FRDTS #: CDER200492 

3/25/2005 

 

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES 
Food and Drug Administration 
21 CFR Part 2 
[Docket No. 2003P-0029] 
Use of Ozone-Depleting Substances; Removal of Essential-Use 
Designations 
ACTION:  Final rule.   
SUMMARY:  The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is amending its 
regulation on the use of ozone-depleting substances (ODSs) in 
self-pressurized containers to remove the essential-use 
designations for albuterol used in oral pressurized metered-dose 
inhalers (MDIs).  Under the Clean Air Act, FDA, in consultation 
with the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), is required to 
determine whether an FDA-regulated product that releases an ODS 
is an essential use of the ODS.  Two albuterol MDIs that do not 
use an ODS have been marketed for more than 3 years.  FDA has 
determined that the two non-ODS MDIs will be satisfactory 
alternatives to albuterol MDIs containing ODSs and is removing 
the essential-use designation for albuterol MDIs as of December 
31, 2008.  Albuterol MDIs containing an ODS cannot be marketed 
after this date. 

 

1 

DATES:  This rule is effective December 31, 2008. 
ADDRESSES:  Received comments, a transcript of, and material 
submitted for, the Pulmonary-Allergy Advisory Committee meeting 
held on June 10, 2004, the environmental assessment, and the 
finding of no significant impact may be seen in the Division of 
Dockets Management, 5630 Fishers Lane, rm. 1061, Rockville, MD  
20852, between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., Monday through Friday. 
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:  

Wayne H. Mitchell,  
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (HFD-7),  
Food and Drug Administration,  
5600 Fishers Lane,  
Rockville, MD  20857,  
301-594-2041. 

SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:  

Table of Contents 

I.  Introduction and Highlights of the Rule 
II.  Background 

A.  Albuterol 
B.  CFCs 
C.  Regulation of ODSs 
1.  The 1978 Rules 
 
 
2.  The Montreal Protocol 
3.  The 1990 Amendments to the Clean Air Act 
 

2 

 
 
 

 

 

 

4.  EPA's Implementing Regulations 
5.  FDA's 2002 Regulation 

III.  Comments on the 2004 Proposed Rule 
 

A.  General Comments 
B.  The Same Active Moiety with the Same Route of  
  Administration, for the Same Indication, and With  
  Approximately the Same Level of Convenience of Use 

1.  The Same Active Moiety with the Same Route of  
  Administration, for the Same Indication 
2. Approximately the Same Level of Convenience of  
  Use 

C.  Supplies and Production Capacity for the Non-ODS  
  Products Will Exist at Levels Sufficient to Meet 
  Patient Need 
D.  Adequate U.S. Postmarketing Use Data is Available  
  for the Non-ODS Products 
E.  Patients Are Adequately Served by the Non-ODS 
  Products 
F.  Effective Date 
G.  CFCs and the Environment 
H.  Comments on the Analysis of Impacts 
I.  Other Comments 
IV. Environmental Impact 
V.  Analysis of Impacts  

 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1.  CFCs and Stratospheric Ozone 
2.  The Montreal Protocol 
3.  Benefits of the Montreal Protocol 
4.  Characteristics of COPD 
5.  Characteristics of Asthma 
6.  Current U.S. Albuterol MDI Market 

A.  Introduction 
B.  Need for Regulation and the Objective of this Rule 
C.  Background 
 
 
 
 
 
 
D.  Benefits and Costs of the Final Rule 
 
 
 
 
E.  Alternative Phaseout Dates 
F.  Sensitivity Analyses 
G.  Small Business Impact 

1.  Baseline Conditions 
2.  Benefits of the Final Rule 
3.  Costs of the Final Rule 
4.  Effects on Medicare and Medicaid 

1.  Affected Sector and Nature of Impacts 

2.  Outreach 

H.  Conclusion 

VI.  References 
VII.  The Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 
VIII.  Federalism 
 

 

4 

We published a proposed rule in the Federal Register of 

I.  Introduction and Highlights of the Rule 
 
June 16, 2004 (69 FR 33602) (the 2004 proposed rule), proposing 
to remove the essential-use designation for albuterol MDIs.  
Albuterol MDIs containing chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) or other 
ODSs cannot be marketed without an essential-use designation.  
We have determined that the four criteria for removing an 
essential use have been met or will be met by the effective date 
of the proposed rule:  

(cid:120)  More than one non-ODS product with the same active moiety 
is marketed with the same route of administration, for the 
same indication, and with approximately the same level of 
convenience of use as the ODS product containing that 
active moiety; 

(cid:120)  Supplies and production capacity for the non-ODS products 

will exist at levels sufficient to meet patient need; 

(cid:120)  Adequate U.S. postmarketing use data is available for the 

non-ODS products; and 

(cid:120)  Patients who medically required the ODS product will be 

adequately served by the non-ODS products containing that 
active moiety and other available products. 
We have also determined that the appropriate effective date 

for the removal of the essential-use designation for albuterol 
MDIs is December 31, 2008.   

 

5 

We will discuss our determinations on the criteria and the 

effective date in section V of this document "Comments on the 
2004 Proposed Rule."   
II.  Background 
A.  Albuterol 

Albuterol is a relatively selective beta2-adrenergic agonist 
used in the treatment of bronchospasm associated with asthma and 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).  Albuterol has the 
molecular formula C13H21NO3.  Albuterol is the name established 
for the drug by the U.S. Pharmacopeia and the U.S. Adopted Names 
Council.  FDA uses the name albuterol, and it is the name 
commonly used in the United States.  In most of the rest of the 
world, the drug is called salbutamol, which is the International 
Nonproprietary Name for the drug (the name recommended by the 
World Health Organization).  Albuterol is widely used in its 
sulfate salt form, which has the molecular formula 
(C13H21NO3)2H2SO4.  We will use "albuterol" to refer to both 
albuterol base and albuterol sulfate, unless otherwise 
indicated. 

Albuterol is available in many dosage forms for the 

treatment of asthma and COPD.  Syrups and tablets may be taken 
by mouth to be absorbed into the blood through the digestive 
tract.  Albuterol drug products are marketed in various forms 
for inhalational use.  Albuterol is available in inhalation 

 

6 

solutions for use in nebulizers, and was previously marketed in 
the United States in a compact dry-powder inhaler.  Most 
important for purposes of this document, albuterol is marketed 
in MDIs, which are small, pressurized aerosol devices that 
deliver a measured dose of an aerosolized drug into a patient's 
mouth for inhalation into the lungs. 

Albuterol MDIs were first approved for use in the United 

States in 1981, when the new drug applications (NDAs) for 
VENTOLIN (NDA 18-473) and PROVENTIL (NDA 17-559) albuterol MDIs 
were approved by FDA.  The first generic albuterol MDI was 
approved in 1995.  Albuterol MDIs have historically used the 
CFCs trichlorofluoromethane (CFC-11) and dichlorodifluoromethane 
(CFC-12) as propellants. 

Albuterol MDIs are among the most widely used drug products 

for the treatment of asthma and COPD.  Because of albuterol's 
relatively rapid onset of action, albuterol MDIs are frequently 
used as "rescue" inhalers for treatment of bronchospasm during 
acute episodes.  Albuterol MDIs can be considered lifesaving for 
some patients at certain times; they are very important for 
controlling symptoms in many more patients who suffer from 
asthma or COPD.  We recognize and take very seriously our 
obligation to examine with particular care any action that could 
affect the availability of these important drugs. 
B.  CFCs 

 

7 

CFCs are organic compounds that contain carbon, chlorine, 
and fluorine atoms.  CFCs were first used commercially in the 
early 1930s as a replacement for hazardous materials then used 
in refrigeration, such as sulfur dioxide and ammonia.  
Subsequently, CFCs were found to have a large number of uses, 
including as solvents and as propellants in self-pressurized 
aerosol products, such as MDIs. 

CFCs are very stable in the troposphere, the lowest part of 

the atmosphere.  They move to the stratosphere, a region that 
begins about 10 to 16 kilometers (km) (6 to 10 miles) above 
Earth's surface and extends up to about 50 km (31 miles) 
altitude.  Within the stratosphere, there is a zone about 15 to 
40 km (10 to 25 miles) above the Earth's surface in which ozone 
is relatively highly concentrated.  This zone in the 
stratosphere is generally called the ozone layer.  Once in the 
stratosphere, CFCs are gradually broken down by strong 
ultraviolet light, where they release chlorine atoms that then 
deplete stratospheric ozone.  Depletion of stratospheric ozone 
by CFCs and other ODSs allows more ultraviolet-B (UV-B) 
radiation to reach the Earth's surface, where it increases skin 
cancers and cataracts, and damages some marine organisms, 
plants, and plastics. 
C.  Regulation of ODSs 

 

8 

The link between CFCs and the depletion of stratospheric 
ozone was discovered in the mid-1970s.  Since 1978, the U.S. 
Government has pursued a vigorous and consistent policy, through 
the enactment of laws and regulations, of limiting the 
production, use, and importation of ODSs, including CFCs. 
1.  The 1978 Rules 

In the Federal Register of March 17, 1978 (43 FR 11301 at 

11318), FDA and EPA published rules banning, with a few 
exceptions, the use of CFCs as propellants in aerosol 
containers.  These rules were issued under authority of the 
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (the act) (21 U.S.C. 321 et 
seq.) and the Toxic Substances Control Act (15 U.S.C. 2601 et 
seq.), respectively.  FDA's rule (the 1978 rule) was codified as 
§ 2.125 (21 CFR 2.125).  The rules issued by FDA and EPA had 
been preceded by rules issued by FDA and the Consumer Product 
Safety Commission requiring products that contain CFC 
propellants to bear warning statements on their labeling (42 FR 
22018, April 29, 1977; 42 FR 42780, August 24, 1977). 

The 1978 rule prohibited the use of CFCs as propellants in 
self-pressurized containers in any food, drug, medical device, 
or cosmetic.  As originally published, the rule listed five 
essential uses that were exempt from the ban.  The third listed 
essential use was for "[m]etered-dose adrenergic bronchodilator 
human drugs for oral inhalation."  This language describes 

 

9 

albuterol MDIs, so the list of essential uses did not have to be 
amended in 1981 when VENTOLIN and PROVENTIL albuterol MDIs were 
approved by FDA. 

The 1978 rule provided criteria for adding new essential 
uses, and several uses were added to the list, the last one in 
1996.  The 1978 rule did not provide any mechanism for removing 
essential uses from the list as alternative products were 
developed or CFC-containing products were removed from the 
market.  The absence of a removal procedure came to be viewed as 
a deficiency in the 1978 rule, and was addressed in a later 
rulemaking, discussed in section II.C.5 of this document. 
2.  The Montreal Protocol 

On January 1, 1989, the United States became a party to the 

Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer 
(Montreal Protocol) (September 16, 1987, 26 I.L.M. 1541 (1987)), 
available at http://www.unep.org/ozone/pdfs/Montreal-
Protocol2000.pdf.1  The United States played a leading role in 
the negotiations of the Montreal Protocol, believing that 
internationally coordinated control of ozone-depleting 
substances would best protect both the U.S. and global public 
health and the environment from potential adverse effects of 
depletion of stratospheric ozone.  Currently, there are 188 

                                                 
1 FDA has verified all Web site addresses cited in this document, but FDA is 
not responsible for any subsequent changes to the Web sites after this 
document has published in the Federal Register. 

 

10 

parties to this treaty.2  When it joined the treaty, the United 
States committed to reducing production and consumption of 
certain CFCs to 50 percent of 1986 levels by 1998 (Article 2(4) 
of the Montreal Protocol).  It also agreed to accept an 
"adjustment" procedure, whereby, following assessment of the 
existing control measures, the Parties could adjust the scope, 
amount, and timing of those control measures for substances 
already subject to the Montreal Protocol.  As the evidence 
regarding the impact of ODSs on the ozone layer became stronger, 
the Parties used this adjustment procedure to accelerate the 
phaseout of ODSs.  At the fourth meeting of the Parties to the 
Montreal Protocol, held at Copenhagen in November 1992, the 
Parties adjusted Article 2 of the Montreal Protocol to eliminate 
the production and importation of CFCs by Parties that are 
developed countries by January 1, 1996 (Decision IV/2).3  The 
adjustment also indicated that it would apply "save to the 
extent that the Parties decide to permit the level of production 

                                                 
2 The summary descriptions of the Montreal Protocol and decisions of parties 
to the Montreal Protocol contained in this document are presented here to 
help you understand the background of the action we are taking.  These 
descriptions are not intended to be formal statements of policy regarding the 
Montreal Protocol.  Decisions by the parties to the Montreal Protocol are 
cited in this document in the conventional format of "Decision IV/2," which 
refers to the second decision recorded in the Report of the Fourth Meeting of 
the parties to the Montreal Protocol on Substances That Deplete the Ozone 
Layer.  Reports of meetings of the parties to the Montreal Protocol may be 
found on the United Nations Environment Programme's Web site at 
http://www.unep.org/ozone/mop/mop-reports.shtml.  
3 Production of CFCs in economically less-developed countries is being phased 
out and is scheduled to end by January 1, 2010.  See Article 2a of the 
Montreal Protocol. 

 

11 

or consumption that is necessary to satisfy uses agreed by them 
to be essential" (Article 2A(4)).  Under the treaty's rules of 
procedure, the Parties may make such an essential-use decision 
by a two-thirds majority vote, although, to date, all such 
decisions have been made by consensus. 

To produce or import CFCs for an essential use under the 

Montreal Protocol, a Party must request and obtain approval for 
an exemption at a meeting of the Parties.  One of the most 
important essential uses of CFCs under the Montreal Protocol is 
their use in MDIs for the treatment of asthma and COPD.  The 
decision on whether the use of CFCs in MDIs is "essential" for 
purposes of the Montreal Protocol turns on whether: "(1) It is 
necessary for the health, safety, or is critical for the 
functioning of society (encompassing cultural and intellectual 
aspects) and (2) there are no available technically and 
economically feasible alternatives or substitutes that are 
acceptable from the standpoint of environment and health" 
(Decision IV/25).  Each request and any subsequent exemption is 
for only 1 year's duration (Decision V/18).  Since 1994 the 
United States and some other Parties to the Montreal Protocol 
have annually requested, and been granted, essential-use 
exemptions for the production or importation of CFCs for their 
use in MDIs for the treatment of asthma and COPD (see, among 
others, Decisions VI/9 and VII/28).  The exemptions have been 

 

12 

consistent with the criteria established by the Parties, which 
make the grant of an exemption contingent on a finding that the 
use for which the exemption is being requested is essential for 
health, safety, or the functioning of society, and that there 
are no available technically and economically feasible 
alternatives or substitutes that are acceptable from the 
standpoint of health or the environment (Decision IV/25). 
Phasing out the use of CFCs in MDIs for the treatment of asthma 
and COPD has been an issue of particular interest to the Parties 
to the Montreal Protocol.  Several decisions of the Parties have 
dealt with the transition to CFC-free MDIs, including the 
following decisions: 
(cid:120)  Decision VIII/10  stated that the Parties that are developed 

countries would take various actions to promote industry's 
participation in a smooth and efficient transition away from 
CFC-based MDIs (San Jose, Costa Rica, 1996). 

(cid:120)  Decision IX/19 required the Parties that are developed 

countries to present an initial national or regional 
transition strategy by January 31, 1999 (Montreal, Canada, 
1997). 

(cid:120)  Decision XII/2 elaborated on the content of national or 

regional transition strategies required under Decision IX/19 
and indicated that any MDI for the treatment of asthma or COPD 
approved for marketing after 2000 would not be an "essential 

 

13 

use" unless it met the criteria laid out by the Parties for 
essential uses.  (Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso, 2000). 

(cid:120)  Decision XIV/5 requested that each Party report annually the 

quantities of CFC and non-CFC MDIs and dry-powder inhalers 
sold or distributed within that country and the approval and 
marketing status of non-CFC MDIs and dry-powder inhalers.  
Decision XIV/5 also noted "with concern the slow transition to 
CFC-free metered-dose inhalers in some Parties."  (Rome, 
Italy, 2002). 

(cid:120)  Decision XV/5 states that no essential uses of CFCs will be 
authorized for Parties that are developed countries at the 
17th meeting of the Parties (in autumn 2005), or thereafter, 
unless the Party requesting the essential-use allocation has 
submitted an action plan.  Among other items, the action plan 
should include a specific date by which the Party plans to 
cease requesting essential-use allocations of CFCs for 
albuterol MDIs to be sold or distributed in developed 
countries.  The action plan must be submitted before the 25th 
meeting of the Open-Ended Working Group4 in the summer of 
2005.  (Nairobi, Kenya, 2003). 

                                                 
4 The Open-Ended Working Group (OEWG) was established in 1989 at the first 
meeting of the parties to the Montreal Protocol held in Helsinki.  The OEWG, 
among other duties, considers proposals for amendments and adjustments to the 
Montreal Protocol and prepares consolidated reports based on the reports of 
various scientific, technical, and economic panels.  These proposals and 
reports may subsequently be acted on by a meeting of the parties to the 
Montreal Protocol. 

 

14 

In addition to fulfilling our obligations under the Clean 

Air Act and other provisions of the Montreal Protocol, this rule 
is intended to provide, for purposes of Decision XV/5, the 
specific date after which the United States will not request 
essential-use allocations of CFCs for albuterol MDIs. 
C.  The 1990 Amendments to the Clean Air Act 

In 1990, Congress amended the Clean Air Act to, among other 
things, better protect stratospheric ozone (Public Law 101-549, 
November 15, 1990) (the 1990 amendments).  The 1990 amendments 
were drafted to complement, and be consistent with, our 
obligations under the Montreal Protocol (see section 614 of the 
Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. 7671m)).  Section 614(b) of the Clean 
Air Act provides that in the case of a conflict between any 
provision of the Clean Air Act and any provision of the Montreal 
Protocol, the more stringent provision will govern.  Section 604 
of the Clean Air Act requires the phaseout of the production of 
CFCs by 2000 (42 U.S.C. 7671c),5 while section 610 of the Clean 
Air Act (42 U.S.C. 7671i) required EPA to issue regulations 
banning the sale or distribution in interstate commerce of 
nonessential products containing CFCs.  Sections 604 and 610 
provide exceptions for "medical devices."  Section 601(8) (42 
U.S.C. 7671(8)) of the Clean Air Act defines "medical device" as  

                                                 
5 In conformance with Decision IV/2, EPA issued regulations accelerating the 
complete phaseout of CFCs, with exceptions for essential uses, to January 1, 
1996 (58 FR 65018, December 10, 1993). 

 

15 

any device (as defined in the Federal Food, Drug, and 
Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 321)), diagnostic product, 
drug (as defined in the Federal Food, Drug, and 
Cosmetic Act), or drug delivery system- 
(A) if such device, product, drug, or drug 
delivery system utilizes a class I or class II 
substance for which no safe and effective alternative 
has been developed, and where necessary, approved by 
the Commissioner [of Food and Drugs]; and 
delivery system, has, after notice and opportunity 
for public comment, been approved and determined to 
be essential by the Commissioner [of Food and Drugs] 
in consultation with the Administrator [of EPA]." 

(B) if such device, product, drug, or drug 

 

4.  EPA's Implementing Regulations 

EPA regulations implementing the Montreal Protocol and the 
stratospheric ozone protection provisions of the 1990 amendments 
are codified in part 82 of title 40 of the Code of Federal 
Regulations (40 CFR part 82).  (See 40 CFR 82.1 for a statement 
of intent.)  Like the 1990 amendments, EPA's implementing 
regulations contain two separate prohibitions, one on the 
production and import of CFCs (subpart A of 40 CFR part 82) and 
the other on the sale or distribution of products containing 
CFCs (40 CFR 82.66). 

The prohibition on production and import of CFCs contains 

an exception for essential uses and, more specifically, for 
essential MDIs.  The definition of essential MDI at 40 CFR 82.3 
requires that the MDI be intended for the treatment of asthma or 
COPD, be essential under the Montreal Protocol, and if the MDI 

 

16 

is for sale in the United States, be approved by FDA and listed 
as essential in FDA's regulations at § 2.125. 

The prohibition on the sale of products containing CFCs 
includes a specific prohibition on aerosol products and other 
pressurized dispensers.  The aerosol product ban contains an 
exception for medical devices listed in  
§ 2.125(e).  The term "medical device" is used with the same 
meaning it was given in the 1990 amendments and includes drugs 
as well as medical devices. 
5.  FDA's 2002 Regulation 

In the 1990s, we decided that § 2.125 required revision to 
better reflect our obligations under the Montreal Protocol, the 
1990 amendments, and EPA's regulations, and to encourage the 
development of ozone-friendly alternatives to medical products 
containing CFCs.  In particular, as acceptable alternatives that 
did not contain CFCs or other ODSs came on the market, there was 
a need to provide a mechanism for removing essential uses from 
the list in § 2.125(e).  In the Federal Register of March 6, 
1997 (62 FR 10242), we published an advance notice of proposed 
rulemaking (1997 ANPRM) in which we outlined our then-current 
thinking on the content of an appropriate rule regarding ODSs in 
products FDA regulates.  We received almost 10,000 comments on 
the 1997 ANPRM.  In response to the comments, we revised our 
approach and drafted a proposed rule published in the Federal 

 

17 

Register of September 1, 1999 (64 FR 47719) (1999 proposed 
rule).  We received 22 comments on the 1999 proposed rule.  
After minor revisions in response to these comments, we 
published a final rule in the Federal Register of July 24, 2002 
(67 FR 48370) (the 2002 final rule) (corrected in 67 FR 49396, 
July 30, 2002, and 67 FR 58678, September 17, 2002). 

Among other changes, the 2002 final rule, in revised  

§ 2.125(g)(3), set standards that FDA would use for determining 
whether the use of an ODS in a medical product is no longer 
essential.  The 2002 final rule provided that to remove an 
essential-use designation, FDA must find that: 

(cid:120)  At least one non-ODS product with the same active moiety is 

marketed with the same route of administration, for the 
same indication, and with approximately the same level of 
convenience of use as the ODS product containing that 
active moiety; 

(cid:120)  Supplies and production capacity for the non-ODS product(s) 

exist or will exist at levels sufficient to meet patient 
need; 

(cid:120)  Adequate U.S. postmarketing use data is available for the 

non-ODS product(s); and 

(cid:120)  Patients who medically required the ODS product are 

adequately served by the non-ODS product(s) containing that 
active moiety and other available products. 

 

18 

To remove the essential-use designation of an active moiety 

marketed in an ODS product represented by one new drug 
application (NDA), there must be at least one acceptable 
alternative, while for an active moiety marketed in ODS products 
and represented by two or more NDAs, there must be at least two 
acceptable alternatives. 

Because there are multiple NDAs for albuterol MDIs 

containing an ODS, the rule requires that there must be at least 
two acceptable alternatives available for us to remove the 
essential-use designation for albuterol.  We have determined 
that there are two acceptable alternatives for albuterol MDIs 
containing an ODS. 

FDA approved the NDA for PROVENTIL HFA, albuterol sulfate 

MDI, on August 15, 1996 (NDA 20-503), and the product was 
introduced into the U.S. market later that year.  PROVENTIL HFA 
is manufactured by 3M Co. (3M) and marketed by Schering-Plough 
Corp. (Schering).  VENTOLIN HFA, albuterol sulfate MDI, was 
approved on April 19, 2001 (NDA 20-983), and it was introduced 
into the U.S. market in February 2002.  VENTOLIN HFA is 
manufactured and marketed by GlaxoSmithKline (GSK).  Both of 
these products use the hydrofluoroalkane HFA-134a as a 
replacement for ODSs.  HFA-134a does not affect stratospheric 
ozone.  We will use the phrase "albuterol HFA MDIs" to refer to 
both of these products in this document.  IVAX Corp. (IVAX) has 

 

19 

recently begun marketing an albuterol HFA MDI, but the short 
period of time that the IVAX MDI has been on the market prevents 
us from considering the drug an alternative to albuterol CFC 
MDIs for purposes of this rulemaking (see our response to 
comment 14).  Albuterol HFA MDIs are the subject of patents, 
listed in our publication Approved Drug Products with 
Therapeutic Equivalence Evaluations (the Orange Book), which 
will, presumably, block the marketing of generic albuterol HFA 
MDIs until they expire.  See our response to comment 36 of this 
document for a discussion of the patent issues that were raised 
in this rulemaking.   

There is a separate essential-use designation for metered-
dose ipratropium bromide and albuterol sulfate, in combination, 
administered by oral inhalation for human use, § 
2.125(e)(2)(viii).  This essential use was added to the list of 
essential uses (§ 2.125(e)), even though albuterol and 
ipratropium bromide were already separately included in the list 
of essential uses.  (See 60 FR 53725, October 17, 1995, and 61 
FR 15699, April 9, 1996.)  The only drug product marketed under 
the essential-use designation for metered-dose ipratropium 
bromide and albuterol sulfate, in combination, is Boehringer 
Ingelheim Phamaceuticals' product COMBIVENT.  Because COMBIVENT 
has two active ingredients, it is not subject to Decision XV/5, 
which concerns MDIs with albuterol as the sole active 

 

20 

ingredient.  This rule will not affect the essential-use status 
of COMBIVENT. 
III.  Comments on the 2004 Proposed Rule 

On June 10, 2004, we held a meeting of the Pulmonary-

Allergy Drug Advisory Committee (the PADAC meeting) to discuss 
the issues involved in removing the essential-use designation 
for albuterol MDIs (see the Federal Registers of May 11, 2004 
(69 FR 26169), and June 2, 2004 (69 FR 31126)).  Presentations 
were made by 13 speakers representing patient advocacy groups, 
medical professional organizations, an industry organization, an 
environmental advocacy group, an economics consulting firm, GSK, 
Schering, Honeywell Chemicals (Honeywell), and IVAX.  We address 
the comments made in written material submitted to the committee 
and oral comments made during the open public hearing and 
committee discussion portions of the meeting in addition to the 
written and electronic comments submitted to the docket in 
response to the proposed rule.6 

                                                 
6 Fran Du Melle, Executive Vice President of the American Lung Association, 
submitted a citizen petition on behalf of the U.S. Stakeholders Group on MDI 
Transition on January 29, 2003 (Docket No. 03P-0029/CP1)(Stakeholders' 
petition).  The Stakeholders' petition requested that we initiate rulemaking 
to remove the essential-use designation of albuterol MDIs.  Several comments 
were submitted in response to the petition.  All of the opinions and 
information in those comments, with one exception (see comment 39), were also 
contained in testimony at the PADAC meeting or in comments on the proposed 
rule.  In nearly every case, parties submitting comments on the petition also 
testified at the PADAC meeting, submitted comments on the proposed rule, or 
both.  Accordingly, with the exception of comment 39, we will not be directly 
responding in this document to the Stakeholders' petition or the comments on 
the petition.     

 

21 

We received over 75 written and electronic comments in 
response to the 2004 proposed rule.  They were submitted by 
patients, health care providers, patient advocacy groups, 
professional groups, manufacturers, a law firm, an economics 
consulting firm, and industry organizations.  Most of the 
parties who spoke at the PADAC meeting also submitted written 
comments. 
A.  General Comments 

(Comment 1) We received several comments that expressed 

general approval for the 2004 proposed rule.   

We appreciate the effort that the people who submitted 

We cannot address these general comments.  Comments that 

(Comment 2) We received several comments that expressed a 

these comments, and all other comments, made in expressing their 
opinions on this important rulemaking. 
 
general opposition to the phaseout of albuterol CFC MDIs, 
without giving any reasons for the opposition. 
 
gave specific reasons why the person submitting the comment 
opposes the elimination of the essential-use designation for 
albuterol CFC MDIs will be discussed in the appropriate sections 
of this document. 
 
perception that this rulemaking would remove all albuterol MDIs 
from the market. 

(Comment 3) A few comments seemed to be based on a 

 

22 

The perception is inaccurate.  This rulemaking is based on 

 
the fact that there will be at least two different albuterol 
MDIs that are acceptable alternatives under § 2.125(g) available 
after the rule goes into effect. 

(Comment 4) Several comments were made advocating an 

expeditious phaseout of albuterol CFC MDIs.  A few comments 
recommended  we proceed slowly and cautiously. 

We believe  this final rule provides for the phaseout of 

albuterol CFC MDIs with a speed that is consistent with our duty 
to protect the public health and our legal obligations. 

(Comment 5) One comment requested  we publish this rule by 

December 31, 2004. 

We did not publish this rule by December 31, 2004, because 

it involves complicated and sensitive issues that required 
extensive consultation and deliberation within FDA and the 
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), and with EPA and 
other Federal agencies.  We have issued this rule in the most 
expeditious manner, consistent with the complexities and 
sensitivity of the issues involved.  

(Comment 6) One comment asked that we consider in this 
rulemaking the availability of CFC drug products that do not 
have a non-CFC substitute, the availability of generic albuterol 
MDIs, and the impact that higher priced drugs may have on the 
public health. 

 

23 

As we discuss in several places in the 2004 proposed rule 
and this document, issues of price and generic competition were 
major concerns to us.  However, because this rulemaking deals 
exclusively with the essential-use designation for albuterol 
MDIs, we did not examine the availability of non-CFC substitutes 
for drug products other than albuterol CFC MDIs. 

(Comment 7) One comment stated  we did not adequately 

communicate to the medical community the details of our policy 
regarding CFC MDIs.  The comment expressed concern that we did 
not give a time frame for the phaseout of albuterol CFC MDIs. 
We believe  we have done a good job of keeping the public 
and the medical community informed on our policy regarding the 
elimination of essential-use designations for medical products.  
We first discussed our general policy on the issue in the 1997 
ANPRM.  We received nearly 10,000 comments in response to the 
1997 ANPRM, which demonstrates that this document received wide 
publicity.  We received additional comments in response to the 
1999 proposed rule, which proposed changes in 21 CFR 2.125 to 
provide a mechanism for eliminating essential uses.  A citizen 
petition was submitted on behalf of the U.S. Stakeholders Group 
on MDI Transition (stakeholders group) on January 29, 2003 
(Docket No. 03P-0029/CP1), essentially requesting that we 
initiate this rulemaking.  This stakeholders group consists of 
both patient advocacy and professional organizations.  These 

 

24 

groups were aware of our policies.  FDA staff has spoken several 
times before professional medical organizations, patient 
advocacy groups, and the National Asthma Education and 
Prevention Program Coordinating Committee of the National 
Institutes of Health.  FDA staff have also answered countless 
telephone calls and correspondence on the subject.  We have 
provided press releases and opportunities for interviews to the 
general, trade, and professional media.  We believe we have done 
what can be reasonably expected to inform the public and the 
medical profession.  However, we were not able to provide a time 
frame for eliminating the essential-use designation for 
albuterol MDIs.  We specifically solicited comments on an 
appropriate effective date for the elimination of the essential-
use designation for albuterol MDIs.  The effective date could 
not be established until we had finished our evaluation of the 
comments submitted in response to the 2004 proposed rule, 
prepared a draft of this document, and consulted with EPA and 
other Federal agencies. 
B.  The Same Active Moiety with the Same Route of 
Administration, for the Same Indication, and With Approximately 
the Same Level of Convenience of Use 
1.  The Same Active Moiety with the Same Route of Administration 
for the Same Indications 

 

25 

 
We did not receive any comments disagreeing with our 
tentative conclusions stated in the 2004 proposed rule, or 
addressing the conclusions in any substantive way, that 
albuterol HFA MDIs have the same active moiety with the same 
route of administration for the same indications as albuterol 
CFC MDIs.  We therefore finalize our tentative conclusion that 
albuterol HFA MDIs have the same active moiety with the same 
route of administration for the same indications as albuterol 
CFC MDIs. 
2.  Approximately the Same Level of Convenience of Use 
 
(Comment 8) One comment asserted that the VENTOLIN HFA MDIs 
were not an adequate alternative for albuterol CFC MDIs because 
the VENTOLIN HFA MDI requires more force to operate. 
 
operate the various albuterol MDIs, because that information 
comes from different sources using different measuring 
techniques and apparatus, we are not able to meaningfully 
compare the amounts of force needed to operate albuterol HFA 
MDIs compared to the force needed for albuterol CFC MDIs.  
However, of the approximately 20 comments we received that 
indicated that the person submitting the comment had some 
experience using albuterol HFA MDIs, only one complained that 
the albuterol HFA MDIs required excessive effort to operate.  
None of the thirteen comments from health care providers 

Although we do have some data on the force needed to 

 

26 

indicated that their patients had problems operating the 
albuterol HFA MDIs.  The PROVENTIL HFA MDI is somewhat shorter 
and wider than the VENTOLIN HFA MDI.  Patients who find it 
difficult to apply adequate pressure to the VENTOLIN HFA MDI may 
wish to try the shorter PROVENTIL HFA MDI or other albuterol HFA 
MDIs that may come onto the market.   

(Comment 9)  One comment said that the VENTOLIN HFA MDIs 

were not an adequate alternative for albuterol CFC MDIs because 
the VENTOLIN HFA MDI needs to be primed before use. 

The approved labeling for both PROVENTIL HFA and VENTOLIN 
HFA recommend that patients prime the MDI before using it for 
the first time and in cases where the MDI has not been used for 
more than 2 weeks by releasing four test sprays into the air, 
away from the face.  The approved labeling for PROVENTIL CFC 
MDIs and Warwick brand albuterol CFC MDIs contain a similar 
instruction about priming, but recommend priming if the MDI has 
not been used for 4 days, as opposed to the more convenient 2 
weeks for the albuterol HFA MDIs.  The approved labeling for 
VENTOLIN CFC MDIs, and for the generic albuterol CFC MDIs which 
refer to the VENTOLIN CFC MDI, contain an essentially identical 
recommendation, but refer to the operation as "test sprays" 
rather than priming.  These test sprays are recommended if these 
albuterol CFC MDIs have not been used for more than 4 weeks.  
Therefore, priming is recommended for all of the albuterol CFC 

 

27 

MDI products affected by this rulemaking.  The only difference 
between albuterol CFC MDIs and albuterol HFA MDIs that would 
inconvenience patients is the shorter period of non-use before 
priming is recommended for the albuterol HFA MDIs compared to 
VENTOLIN CFC MDIs and the generic albuterol CFC MDIs which refer 
to the VENTOLIN CFC MDI.  We consider this difference be at most 
a minor inconvenience, and not a "significant [variation] in 
convenience that materially impede[s] patient compliance."  See 
the 2002 final rule at 48377.  When we compare the albuterol HFA 
MDIs to PROVENTIL CFC MDIs and Warwick brand albuterol CFC MDIs, 
the albuterol HFA MDIs are actually more convenient, because of 
the longer period of non-use before priming is recommended. 

The float test is a widely described, but inaccurate, 

(Comment 10) One comment stated that the VENTOLIN HFA MDIs 
were not an adequate alternative for albuterol CFC MDIs because 
the float test cannot be used to determine whether the VENTOLIN 
HFA MDI is empty. 
 
method of ascertaining whether an MDI is empty by seeing if it 
floats.  In addition to being an inaccurate method to ascertain 
whether an MDI still contains usable quantities of the drug, the 
float test can damage the MDI (See Ref. 1 and Ref. 2).  The 
float test is not recommended in the approved labeling of any 
albuterol CFC MDI.  The only accurate way to determine whether 
an MDI still contains usable quantities of the drug is to keep 

 

28 

(Comment 11) At the PADAC meeting a representative of GSK 

We find that albuterol HFA MDIs have approximately the same 

track of the number of actuations.  This is true for both 
albuterol CFC and HFA MDIs.  Therefore we cannot view the 
inability to perform the float test on the albuterol HFA MDIs as 
a "significant [variation] in convenience that materially impede 
patient compliance."  (See the 2002 final rule at 48377.) 
 
level of convenience of use as albuterol CFC MDIs. 
C.  Supplies and Production Capacity for the Non-ODS Products 
Will Exist at Levels Sufficient to Meet Patient Need 
 
stated  GSK was currently producing approximately 300,000 
albuterol HFA MDIs annually at their Zebulon, North Carolina, 
plant.  She further stated  the current installed capacity at 
Zebulon is 15 million albuterol HFA MDIs annually, but that it 
would take GSK 6 to 12 months after a final decision on an 
effective date in this rulemaking to hire staff and reconfigure 
existing space to take full advantage of the installed capacity.  
She stated  it would take GSK 12 to 18 months after a final 
decision on an effective date in this rulemaking to install 
additional manufacturing equipment and secure required component 
supplies to enable GSK to manufacture 30 to 33 million albuterol 
MDIs. 
 
A representative of Schering stated at the PADAC meeting 
that 3M would be able to manufacture enough albuterol MDIs to 

 

29 

In a subsequent written comment (2003P -0029/C20), GSK 

meet Schering's "share of the expected demand" for approximately 
50 million albuterol HFA MDIs (transcript of PADAC meeting at p. 
130).  Answering a question from a committee member, the 
Schering representative clarified that his statement regarding 
Schering's and 3M's share of the manufacturing capacity was 
consistent with the earlier statements made on behalf of GSK.   
 
revised its production estimates and stated  they would begin 
increasing production before the publication of this rule, and 
that they currently anticipated having the capacity to produce 
30 million albuterol HFA MDIs annually by December 31, 2005.  
GSK further said they will also begin building up their 
inventory at least 3 months before the effective date of this 
rule.  GSK also said  they would reevaluate their expansion 
plans if the effective date of this rule were substantially 
beyond December 31, 2005. 
 
production capacity in a written comment submitted after the 
PADAC meeting (2003P -0029/C31).  Schering said they will have 
adequate production available to meet demand for albuterol HFA 
MDIs by December 2005.  Schering also said they would reevaluate 
their expansion plans if the effective date of this rule were 
substantially beyond December 2005.  3M, which produces the 
albuterol HFA MDIs Schering markets, confirmed Schering's 

Schering also revised their projections on increasing 

 

30 

comment by stating that they will have the capacity to 
manufacture 30 million albuterol HFA MDIs annually by December 
31, 2005. 
These projections were major considerations we took into 
  
account in establishing the effective date for this rule.  We 
discuss our rationale for setting a December 31, 2008 effective 
date in our response to comment 32. 
 
stated  there would be more than adequate supplies of HFA-134a 
for albuterol MDIs if the essential-use designation is removed. 
 
We appreciate this confirmation that adequate supplies of 
HFA-134a will exist to meet the increased demand for the 
propellant. 

(Comment 12) A comment from a manufacturer of HFA-134a 

(Comment 13) A few comments from patients expressed 

concerns that shortages of albuterol MDIs may result from the 
elimination of the essential-use status of albuterol MDIs.  
Comments from a trade organization and a chain drug store 
expressed concerns about whether production capacity for 
albuterol HFA MDIs would be in place as quickly as had been 
discussed in the 2004 proposed rule. 
The issue of adequate supply and production capacity has 
 
been key to this rulemaking.  We regard the statements by GSK, 
Schering, and 3M that they will have adequate production in 
place as the best evidence on the availability of production 

 

31 

capacity.  When we chose December 31, 2008, as the effective date 
of this rule, we did so with every reasonable expectation that 
adequate supplies and production capacity would be in place by 
December 31, 2008.   
 
(Comment 14) A representative of IVAX stated at the PADAC 
meeting that IVAX had submitted an NDA for an albuterol HFA MDI 
in January 2003, and received an approvable letter7 from FDA for 
the NDA on November 28, 2003.  He also said  IVAX had submitted 
a separate NDA for an albuterol HFA breath-actuated inhaler in 
August 2003.  He said  he expected the products to be on the 
market in the near future.  He stated that IVAX would soon have 
the capacity to manufacture 50 to 60 million HFA MDIs a year at 
IVAX's Waterford, Ireland, plant, although he did not specify 
what proportion of that capacity would be allocated to albuterol 
HFA products or to products for the U.S. market. 
 
on the essential-use designation for albuterol MDIs.  The IVAX 
albuterol HFA MDI was approved on October 29, 2004, and 
introduced into the market in December, 2004.  Because this 
product has been on the market for such a short time, the 
available U.S. postmarketing use data is inadequate for purposes 

We did not consider this information in making our decision 

                                                 
7 An "approvable letter" is a written communication to an applicant from FDA 
stating that we will approve the NDA if specific additional information or 
material is submitted or specific conditions are met.  An approvable letter 
does not constitute approval of any part of an NDA and does not permit 
marketing of the drug that is the subject of the NDA (21 CFR 314.3). 

 

32 

of § 2.125(g)(3)(iii).  IVAX's albuterol HFA breath-actuated 
inhaler has not been approved or marketed.  Section 
2.125(g)(4)(i) requires alternative products to be marketed.  In 
addition, because the product has not been marketed, there can 
be no U.S. postmarketing use data available to allow us to 
evaluate whether the breath-actuated inhaler will be an 
acceptable alternative to albuterol CFC MDIs. 

(Comment 15) One comment asserted  the entire supply of 
albuterol HFA MDIs for the United States would be produced at 
one GSK facility and one 3M facility.  The comment concluded 
that adequate supplies of albuterol HFA MDIs were insufficient 
because it was unclear whether one facility could supply the 
entire market if the other facility were forced to close.   
 
We appreciate the concerns expressed in this comment; 
however, the factual premise for the comment is misstated.  We 
believe that a switch to albuterol HFA MDIs will improve the 
security of the U.S. supply of albuterol MDIs.  Immediately 
after the phaseout of albuterol CFC MDIs, we will have one GSK 
facility and two 3M/Schering facilities supplying the U.S. 
market for albuterol MDIs.  This compares favorably to the 
current situation with albuterol MDIs, where one Schering 
facility and one IVAX facility supply 95 percent of the U.S. 
market for albuterol CFC MDIs(comment from NERA dated August 13, 
2004 (2003P-0029/C25)), exhibit 4; and corrected comment from 

 

33 

GSK, dated August 25, 2004 (2003P-0029/CR1).  IVAX's recently 
approved albuterol HFA MDI, although not considered an 
alternative product for purposes of this rule (see our response 
to comment 14), gives additional assurance that there will be 
adequate supplies of albuterol HFA MDIs if there is an 
interruption of production at one of the GSK or 3M approved 
manufacturing sites.  We also would like to point out that GSK 
and 3M have overseas production facilities that are not listed 
as authorized manufacturing facilities in the approved NDAs for 
PROVENTIL HFA and Ventolin HFA.  These facilities may be able to 
export albuterol HFA MDIs to the United States in an emergency 
shortage situation. 
 
an essential-use designation, we considered requiring multiple 
production sites to ensure a secure supply of non-ODS drug 
products (see the 1997 ANPRM at 10245, the 1999 proposed rule at 
47723, and the 2002 final rule at 48377).  We chose not to 
require multiple production sites for the alternative products 
as a criterion for eliminating the essential-use designation.  
In any case, albuterol HFA MDIs can be manufactured at three or 
more sites, which will provide a high degree of security for 
continued supplies of albuterol HFA MDIs, compared to the supply 
of other drugs intended for treatment of serious or life-

In our rulemaking establishing the criteria for eliminating 

 

34 

(Comment 16) One comment recommended  we delay the 

The IVAX albuterol HFA MDI is already approved (see our 

threatening diseases, many of which are only manufactured in one 
facility.  
 
effective date for this rule until albuterol MDIs from IVAX and 
Sepracor Inc. (Sepracor) are on the market to ensure adequate 
supplies and provide price competition.  Another comment 
recommended  we establish an earlier effective date if the 
albuterol MDIs from IVAX and Sepracor Inc. are approved. 
 
response to comment 14).  Sepracor's levalbuterol tartrate8 MDI 
XOPENEX HFA was approved on March 11, 2005, but has not been 
marketed by the time this document was published.  Because 
XOPENEX HFA has not been marketed, we cannot consider it an 
alternative to albuterol CFC MDIs (see our response to comment 
14).  While we believe that the presence of additional suppliers 
of non-ODS albuterol products would be desirable for the reasons 
given in the comment, we do not believe they are necessary for 
the purposes of this rulemaking.  Based on statements from GSK, 
Schering, and 3M, we expect that adequate production capacity 
for alternative products evaluated under § 2.125(g) will exist 
by the effective date of this rule.  As we discuss in our 

                                                 
8 Levalbuterol tartrate is the tartrate salt of levalbuterol, the single R-
enantiomer of albuterol, which is the active ingredient in both CFC and HFA 
MDIs as a racemic mixture of the two stereoisomers (R and S) at a 1:1 ratio.  
We have not determined whether we will, in the future, consider products 

 

35 

responses to comment 18 and in section V of this document, we 
also believe that anticipated prices for albuterol HFA MDIs will 
not prevent patients from being adequately served by the 
albuterol HFA MDIs, even without the downward price pressure of 
additional competition. 

We find that supplies and production capacity for albuterol 

HFA MDIs will exist at levels sufficient to meet patient needs 
by December 31, 2008. 
D.  Adequate U.S. Postmarketing Use Data is Available for the 
Non-ODS Products 

We did not receive any substantive comments about whether 

adequate U.S. postmarketing use data is available for the 
albuterol HFA MDIs.  We therefore finalize our tentative 
conclusion that adequate U.S. postmarketing use data is 
available for PROVENTIL HFA and VENTOLIN HFA, the albuterol HFA 
MDIs that we considered as alternatives in this rulemaking. 
E.  Patients Are Adequately Served by the Non-ODS Products 
 
meeting described GSK's Bridges to Access program.  Bridges to 
Access provides GSK drugs at very low cost to lower-income 
individuals and families.  She also mentioned GSK's Orange Card 
Program and the Together Rx program in which GSK participates.  

(Comment 17)  A representative of GSK speaking at the PADAC 

                                                                                                                                                             
whose active ingredient is a stereoisomer to be alternatives to drug products 
whose active ingredient is the corresponding racemic mixture. 

 

36 

Both of these programs allow eligible Medicare patients to 
purchase drugs at significantly reduced prices.  She added that 
GSK intended to annually distribute 2 million VENTOLIN HFA MDIs 
to physicians as samples.  She also said  GSK expected that many 
physicians would primarily provide these samples to their lower-
income patients. 

A subsequent written comment from GSK provided additional 
information on the Bridges to Access, Orange Card, and Together 
Rx programs.  The comment also describes a Ventolin HFA Savings 
Check program which will distribute at least 3 million $10 
coupons for use in purchasing VENTOLIN HFA MDIs. 

A representative of Schering speaking at the PADAC meeting 

said  Schering's SP Cares program, which is similar to GSK's 
Bridges to Access program, distributes free drugs, including 
PROVENTIL HFA, to low-income uninsured patients.  

A written comment asserted that the Bridges to Access 

program provided albuterol HFA MDIs to only approximately 1.4% 
of the uninsured patients who need albuterol MDIs, and that the 
program would have to be expanded to an extreme degree to 
provide meaningful supplies of albuterol MDIs to all uninsured 
patients.  This comment also asserted that GSK's commitment to 
annually provide 2 million free albuterol HFA MDIs would have a 
limited benefit to the uninsured population because large 
numbers of uninsured patients receive medical care in the 

 

37 

emergency departments of hospitals rather than in a physician's 
office, and it is unlikely that the free albuterol HFA MDIs will 
be distributed to the emergency departments.  This comment was 
submitted before GSK's comment describing the Ventolin HFA 
Savings Check program. 

Another comment stated that any patient assistance program 
must be targeted to those most in need, particularly low-income 
children and minority populations, while yet another comment 
stressed the importance of patient assistance programs in the 
transition to albuterol HFA MDIs. 

We took these comments into consideration in determining 

that patients would be adequately served by albuterol HFA MDIs.  
These patient assistance programs have the potential to 
alleviate difficulties that lower income patients may have in 
obtaining the higher-priced albuterol HFA MDIs. 

We agree with the comment that stated that these programs 
must carefully target the populations most in need of financial 
assistance in procuring needed albuterol MDIs, and we strongly 
recommend that GSK and Schering take all reasonable steps to 
ensure that their programs serve patients with the greatest 
needs, regardless of whether those patients are treated in a 
physician's office, clinic, or hospital emergency department.  
This targeting is particularly important in distributing free 
albuterol HFA MDIs.  

 

38 

We believe that many of the concerns expressed by the 

comment critical of GSK's Bridges to Access are valid, but that 
the comment underestimates the positive effect that Bridges to 
Access and other patient assistance programs can have.    The 
estimate in the comment did not factor in the 2 million free 
albuterol HFA MDIs GSK has committed to distribute to physicians 
as samples and whatever free albuterol HFA MDIs Schering may 
distribute.  The comment also could not factor in the effect of 
GSK's Ventolin HFA Savings Check program.  With successful 
targeting, these free albuterol HFA MDIs and $10 coupons should 
have a beneficial impact; with less successful targeting the 
impact could be very limited (see section VII.D.2 of this 
document).  The comment also ignores the potential impact of 
Schering's SP Cares program, which is similar to GSK's Bridges 
to Access program.  We recognize that the Bridges to Access and 
SP Cares programs will have to expand to reach all uninsured low 
and moderate income patients who will need albuterol HFA MDIs, 
but the degree of expansion required would be smaller than that 
described in the comment critical of the Bridges to Access 
program.  We also believe that GSK and Schering understand the 
need to expand these programs, and that this understanding was 
implicit in their testimony at the PADAC meeting and written 
comments (see pp. 5-6 of GSK's corrected comment of August 25, 

 

39 

(Comment 18) A speaker at the PADAC meeting said  because 

2004 (2003P-0029/CR1) and p. 4 of Schering's comment of August 
13, 2004 (2003P-0029/C31)). 
 
albuterol HFA inhalers retail for $20 more than generic 
albuterol CFC MDIs, an early phaseout of albuterol HFA MDIs 
could result in a total $5 billion in additional treatment costs 
until HFA inhalers come off patent.  The speaker also said  the 
economic burden would fall most heavily on those Americans least 
able to pay the price, with a disproportionate effect on 
minorities, inner-city children, elderly patients on fixed 
incomes, and the rural poor.  The speaker asserted that 
eliminating the essential-use designation before lower-priced 
generic albuterol HFA MDIs are on the market would force many 
lower-income patients to discontinue use of albuterol MDIs.  The 
speaker also referred to a recent study in JAMA: The Journal of 
the American Medical Association indicating that increasing 
copayments can reduce prescription drug use up to 32 percent.  
She further stated  this would result in a cascading increase in 
total health care costs, as patients who discontinue their 
albuterol are admitted to emergency rooms and hospital wards.  
A speaker representing an economics consulting firm under 
contract to GSK stated at the PADAC meeting that patients would 
be adequately served by albuterol HFA MDIs.  He projected  the 
average price per MDI would increase by $9.87 and  the yearly 

 

40 

average cost per patient would rise by $16.02.  He also said  
adequate programs were in place to minimize the adverse impact 
on lower-income patients. 

Several comments from patients, health care professionals, 

and other parties stated  the elimination of lower-priced 
generic albuterol MDIs that would result from this rule would 
force many patients to discontinue the use of albuterol MDIs, 
with significant adverse impact on their health, increased 
hospitalizations, loss of time at work, and a worsening quality 
of life.  Many of these comments recommended  the essential-use 
status of albuterol MDIs not be removed until after generic 
albuterol HFA MDIs are approved and marketed.   

Other comments agreed with our tentative conclusion stated 

in the 2004 proposed rule that patients will be adequately 
served by albuterol HFA MDIs. 

While we do not agree with the statement from the speaker 

from the contract economic consulting firm that  the average 
price per MDI would only increase by $9.87 and that the yearly 
average cost per patient would only rise by $16.02, we do agree 
with the conclusion of the speaker that the price of albuterol 
HFA MDIs will not prevent patients from being adequately served.  
As discussed in more detail in section V, we estimate that the 
retail cash price per MDI would increase by $27 and the average 
yearly cost to uninsured patients would rise $95.  While higher 

 

41 

drug prices are undesirable, we do not believe that asthma and 
COPD patients will be forced to stop using albuterol MDIs 
because of price increases.  We believe that the programs 
discussed in comment 17 can, if properly utilized, provide a 
safety net for lower-income patients who otherwise could not 
afford this very important drug.  Section V of this document 
contains a fuller discussion of the economic issues presented by 
this rulemaking.  While we recognize that sales of albuterol 
MDIs may decline by approximately 1 or 2 percent as a result of 
this rulemaking, this decline in sales does not necessarily 
equate to patients having to forgo appropriate treatment of 
their asthma or COPD because of price increases.  There are many 
ways patients may modify their behavior in order to minimize the 
impact of elimination of generic albuterol MDIs, including:  
increasing their use of other asthma and COPD drugs, including 
non-albuterol bronchodilators (and thereby decreasing their need 
for albuterol); buying fewer MDIs to keep in different locations 
because they have chosen to limit the number of MDIs they have 
beyond the one patients generally carry on their person.  
Patients with infrequent bouts of bronchospasm may also choose 
not to purchase albuterol HFA MDIs that the patients believe 
they might not use, even though the patients are financially 
able to do so.  

 

42 

(Comment 19) A speaker at the PADAC meeting said  an FDA 
policy that removed lower priced generic drugs from the market 
was contrary to the intent of the Drug Price Competition and 
Patent Term Restoration Act of 1984 (Public Law 98-417) (Hatch-
Waxman amendments).  A written comment asserted  the real intent 
of this rulemaking was to remove generic albuterol MDIs from the 
market. 

We recognize that one of consequences, although not one we 
desire, of this rulemaking will be the removal, for a period of 
time, of generic albuterol MDIs from the market.  We agree with 
the speaker at the PADAC meeting that one of the general 
intentions of the Hatch-Waxman amendments is to encourage the 
entry of lower-priced generic drug products into the market.  
However, another key purpose of the Hatch-Waxman amendments is 
to encourage significant innovations in human drugs (see 
generally 130 Cong. Rec. H9113-14 and H9121-22 (Sept. 6, 1984) 
(statements of Rep. Waxman)).  The development of HFA inhalers 
represents large investments of time and money by innovator 
firms.  This investment resulted in innovative products that 
significantly serve the public health by protecting the 
stratospheric ozone.  While the provisions of the Hatch-Waxman 
amendments do not directly apply to this rulemaking, the 
underlying general policy of encouraging innovation and 
protecting investment in research and development does apply as 

 

43 

much as the policy of encouraging the availability of lower-
priced generic drugs.  Most importantly, there is no specific 
provision in the Hatch-Waxman amendments that prohibits us from 
removing generic albuterol MDIs from the market.  There is, 
however, specific language in the Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. 7671) 
that requires us to evaluate whether a use of an ozone-depleting 
substance in a drug product is, or remains, an essential use.  
We are obligated to follow the specific mandate Congress gave us 
in the Clean Air Act, rather than one of two general policies 
underlying another piece of legislation.  

(Comment 20) One comment suggested  we approve generic 

albuterol HFA MDIs immediately, to lower expenses incurred by 
asthma patients. 

Albuterol HFA MDIs are the subject of patents that may 

affect the availability of generic albuterol HFA MDIs until they 
expire.  FDA's ability to approve generics is constrained by the 
patent and exclusivity protections afforded by the Hatch-Waxman 
amendments.  FDA may not approve generic albuterol HFA MDIs 
before permitted by law. 

(Comment 21) One comment expressed concern that the removal 

of the essential-use designation for albuterol MDIs would lead 
to higher costs to the Federal Government as a result of the 
Medicare prescription drug benefits that will go into effect on 
January 1, 2006 (see Title I of the Medicare Prescription Drug 

 

44 

Improvement and Modernization Act of 2003 (Public Law 108–173, 
December 8, 2003)).  The comment recommended that the essential-
use designation for albuterol not be removed until generic 
albuterol HFA MDIs come on the market, to minimize spending by 
the Federal Government.  

Although cost to the Federal Government is not a criterion 
under § 2.125(g), the availability of prescription drug benefits 
under Medicare does affect whether patients are adequately 
served by the non-ODS products. In fact, the prescription drug 
benefits will reduce the impact of higher prices for albuterol 
MDIs on Medicare-eligible patients, who would not otherwise have 
prescription drug insurance benefits.  This will help ensure 
that patients are adequately served by albuterol HFA MDIs. 
(Comment 22) A few comments suggested that prices for 

albuterol HFA MDIs would increase after the rulemaking.  A GSK 
spokesperson at the PADAC meeting stated that GSK had committed 
to a price freeze on VENTOLIN HFA until December 31, 2007.  The 
commitment was repeated in GSK's subsequent written comments. 
We believe that GSK's price freeze will be effective in 

keeping prices at the current level through much of the 
transition period before the effective date of this rule.  
Although Schering has not made a similar commitment, it seems 
unlikely that they will raise their prices knowing that one of 
their two competitors is committed to a price freeze.  The 

 

45 

presence of both GSK and Schering in the market should provide 
downward pressure on prices for albuterol HFA MDIs that will 
continue after the effective date of this rule (see pp. 13–20 of 
the National Economic Associates' comment of August 13, 2004 
(2003P-0029/C25), and section V.D.1 of this document).  Even if 
this pressure does not result in price decreases, it may prevent 
price increases.  A representative of IVAX indicated at the 
PADAC meeting that IVAX's albuterol HFA MDI would be priced 
lower than PROVENTIL HFA and VENTOLIN HFA.  IVAX's entry into 
the albuterol HFA MDI market and the potential market entry of 
additional albuterol HFA MDIs will provide additional downward 
pressure on prices even before the entry of generic albuterol 
HFA MDIs.  

(Comment 23) One comment objected to the elimination of the 
essential-use designation for albuterol MDIs, saying  the price 
of albuterol HFA MDIs is more than $100 per MDI compared to 
generic albuterol CFC MDIs, which cost less than $10 per MDI. 

The issue of the impact of higher prices for albuterol HFA 
MDIs is one that we have given a great deal of thought, but the 
difference is not nearly as great as this comment states.  The 
weighted average (across all payer types) of retail prescription 
price for generic albuterol CFC MDIs during the first half of 
2004 was about $13.50 per MDI and the weighted average retail 
prescription price for albuterol HFA MDIs was about $39.50 per 

 

46 

MDI (see section V.C.6. of this document).  As we discuss in our 
response to comment 18 and section V of this document, we do not 
believe that this price difference prevents patients from using 
albuterol HFA MDIs. 

(Comment 24) One comment recommended that we perform a 
cost-benefit analysis using Medical Expenditure Panel Survey 
(MEPS) data from the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality 
(AHRQ). 

The analysis of impacts described in section V of this 

document uses the MEPS data.  While the analysis does look at 
both the costs and benefits of this rulemaking, we would not 
characterize the analysis as a full cost-benefit analysis 
because we are unable to fully quantify the public health costs 
and environmental benefits in dollar terms; however, we do 
quantify these costs and benefits to the extent we are able. 

(Comment 25) One comment asserted that, while our analysis 

in the 2004 proposed rule of the economic impact of this 
rulemaking on patients was appropriate to the extent the 
analysis focused on whether higher prices would deter patients 
from using albuterol MDIs, those portions of the economic 
analysis that dealt with more general societal costs were 
inappropriate and contrary to the provisions of § 2.125. 

We are required to examine the broader societal costs and 

benefits of any rulemaking.  Executive Order 12866 directs us to 

 

47 

assess all costs and benefits of available regulatory 
alternatives and, when regulation is necessary, to select 
regulatory approaches that maximize net benefits.  The 
Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 601–612) requires agencies 
to analyze regulatory options that would minimize any 
significant impact of a rule on small entities.  Section 202(a) 
of the Unfunded Mandates Reform Act of 1995 (Public Law 104–4) 
requires that agencies prepare a written statement that includes 
an assessment of anticipated costs and benefits before proposing 
any rule that includes any Federal mandate that may result in 
significant expenditure by State, local, and tribal governments, 
or the private sector.   

(Comment 26) A few comments stated  albuterol HFA MDIs were 

unacceptable alternatives because they did not propel the drug 
with adequate force into the lungs.  Other comments stated that 
they had to use an albuterol HFA MDI several times to get the 
same effect they had received from significantly fewer uses of 
an albuterol CFC MDI.  Several comments from patients stated 
that their experience indicated albuterol HFA MDIs were less 
effective than albuterol CFC MDIs, while other comments from 
patients stated that they had found albuterol HFA MDIs to be 
more effective than albuterol CFC MDIs.  One physician commented 
that she believed HFA MDIs were better drug delivery systems 
than CFC MDIs. 

 

48 

The wording of certain comments leads us to believe that at 
least some of people submitting these comments may be confusing 
dry powder inhalers (DPIs) or aqueous (AQ) pumps with HFA MDIs.  
There are currently no albuterol DPIs or AQ pumps being 
marketed.  We did not consider any DPI or AQ pump as a potential 
alternative to albuterol CFC MDIs.  Other comments may reflect 
the common misperception that MDIs propel drugs into the lungs.  
MDIs do not in fact propel any significant amount of drug into 
the lungs.  MDIs propel the drug into the mouth and the drug is 
then inhaled into the lungs.  Albuterol CFC MDIs and albuterol 
HFA MDIs work in same way; both contain the active ingredient as 
a very fine powder which is delivered in a suspension into the 
patient's mouth.  MDIs that forcefully deliver the drug 
suspension may actually be less effective at delivering the drug 
into the lungs.  In these instances, a significant portion of 
the drug may be sprayed onto the surfaces in the back of the 
mouth, from which they will be swallowed rather than inhaled 
into the lungs.  An explanation that we believe likely for some 
of these perceived differences is the possibility that the 
albuterol HFA MDIs that were being used had clogged mouthpieces.  
Cleaning the mouthpieces as described in the labeling for 
PROVENTIL HFA and VENTOLIN HFA should alleviate these problems. 

Whatever the perceived differences between albuterol CFC 

MDIs and albuterol HFA MDIs may be, clinical studies have shown 

 

49 

the albuterol HFA MDIs are as effective as the albuterol CFC 
MDIs in treating asthma and COPD. 

(Comment 27) One comment stated  we should not remove the 
essential-use designation for albuterol MDIs because members of 
the person submitting the comment's family are allergic to the 
lactose contained in alternative products. 

Neither VENTOLIN HFA nor PROVENTIL HFA contains lactose.  
While other inhaled drug products for the treatment of asthma 
and COPD do contain small amounts of lactose, our determination 
on the essential-use designation for albuterol MDIs is based 
exclusively on the suitability of VENTOLIN HFA and PROVENTIL HFA 
as alternatives. 

(Comment 28) One person said in his comment he had an 

adverse reaction that included tachycardia (elevated heart rate) 
after taking PROVENTIL HFA.  He attributed the adverse event to 
ethanol, which is an inactive ingredient in PROVENTIL HFA and to 
which he is sensitive. 

Reports of an allergic reaction attributed to the very 

small amounts of ethanol contained in PROVENTIL HFA are 
extremely rare.9  VENTOLIN HFA, which does not contain ethanol, 

                                                 
9 We are only aware of one report in our MedWatch system of an allergic 
reaction attributed to the very small amounts of ethanol contained in 
PROVENTIL HFA.  VENTOLIN HFA, which does not contain ethanol, should be 
considered for asthma and COPD patients who may be sensitive to ethanol.  
MedWatch is the FDA safety information and adverse event reporting program, 
which allows health care professionals and consumers to report serious 

 

50 

should be considered for asthma and COPD patients who may be 
sensitive to ethanol.  Unlike the albuterol CFC MDIs, VENTOLIN 
HFA and PROVENTIL HFA do not contain identical active 
ingredients, and patients having difficulties with one product 
should discuss with their physicians switching to the other.   

(Comment 29) One person said in his comment he had an 
asthma attack after his first use of a QVAR (beclomethasone 
dipropionate) HFA MDI.  He attributed the adverse event to the 
HFA propellant in the QVAR MDI and concluded that HFA MDIs would 
not serve patients who were sensitive to HFA. 

Another person said in her comment her use of an albuterol 

HFA MDI caused irritation and triggered an asthma attack. 

A third comment suggested HFA MDIs could be less likely to 
cause paradoxical bronchospasm because of tighter specifications 
for the various compounds in the MDIs. 

Bronchospasm may occur after using any inhaled asthma drug, 

including both albuterol CFC and HFA MDIs.  The approved 
labeling for both albuterol CFC and HFA MDIs, as well as QVAR 
and most other approved inhaled drugs, describe paradoxical 
bronchospasm as an adverse event that can be expected in a small 
number of patients.  Paradoxical bronchospasm seems to be 
associated with the first use of an MDI or vial of an inhaled 

                                                                                                                                                             
problems that they suspect are associated with the drugs and medical devices 
they prescribe, dispense, or use. 

 

51 

drug.  The warnings about paradoxical bronchospasm represent a 
general concern with inhaled drugs, and do not represent a 
special concern for albuterol CFC and HFA MDIs or QVAR.  
Paradoxical bronchospasm is very rare; a study conducted in the 
United Kingdom of 10,472 patients regularly using VENTOLIN 
EVOHALER (an albuterol HFA MDI marketed in the United Kingdom 
that is substantially similar to VENTOLIN HFA) over five 3-month 
observation periods, did not show any incidents of paradoxical 
bronchospasm (Ref. 3).  We have not seen any evidence from the 
clinical studies of various HFA MDIs that this type of adverse 
event is more or less common with HFA MDIs than with CFC MDIs.  
Absent other data, we cannot assume that the adverse events 
described in the comments were caused by the HFA propellant in 
the MDIs. 

(Comment 30) A few comments stated albuterol HFA MDIs left 
a powdery residue at the back of the throat.  One person said in 
her comment that after using an albuterol HFA MDI she felt the 
need to rinse her mouth out.  One comment said this tendency to 
leave a powdery residue could lead to thrush and other 
infections. 

A very small number of patients have reported an unpleasant 
powdery residue in the oral cavity after use of an albuterol HFA 
MDI.  Any MDI can leave a residue in the oral cavity.  Use of a 
spacer can minimize the amount of residue left in the mouth.  

 

52 

Patients who experience this problem may wish to speak to their 
physicians about using a spacer with the MDI.  We do not 
consider problems with a powdery residue to be either prevalent 
enough or serious enough to prevent patients from being 
adequately served by albuterol HFA MDIs. 

Thrush, also known as candidiasis, is occasionally seen 

with the use of inhaled corticosteroids.  Although thrush may be 
seen in patients who are taking both inhaled corticosteroids and 
inhaled albuterol, there is no evidence to suggest that use of 
albuterol or HFA contributes to the development of thrush.  
Accordingly, we do not believe thrush to be a problem with use 
of albuterol HFA MDIs. 

(Comment 31) One comment stated albuterol HFA MDIs are not 
an adequate substitute because they cannot be used with spacers. 

Commercially available spacers can be used with both 

albuterol HFA MDIs.  Patients who are having difficulties with 
any MDI may wish to speak to their physicians about using a 
spacer in conjunction with the MDI. 

We find that patients who medically require albuterol CFC 

MDIs are adequately served by albuterol HFA MDIs. 
F.  Effective Date 
 
comments, including comments from Schering, 3M, and GSK, 
recommended an effective date of December 31, 2005. 

(Comment 32) Several speakers at the PADAC meeting and 

 

53 

Schering, 3M, and GSK have all stated that adequate 

 
production capacity and supplies would be in place by December 
31, 2005.  However, the December 31, 2005, date is merely a 
projected date, and neither Schering, 3M, nor GSK provided the 
basis for their projections.  No timelines, construction and 
installation schedules, or training goals were provided to us.  
We have no descriptions of what new machinery must be procured, 
nor any idea when that machinery can be up and running.  While 
we believe that the projections were made in good faith, 
unanticipated delays and shortages could push the date on which 
adequate production capacity and supplies are in place 
significantly beyond December 31, 2005. Due to the lack of 
underlying information, we are unable to evaluate the likelihood 
or length of any possible delays.   

If this rule were to go into effect before adequate 

production capacity and supplies were in place, there would not 
be a smooth transition from albuterol CFC MDIs to albuterol HFA 
MDIs.  We could be forced to publish a notice postponing the 
effective date.  We could see resumption of production at 
albuterol CFC MDI lines that had been closed and increased 
production to restock supplies of albuterol CFC MDIs that had 
been allowed to dwindle in anticipation of the effective date of 
this rule.  If needed CFCs, MDI components, or production 

 

54 

facilities were unavailable, shortages of albuterol MDIs could 
exist. 

Furthermore, if we were forced to push the effective date 

of this rule back because of the failure of manufacturers to 
have adequate production capacity and supplies in place, it 
would be very harmful to any transition education program.  
Patients and health care providers would be provided with 
different dates by which the transition from albuterol CFC MDIs 
to albuterol HFA MDIs would be completed.  This could lead to 
confusion, lack of trust, and the belief that people would not 
have to think about the transition because it would probably be 
postponed again.   
 
When we consider how serious and life threatening asthma 
and COPD are, and how important albuterol MDIs are in treating 
asthma and COPD, it becomes apparent that a conservative 
estimate of when sufficient supplies and production capacity 
will exist and a later effective date will better ensure that 
shortages do not happen and a smoother transition will be made.  
For these reasons we believe that a December 31, 2005, effective 
date does not provide an adequate safety margin to ensure that 
adequate production capacity and supplies will be in place.  
Accordingly, we have determined that December 31, 2008, is a 
more appropriate effective date for this rule.  

 

55 

We arrived at a December 31, 2008, effective date with the 

 
expectation that an orderly transition to albuterol HFA MDIs 
would be completed by that date. Although significant production 
and supplies may be in place prior to this date, in light of the 
serious consequences of inadequate supplies and the need to 
ensure that vulnerable patients have adequate access, the date 
of December 31, 2008 ensures that the criteria in § 2.125(g) 
will be met and that the transition to albuterol HFA MDIs can be 
accomplished smoothly.  This transition period between the 
publication of the final rule and the effective date ensures 
that new facilities will be on line, that manufacturers will 
have successfully demonstrated their ability to produce 
necessary supplies of albuterol HFA MDIs, and patients and 
health care providers will be adequately educated about the 
transition to albuterol HFA MDIs.  After the effective date, 
section 610 of the Clean Air Act would prohibit the sales of 
albuterol CFC MDIs in interstate commerce.  As discussed below 
in response to comment 42, the transition time under this rule 
should allow for retailers and their suppliers to deplete their 
stock. 
(Comment 33) One comment suggested a 2007 effective date 
 
without giving reasons why this date would be more appropriate 
than others. 

 

56 

This comment did not provide any information or rationale 

 
for the date, and our rationale for the December 31, 2008, 
effective date is set out in our response to comment 32. 
 
date that will allow patients to try different albuterol HFA 
MDIs to see if they perform adequately for individual patients. 

(Comment 34) A few comments asked that we set an effective 

As we discussed in our responses to comment 18 and in 

(Comment 35) Several comments urged us to set the effective 

We believe the December 31, 2008 effective date provides 
ample opportunity for patients to work with their healthcare 
providers to determine the best substitute. 
 
date for this rule late enough to allow lower-priced generic 
albuterol HFA MDIs onto the market before the essential-use 
status of albuterol MDIs is removed. 
 
section V, we do not believe that presence of generic albuterol 
HFA MDIs is necessary to ensure that patients are adequately 
served by albuterol HFA MDIs. 
 
comments "on when patents may cease to bar the marketing of 
generic albuterol HFA MDIs."  (2004 proposed rule at 33608.)  We 
did not receive any substantive comments on this issue.  One 
comment, while agreeing with us that we do not have the 
institutional expertise to evaluate patents, criticized our 
statement that "it seems at least possible that key patents 

(Comment 36) In the 2004 proposed rule we asked for 

 

57 

could be successfully challenged well before 2015 or perhaps 
even 2010, allowing generic drugs to enter the market much 
earlier than anticipated."  (2004 proposed rule at 33608.)  The 
comment asserted  it would be irresponsible to base any decision 
on the mere possibility that patents may be successfully 
challenged.  The comment also stated competition would not be 
blocked because of the ability of firms to license HFA MDI 
technology from 3M.  It also pointed to IVAX as a potential 
source of competition. 

We did not receive any substantive comments on the validity 
of the patents listed in the Orange Book for albuterol HFA MDIs. 
Because we have determined that, as we discussed in our response 
to comment 18 and in section V, the presence of generic 
albuterol HFA MDIs in the market is not necessary to ensure that 
patients are adequately served by albuterol HFA MDIs, it is not 
necessary for us to reach a conclusion on the validity of those 
patents.  We do not believe that IVAX or entrants into the 
albuterol HFA MDI market that license HFA MDI technology from 3M 
will be priced as low as current generic albuterol CFC MDIs.  We 
base this belief on the added expense that licenses will entail 
for manufacturers and the past history of drug pricing.  
However, we do believe that IVAX and other, potential, entrants 
can exert downward pressure on prices that could result in lower 
prices than we currently see for albuterol HFA MDIs.   

 

58 

(Comment 37) A representative of Honeywell, speaking at the 

 
PADAC meeting, said Honeywell planned to resume production of 
CFC propellants at a Louisiana plant, and gave assurances that 
Honeywell Chemicals could supply CFC propellants for years to 
come, if needed.  He also said FDA should not consider a 
shortage of CFC propellants in establishing a transition 
strategy.  Honeywell later provided more details on the subject 
in a written comment. 

Another speaker at the PADAC meeting said Honeywell's 
resumption of production at their Baton Rouge plant would 
violate U.S. law and the Montreal Protocol.  He further said 
that according to statements made by Honeywell, current 
stockpiles of CFCs coupled with production of CFCs at 
Honeywell's Netherlands facility, which is scheduled to close at 
the end of 2005, should meet U.S. demand for CFCs for use in 
MDIs until 2008. 

Another comment stated it was appropriate for us to take 
into account the disruptions in the supply of CFCs caused by 
Honeywell ending production of CFCs at their Netherlands 
facility and the equivocal legal status of Honeywell's 
resumption of production of CFCs at their Baton Rouge facility.  
It also said we should carefully scrutinize Honeywell's ability 
to manufacture pharmaceutical grade CFCs at the Baton Rouge 
facility. 

 

59 

Although we discussed Honeywell's continued production of 
CFCs in the 2004 proposed rule (2004 Proposed Rule at pp. 33607-
33608), this issue does not address any of the criteria under 
which we are making a determination on the essential-use status 
of albuterol MDIs.  The criteria in §2.125(g) direct us to 
examine the adequacy of supplies and capacity for the non-ODS 
substitutes, but not the supplies and capacity for the ODS 
product.   

(Comment 38) Speakers at the PADAC meeting and written 

comments stated that the Parties to the Montreal Protocol were 
unlikely to continue to approve the United States' future 
nominations for allocations of CFCs for use in MDIs.  One 
comment asked that we carefully consider the future supply of 
CFCs in setting an effective date for this rule.  Another 
comment pointed out that a key raw material in the production of 
CFCs is carbon tetrachloride, an ODS that is being phased out 
under the provisions of the Montreal Protocol.  The comment 
asserted that this could lead to a situation where it could be 
very difficult to obtain the needed raw materials for the 
manufacture of CFCs, even if the manufacture itself was allowed 
under the Montreal Protocol.  Another comment urged us to not 
allow the fact that other Parties to the Montreal Protocol have 
initiated phaseouts of albuterol CFC MDIs pressure us into a 

 

60 

premature action, pointing out that prices for albuterol HFA 
MDIs are lower in other countries. 

We are obligated to follow the procedures and criteria in § 
2.125 in this rulemaking, and the continued supply of CFCs under 
the Montreal Protocol or the phaseout strategies in other 
countries are not criteria listed in  
§ 2.125(g) and these issues were not considered in this 
rulemaking.   

(Comment 39) Prior to publication of the 2004 proposed 

rule, we received a comment from a manufacturer of MDI 
components submitted in response to the Stakeholders' petition.  
The manufacturer said it has the ongoing capacity to supply MDI 
components necessary for ongoing use of CFC MDIs, including 
albuterol CFC MDIs, and it will continue production as long as 
there is sufficient demand. 

While we appreciate the information contained in this 

comment, the continued availability of MDI components necessary 
for continuing use of CFC MDIs is also not a criterion under § 
2.125(g) upon which we may base our decision. 
 
that FDA monitor patient compliance and access to albuterol HFA 
MDIs and reserve the right to allow a certain number of 
albuterol CFC MDIs to be sold in case of a real emergency.    

(Comment 40) One speaker at the PADAC meeting suggested 

 

61 

 
Under the Clean Air Act, a use of an ODS is either 
essential or it is not.  We are currently unaware of any 
interpretation of the provisions of the Clean Air Act that would 
give us the flexibility to allow emergency sale or distribution 
of a CFC MDI once its use is determined to be non-essential. 
(Comment 41) One comment recommended that we not set an 
effective date until we are certain that adequate production 
capacity will exist. 

(Comment 42) A comment recommended that we not establish a 

In choosing December 31, 2008, as the effective date of 
this rule, we did so with every reasonable expectation that 
adequate supplies and production capacity will exist by that 
time.  
 
date beyond which retail pharmacies are barred from selling 
albuterol CFC MDIs, even if we did establish a date beyond which 
albuterol CFC MDIs could not be manufactured. 
The sale of remaining stocks of albuterol CFC MDIs was one 
 
of the factors we considered in establishing an effective date 
that is well after the date we expect the transition to HFA MDIs 
to be substantially completed by manufacturers of albuterol 
MDIs.  This additional buffer period should give wholesalers and 
retailers adequate time to dispose of stocks of albuterol CFC 
MDIs.  That being said, we do not have the authority to 
establish an effective dates for wholesalers and retailers that 

 

62 

differs from an effective date for manufacturers.  We can only 
make a determination on the date by which the criteria set out 
in § 2.125(g) will be met and the use of ODSs in albuterol MDIs 
is no longer essential.  Once a product is no longer an 
essential use, the prohibitions in section 610 of the Clean Air 
Act automatically come into play.  However, section 610 of the 
Clean Air Act only applies to sales in interstate commerce.    
If shipments of albuterol CFC MDIs by producers have stopped by 
December 31, 2007, or shortly thereafter, wholesalers and 
retailers should not find it difficult to distribute their 
stocks  by December 31, 2008. 
G.  CFCs and the Environment 

(Comment 43) A few comments asserted that CFCs used in MDIs 

do not have an adverse impact on the environment because the 
CFCs are inhaled rather than being released into the 
environment. 

Nearly all of the CFCs inhaled into the lungs from an MDI 
are almost immediately exhaled into the environment.  The small 
amounts of CFCs absorbed into the body are later excreted and 
exhaled without being broken down.  Essentially all of the CFCs 
released from an MDI end up in the atmosphere with resulting 
harm to the stratospheric ozone layer. 

(Comment 44) A few comments asserted that the amount of 
ODSs released from albuterol CFC MDIs is insignificant, and 

 

63 

eliminating their use would not provide any environmental 
benefit.   

The United States evaluated the environmental effect of 

eliminating the use of all CFCs in an environmental impact 
statement (EIS) in the 1970s (see 43 FR 11301, March 17, 1978).  
As part of that evaluation, FDA concluded that the continued use 
of CFCs in medical products posed an unreasonable risk of long-
term biological and climatic impacts (see Docket No. 96N-0057).  
In 1990, Congress enacted Title VI of the Clean Air Act, which 
codified the decision to fully phase out the use of CFCs over 
time.  Congress did not assign us the task of determining what 
amount of environmental benefit would result from the removal of 
CFC-containing medical devices, diagnostic products, drugs, and 
drug delivery systems from the market.  Congress did instruct us 
to determine whether such products are essential.  This 
rulemaking fulfills that obligation. 

(Comment 45) A comment asserted that the Montreal Protocol 
is working well and that according to the Executive Summary of 
the "World Meteorological Organization Global Ozone and Research 
Project--Report No. 47:  Scientific Assessment of Ozone 
Depletion:  2002" (Executive Summary) (available at 
http://www.unep.org/ozone/Publications/6v_science%20assess%20pan
el.asp), the continuing use of CFCs in albuterol MDIs would 
delay restoration of the Earth's ozone layer to its 1980 

 

64 

condition by an insignificant time past the currently projected 
date of 2050.  The comment quoted the following passage from 
page xvii of the Executive Summary:  

The updated, best-estimate scenario for future 
halocarbon mixing ratios suggests that the atmospheric 
burden of halogens will return to the 1980 pre-
Antarctic-ozone-hole levels around the middle of the 
21st century, provided continued adherence to the 
fully amended and adjusted Montreal Protocol.  Only 
small improvements would arise from further reduced 
production allowances in the future. 
The size of the delay in the date the ozone layer will be 

restored to its 1980 condition is not a criterion in determining 
which medical devices, diagnostic products, drugs, and drug 
delivery systems are essential under the Clean Air Act.  These 
criteria are set out in § 2.125 and discussed above.  However, 
we note that the estimate described in the quoted paragraph 
assumes "continued adherence to the fully amended and adjusted 
Montreal Protocol."  As we discussed in section II.C.2  of this 
document, Decision IV/2 envisioned elimination of the production 
and importation of CFCs by January 1, 1996, by Parties that are 
developed countries. Although production and importation of CFCs 
for use in albuterol MDIs are permitted, year to year, as an 
essential use under the Montreal Protocol, we fail to see how a 

 

65 

rule that permits sale and distribution of albuterol CFC MDIs 
into 2008 can be characterized as a reduction in production 
allowances.  The Montreal Protocol is frequently called the most 
successful environmental treaty in history, yet its success is 
based primarily on voluntary compliance by all of the Parties to 
the treaty.  If the United States were to continue sale and 
distribution of ODS products after adequate alternative products 
were available, this could lead other Parties to do the same, 
eventually threatening the integrity of the Montreal Protocol.  
In the words of the Executive Summary cited in the comment, 
"Failure to comply with the Montreal Protocol would delay or 
could even prevent recovery of the ozone layer."  (Executive 
Summary at xxv.)  The continued existence of a strong Montreal 
Protocol is in the best interest of the public health of the 
United States, and our failure to take timely action on 
albuterol MDIs could potentially weaken the Montreal Protocol. 

(Comment 46) One comment criticized our attempts in the 
2004 proposed rule to quantify the environmental benefits of 
this rulemaking. 

We agree with the comment that accurately quantifying the 

direct environmental benefits of this rule is very difficult and 
that quantifying the indirect environmental benefits may be 
impossible.  However, as we discussed in our response to comment 
25, we are under separate legal obligation to examine the 

 

66 

broader societal costs and benefits of any rulemaking, including 
the environmental costs and benefits.  Accordingly, the 
discussion of the environmental costs and benefits of this rule 
is separate from the determination as to whether the criteria in 
§ 2.125 have been met. 

(Comment 47) One comment stated  the amount of CFCs 

released by MDIs is negligible compared to naturally occurring 
CFCs. 

There are no naturally occurring CFCs.  (Comment 48) A few 

comments seemed to confuse CFCs with other greenhouse gases, 
such as carbon dioxide and nitrous oxide, when stating that MDIs 
were a minor source of CFCs compared to sources such as power 
plant and automobile emissions.   

While CFCs are considered to be greenhouse gases, we are 
publishing this rule because the criteria in § 2.125 have been 
met, rather than any contribution CFCs may be making towards 
global warming.   

(Comment 49) A few comments stated that MDIs were a minor 

source of CFCs compared to hair spray and deodorants. 

CFCs were banned from deodorants, hair spray, and other 

cosmetics by the 1978 rule.  Cosmetics containing CFCs have not 
been legally marketed in the United States since April 15, 1979, 
the effective date of the 1978 rule.  
H.  Comments on the Analysis of Impacts 

 

67 

(Comment 50) We received several comments about our 

estimates of the price increases that might result from the 
proposed rule.  

One comment objected to FDA estimates of expected price 

increases based on the price gap between albuterol CFC MDIs and 
albuterol HFA MDIs from drugstore.com, because the Web site's 
market share is small and therefore does not accurately 
represent market prices.  This comment recommended that we use 
retail cash albuterol MDI prices from IMS Health Inc. (IMS).  
Another comment took average wholesale prices of albuterol MDIs 
and inflated them according to average retail markups on 
albuterol for cash payers of 28.8 percent for branded MDIs and 
363.3 percent for generic MDIs.  From this, the comment 
calculated cash payers will pay on average $8.61 more per MDI. 

Another comment contended that price increases are of 
limited importance, because insurers have an incentive to 
maintain lower copayments for albuterol.  Lower copayments would 
minimize the costs to insurers for emergency department visits, 
hospitalizations, etc. that result from poorer compliance with 
albuterol therapy. 

A few comments said  individuals eligible for Medicare or 
Medicaid are unlikely to face higher costs for albuterol as a 
result of this rule. 

 

68 

We believe that cash albuterol MDI prices best reflect 

prices paid by the uninsured, and, consistent with the comment, 
have considered data on retail cash albuterol MDI prices from 
IMS, which are generally considered to be the best price data 
available.  Although we did use prices from drugstore.com in the 
2004 proposed rule,10 this was done primarily because we did not 
have rights to use the IMS data when the 2004 proposed rule was 
being prepared.  IMS retail price data reflect the impact on 
consumers better than other measures such as estimates derived 
from average wholesale cash prices inflated by average retail 
markups for cash payers. 
 
the likely price increase will be approximately the current 
difference in price between generic albuterol CFC MDIs and 
albuterol HFA MDIs, although competition from IVAX's approved 
albuterol HFA MDI and other albuterol HFA MDIs that enter the 
market may lower prices somewhat.  

After reviewing these comments, we continue to believe that 

We believe that price increases are an important 

determinant of access for individuals without insurance, who are 

                                                 
10 Although the prices derived from IMS data give us much greater assurance 
than the prices found on drugstore.com that the numbers we use accurately 
reflect market prices, in the case of albuterol MDIs the differences in 
prices are not very significant.  The drugstore.com price for generic 
albuterol CFC MDIs is $13.99, while the weighted average retail price derived 
from IMS data is approximately $13.50.  The drugstore.com prices for VENTOLIN 
HFA and PROVENTIL HFA are $39.61 and $38.99 respectively, while the weighted 
average retail price derived from IMS data for albuterol HFA MDIs is $39.50.  
The drugstore.com prices are those posted on February 10, 2005.  See section 

 

69 

likely to pay the full amount of price increases out of their 
own pockets.  Copayments for albuterol MDIs for privately 
insured individuals may change when this rule goes into effect, 
but such changes will be determined by their insurers.  While 
copayments are generally higher for branded drugs, they are not 
necessarily higher for branded drugs that lack a generic 
alternative.  We are unable to predict how average copayments 
may change as a result of the rule. 
 
eligible for Medicare or Medicaid are unlikely to face higher 
out-of-pocket costs for albuterol as a result of this rule. 
(Comment 51) Comments were submitted about our use of 

We agree with the comments suggesting that individuals 

estimates of consumers' response to drug price increases taken 
from the Goldman article (Ref. 4).  One comment noted that 
elasticity estimates in the Goldman article were based on a 
broad range of asthma drugs, many of which differ from albuterol 
MDIs in important ways.  The comment contended that these 
differences prevent us from drawing meaningful conclusions about 
how demand for albuterol MDIs will respond to price increases. 
 
make use of estimates in the Goldman article indicating a price 
elasticity of demand for asthma drugs as large as -.32. 

A second comment noted that the proposed rule failed to 

                                                                                                                                                             
V.C.6 of this document for more information on the prices derived from IMS 
data. 

 

70 

We recognize the limitations of applying results from the 

Goldman article to the market for albuterol MDIs, and have 
sought to characterize fully the associated uncertainty.  We 
believe, however, that focusing on a range of elasticity 
estimates from -.05 to -.15 is reasonable and appropriate given 
available information. 

We used the Goldman article because it provides recent 

estimates of how consumer demand for asthma drugs responds to 
price increases.  The article finds that among all users of 
asthma drugs, a doubling of copayments for asthma drugs reduced 
drug use by 32%.  Among chronic asthma sufferers, use of asthma 
drugs decreased only 22%.  To the extent that asthmatics are 
more willing to reduce their use of maintenance drugs, such as 
steroid inhalers, than to reduce their use of rescue drugs, such 
as albuterol MDIs, the true consumer response to albuterol MDI 
price increases may be less than the Goldman article suggests.  

We acknowledge the potential shortcomings of applying 

estimates from the Goldman article to the market for albuterol 
MDIs but, lacking better information upon which to base our 
estimates, focus on the range of elasticity estimates from -.05 
to -.15, the same range focused upon in the proposed rule.  
 
(Comment 52) Several comments sought to place our analysis 
of impacts in proper historical context by suggesting that the 
reductions in use that we estimate are small compared with 

 

71 

A second comment noted that the introduction of cheaper 

A third comment pointed out that the introduction of 

historical variations.  One comment noted that introduction of 
generic albuterol MDIs to the market for albuterol MDIs in the 
mid-1990's, and the associated decline in prices, was not 
associated with any decrease in asthma morbidity. 
 
generic albuterol MDIs did not result in an increase in 
consumption of albuterol MDIs, implying that removal of generic 
albuterol MDIs should not result in a decrease in consumption. 
 
generic albuterol MDIs to the market coincided roughly with the 
entry of therapeutic alternatives such as salmeterol xinafoate, 
ipatropium bromide, fluticasone propionate, and COMBIVENT, which 
would have decreased demand for albuterol MDIs at the time lower 
priced generics became available. 
 
demand for albuterol MDIs exceed 1 million units, implying that 
estimated decreases in albuterol demand are small relative to 
the market. 
 
future albuterol MDI market based on characteristics of the 
market from the 1990s.  Our projected decrease in albuterol MDI 
sales assumes that, apart from price increases, other 
determinants of albuterol demand are held constant.  In the mid-
1990s, several factors that influence albuterol MDI demand 

A fourth comment noted that year-to-year fluctuations in 

We believe it is difficult to draw conclusions about the 

 

72 

changed including the prevalence and incidence of asthma and 
COPD and patterns of medical practice.  However, the effects of 
these changes cannot easily be estimated with existing data.  
For example, changes in asthma prevalence before and after 1997 
are complicated by changes in the design of the National Health 
Interview Survey in 1997.  We believe the comment stating that 
introduction of new asthma drugs at this time decreased demand 
for albuterol MDIs is probably correct, but we lack the data 
needed to quantify any decrease in demand caused by introduction 
of new asthma drugs.  Because important determinants of 
albuterol MDI demand are not held constant, the lack of a clear 
relationship between aggregate albuterol MDI sales and average 
prices in the 1990s does not undermine the projection that, all 
other factors remaining the same, use of albuterol MDIs will 
fall as prices rise. 
 
hundred thousand annually is a small percentage of the total 
number of albuterol MDIs used in the United States.    
I.  Other Comments 

We agree that a reduction in albuterol MDI use of several 

(Comment 53) Speakers at the PADAC meeting and written 

comments said albuterol MDIs were overused and  the phaseout of 
albuterol CFC MDIs would be an appropriate time for physicians 
and patients to reevaluate the patients’ use of asthma 
medication.  The reevaluation would optimize drug regimens used 

 

73 

by asthma patients by emphasizing use of maintenance drugs and 
deemphasizing the use of albuterol MDIs as a rescue medication.  
One comment suggested  we incorporate strategies to encourage 
these interchanges into this final rule.  Another written 
comment disagreed with these comments, and asserted that the 
elimination of the essential-use designation for albuterol MDIs 
should not be viewed as a teachable moment and it would be 
inappropriate to force patients to use other longer acting but 
more expensive drugs by effectively raising the price of 
albuterol MDIs. 

While recognizing that many experts believe that albuterol 
MDIs are being overused, we do not have any reliable data that 
show that there is a significant pattern of overuse.  In any 
case, the overuse or underuse of a drug product is not a factor 
that we consider under § 2.125(g).  We do, however, welcome any 
opportunity for physicians and patients to reexamine the 
patients' drug use and to try to optimize the patients' 
treatment regimens.  It is also important to remember that we do 
not regulate the practice of medicine and, depending on how the 
strategies are expressed, an effort on our part to incorporate 
into our regulation strategies to encourage these consultations 
might be construed as the regulation of the practice of 
medicine.   

 

74 

(Comment 54) A comment from an industry organization stated 

that educating patients and health care providers about the 
transition from albuterol CFC MDIs to albuterol HFA MDIs is very 
important, and offered to participate in cooperative education 
programs with FDA and other interested parties.  GSK has 
outlined their education plans in their comments.  Other 
comments stated the importance of transition education. 

We agree that educating patients and health care providers 

about the transition is very important.  Anyone who wishes to 
discuss a cooperative educational effort with HHS and FDA should 
contact FDA or the Office of the Secretary of HHS. 

(Comment 55) One comment recommended that, in setting an 

effective date, we take into consideration the time necessary to 
educate patients and health care providers about the transition 
to albuterol HFA MDIs, and one comment recommended more time for 
this education. 
 
providers about the transition to albuterol HFA MDIs is very 
important.  From most patients' perspective, albuterol HFA MDIs 
are essentially identical11 to the albuterol CFC MDIs they will 

We believe that educating patients and health care 

                                                 
11 While PROVENTIL HFA and VENTOLIN HFA can be substituted for albuterol CFC 
MDIs, they are not therapeutic equivalents to albuterol CFC MDIs, or to each 
other, as that term is defined in the Orange Book.  There are minor 
differences between the formulations of VENTOLIN HFA and PROVENTIL HFA that 
might be significant for some small patient subpopulations (see our response 
to comment 28), but for the vast majority of patients these differences 
should not be significant. 

 

75 

be replacing.  An explanation that an albuterol HFA MDI is being 
substituted for the albuterol CFC MDI the patient had been 
receiving and a explanation of the differences in using the new 
MDI should be adequate for the vast majority of patients.  This 
explanation can be given by the patient's physician, pharmacist, 
or other health care provider.  While we realize it will take 
some time to prepare and distribute educational material, we 
believe that adequate education can easily be provided before 
the final transition to albuterol HFA MDIs. 

(Comment 56) One comment asserted that "a premature 

phaseout would compromise the reward structure for innovation."  
The comment also asserted that firms that had made substantial 
investments in developing albuterol HFA MDIs would be adequately 
rewarded for the innovation even if this rule were made 
effective at a date that would allow generic albuterol HFA MDIs 
to enter the market before the removal of the essential-use 
designation for albuterol MDIs.  The comment stated that GSK had 
profited handsomely from sales of its combination fluticasone 
and salmeterol DPI products in the United States and abroad. 
 
We do not see, nor does the comment explain, how profits 
from the sale of combination fluticasone and salmeterol DPIs 
could be seen as a reward for GSK's albuterol HFA MDI research 
and development.  Even if we assume that GSK's sales of other 
products somehow provide adequate incentives for its innovation, 

 

76 

the comment does not assert how the research and development 
efforts of 3M, the manufacturer of the first albuterol HFA MDI 
marketed in the United States, have been rewarded.   

The development of ozone-friendly products is important to 

achieving the goal of protection of the Earth's ozone layer.  
Accordingly, it is a factor we considered in our analyses of 
impacts (see the 2004 proposed rule at pages 33164-33165 and 
section V of this document). 

(Comment 57) One comment emphasized the importance of 
encouraging the development of ozone-friendly products and 
stated that, in consideration of the pharmaceutical firms 
developing ODS free alternatives, the U.S. Government had 
committed itself "to ensure prompt removal of nonessential CFC 
MDIs as soon as new and reformulated products became available." 

As we said before, the development of ozone-friendly 

products is important to achieving the goal of protection of the 
Earth's ozone layer.  However, we are unaware of the commitment 
described in this comment.  The 2002 final rule and this 
rulemaking have been undertaken pursuant to our obligations 
under the Clean Air Act and the Montreal Protocol. 
 
on salmeterol DPIs and combination fluticasone and salmeterol 
DPIs.  Another comment complained about the high prices of 
levalbuterol hydrochloride (HCl) inhalation solution. 

(Comment 58) A few comments expressed unfavorable opinions 

 

77 

We have not considered salmeterol DPIs, combination 

We have carefully considered the potential environmental 

 
fluticasone and salmeterol DPIs, or levalbuterol HCl inhalation 
solution to be alternatives to albuterol CFC MDIs.  Comments 
about salmeterol DPIs, combination fluticasone and salmeterol 
DPIs, and levalbuterol HCl inhalation solution are not relevant 
to this rulemaking. 
IV.  Environmental Impact 
 
effects of this action.  We have concluded that the action will 
not have a significant adverse impact on the human environment, 
and that an environmental impact statement is not required.  Our 
finding of no significant impact, and the evidence supporting 
that finding, contained in an environmental assessment, may be 
seen in the Division of Dockets Management (see ADDRESSES) 
between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., Monday through Friday. 
V.  Analysis of Impacts  
A.  Introduction 

We have examined the impacts of the final rule under 

Executive Order 12866, the Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 
601-612), the Unfunded Mandates Reform Act of 1995 (Public Law 
104-4), and the Congressional Review Act.  Executive Order 12866 
directs agencies to assess all costs and benefits of available 
regulatory alternatives and, when regulation is necessary, to 
select regulatory approaches that maximize net benefits 

 

78 

(including potential economic, environmental, public health and 
safety, and other advantages; distributive impacts; and equity).  
We believe that this final rule is consistent with the 
regulatory philosophy and principles identified in the Executive 
Order.  This final rule is considered an economically 
significant regulatory action under the Executive Order. 

The Regulatory Flexibility Act requires agencies to analyze 
regulatory options that would minimize any significant impact of 
a rule on small entities.  We lack the data to certify that this 
final rule will not have a significant economic impact on a 
substantial number of small entities.  Therefore, we have 
prepared a Regulatory Flexibility Analysis. 

Section 202(a) of the Unfunded Mandates Reform Act of 1995 

requires that agencies prepare a written statement, which 
includes an assessment of anticipated costs and benefits, before 
issuing "any rule that includes any Federal mandate that may 
result in the expenditure by State, local, and tribal 
governments, in the aggregate, or by the private sector, of 
$100,000,000 or more (adjusted annually for inflation) in any 
one year."  The current threshold after adjustment for inflation 
is $115 million, using the implicit GDP deflator for 2003, the 
most recent year for which final data exist.  This rule, 
however, does not contain such a mandate.   

 

79 

The Congressional Review Act requires that regulations that 

have been identified as being major must be submitted to 
Congress before taking effect.  This rule is major under the 
Congressional Review Act. 

Limitations in the available data prevent us from 

estimating quantitatively the anticipated costs and benefits to 
society, so we focus instead on proxy measures.  The costs of 
this final rule include the benefits lost by consumers who would 
have bought albuterol MDIs at the current price but are 
unwilling or unable to buy them at a higher price.  The price of 
albuterol MDIs will rise because this rule, by ending the 
essential-use designation for albuterol MDIs, will effectively 
remove less expensive generic versions of albuterol MDIs from 
the market.  Consumers and third-party payers, including Federal 
and State Governments, will spend more for albuterol MDIs as a 
result of the price increase.  But this increased spending is 
not part of social cost as conventionally defined, because it 
represents resources that are transferred from drug buyers 
(consumers and third-party payers) to drug sellers (drug 
manufacturers, wholesalers, pharmacies, etc.).  The benefits of 
this rule include the value of improvements in the environment 
and public health that may result from reduced emissions of ODSs 
(for example, the reduced future incidence of skin cancers and 
cataracts).  The benefits also include improved expected returns 

 

80 

on investments in environmental technologies and greater 
international cooperation to comply with the Montreal Protocol.  
As we are unable to estimate the costs and benefits in dollar 
terms, we instead focus on the cumulative number of albuterol 
MDIs that might not be sold and the changes in CFC emissions as 
a result of the rule.   

As a result of this rule, approximately 96 million to 430 

million albuterol CFC MDIs will be removed from the market, 
depending on whether generic albuterol MDIs become available in 
2010 or 2017.  If generic albuterol HFA MDIs enter the market at 
the end of 2010 (when one of the earlier listed patents for 
albuterol HFA MDIs expires) then 96 million albuterol CFC MDIs 
would have been sold between the effective date of this rule 
(December 31, 2008) and the end of 2010, without the rule.  If 
generic albuterol HFA MDIs enter the market at the end of 2017 
(when the last listed patent for albuterol HFA MDIs expires)12 
430 million albuterol CFC MDIs would otherwise have been sold 
between the effective date of this rule, and December 2017, 
without the rule.  After generic albuterol HFA MDIs enter the 
albuterol MDI market and competition among albuterol HFA MDI 
producers determines the price, there would be no rationale 

                                                 
12 Since publication of the 2004 proposed rule two patents that expire in 2017 
have been listed in the Orange Book for VENTOLIN HFA. 

 

81 

related to patient access to albuterol MDIs for maintaining an 
essential-use designation for ODSs for albuterol. 

Assuming generic albuterol HFA MDIs enter the market at the 

end of 2010, the removal of albuterol CFC MDIs will eliminate 
competition from low-cost generic drugs during the period 
between December 2008 and December 2010, thereby raising prices 
and increasing spending on albuterol MDIs by about $2.1 billion, 
assuming a 3 percent discount rate, or $1.7 billion, assuming a 
7 percent discount rate (present value in 2005).    

Assuming generic albuterol HFA MDIs enter the market at the 

end of 2017, the removal of albuterol CFC MDIs will eliminate 
competition from low-cost generic drugs during the period 
between December 2008 and December 2017, thereby raising prices 
and increasing spending on albuterol MDIs by about $8.3 billion, 
assuming a 3 percent discount rate, or $6.2 billion, assuming a 
7 percent discount rate (present value in 2005).   
Taking into account GSK’s commitment to provide free samples and 
coupons, we estimate that higher prices due to the elimination 
of generic competition will reduce the number of albuterol MDIs 
sold by between 300,000 and 900,000 per year.  This will induce 
U.S. consumers to use between 600,000 and 1.8 million fewer 
albuterol MDIs between the removal of albuterol CFC MDIs on 
December 31, 2008, and December 2010, or to use 2.7 million and 
8.1 million fewer albuterol MDIs during the years between 

 

82 

December 31, 2008, and December 2017.  These estimates do not 
take into account the GSK and Schering patient assistance 
programs designed to provide free or low cost drugs to low-
income patients.  Should generic albuterol MDIs become available 
at the end of 2010, consumers will substitute 96 million 
albuterol HFA MDIs for albuterol CFC MDIs between 2008 and 
December 2010, reducing atmospheric CFC emissions by 2,400 tons 
in total.  If generic albuterol MDIs become available at the end 
of 2017, substitution of albuterol HFA MDIs for the 430 million 
albuterol CFC MDIs that would have been consumed between 2008 
and December 2017 will reduce atmospheric emissions of CFCs by 
about 10,800 tons in total.  These quantitative estimates of the 
effects of this rule are summarized in tables 1 and 2.   

 

83 

 
Table 1.--Summary of Quantifiable Effects of the Final Rule 
Relative to HFA Patent Expiration in 2010 
 
Number of 
Affected 
Albuterol 
MDIs 
(millions) 

Increased 
Expenditures for 
Albuterol MDIs 
Present Value in 2005 
(billions) 

Possible 
Reduction 
in MDI Use 
(millions) 

Reduced 
Aggregate 
Emissions 
Related to 
Phaseout 
(metric tons) 

3-percent 
discount 

rate 
$2.1 

0.6 to 1.8  2,400 

7-percent 
discount 

rate 
$1.7 

96 million 

 

             
 

Table 2.--Summary of Quantifiable Effects of the Final Rule 
Relative to HFA Patent Expiration in 2017 
 
Number of 
CFC 
Albuterol 
MDIs Removed 
From the 
Market 
430 million 

Reduced 
Aggregate 
Emissions 
Related to 
Phaseout 
(metric tons) 
2.7 to 8.1  10,800  

Possible 
Reduction 
in MDI Use 
(millions) 

Increased 
Expenditures for 
Albuterol MDIs  
Present Value in 
2005 (billions) 
3-percent 
discount 
rate 
$8.3  

7-percent 
discount 
rate 
$6.2  
 

 

 
While the agency believes that the benefits of this 

regulation justify its costs, we cannot estimate quantitatively 
the public health effects of the phaseout.  The decreased use of 
albuterol MDIs may adversely affect some patients, but we lack 

 

84 

an ability to characterize such effects quantitatively.  We also 
are unable to estimate quantitatively the reductions in skin 
cancers, cataracts, and environmental harm that may result from 
the reduction in CFC emissions by 10,800 metric tons during 
these years.   

We state the need for the regulation and its objective in 

section V. B of this document.  Section V.C of this document 
provides background on CFC depletion of stratospheric ozone, the 
Montreal Protocol, the albuterol MDI market, and the health 
conditions that albuterol is used to treat.  We analyze the 
benefits and costs of the rule, including effects on government 
outlays, in section V.D of this document.  We assess alternative 
phaseout dates in section V.E of this document, and conduct a 
sensitivity analysis on entry dates of generic competition in 
section V.F of this document.  We present an analysis of the 
effects on small business in a regulatory flexibility analysis 
in section V.G of this document.  We discuss our conclusions in 
section V.H of this document. 
B.  Need for Regulation and the Objective of this Rule  

This regulation is necessary because private markets are 

very unlikely to preserve levels of stratospheric ozone 
sufficient to protect the public health.  Individual users of 
albuterol MDIs have no significant private incentive to switch 
to non-ozone depleting albuterol HFA MDIs.  In fact, each user 

 

85 

would bear all of the costs and virtually none of the benefits 
of such a switch, as the environmental and health benefits would 
tend to be distributed globally and occur decades in the future.  
Thus, the outcome of a private market would be continued use of 
the albuterol MDI available at the lowest price, even if the 
social value of reducing emissions were clearly much greater 
than the price premium for non-ozone depleting albuterol HFA 
MDIs.  

The objective of this final rule is to reduce atmospheric 

emissions of ODSs, specifically CFCs.  CFCs and other ODSs 
deplete the stratospheric ozone that protects the Earth from 
ultraviolet solar radiation.  We are ending the essential-use 
designation for ODSs used in albuterol MDIs because two 
acceptable ODS-free albuterol formulations have been 
successfully marketed in the United States for more than 2 
years.  Removing this essential-use designation will comply with 
obligations under the Montreal Protocol and the Clean Air Act, 
thereby reducing emissions that deplete stratospheric ozone, 
while preserving access to essential drugs by minimizing adverse 
effects on affected patient populations. 
C.  Background 
1.  CFCs and Stratospheric Ozone 

During the 1970s, scientists became aware of a relationship 

between the level of stratospheric ozone and industrial use of 

 

86 

CFCs.  Ozone (O3), which causes respiratory problems when it 
occurs in elevated concentrations near the ground, shields the 
Earth from potentially harmful solar radiation when in the 
stratosphere.  Excessive exposure to solar radiation is 
associated with adverse health effects such as skin cancer and 
cataracts, as well as other adverse environmental effects.  
Emissions of CFCs and other ODSs reduce stratospheric ozone 
concentrations through a catalytic reaction, thereby allowing 
more solar radiation to reach the Earth’s surface.  Because of 
this, environmental scientists from the United States and other 
countries advocated ending all uses of these chemicals. 

2.  The Montreal Protocol 

The international effort to craft a coordinated response to 

the global environmental problem of stratospheric ozone 
depletion culminated in the Montreal Protocol, an international 
agreement to regulate and reduce production of ODSs.  The 
Montreal Protocol is described in section III.B of this 
document.  One hundred and eighty-six countries have now 
ratified the Montreal Protocol, and the overall usage of CFCs 
has been dramatically reduced.  In 1986, global consumption of 
CFCs totaled about 1.1 million metric tons annually, and by 
2000, total annual consumption had been reduced to fewer than 
0.1 million metric tons (Ref. 5).  This decline amounts to about 

 

87 

a 90-percent decrease in consumption and is a key measure of the 
success of the Montreal Protocol.  Within the United States, 
consumption of ODSs, and CFCs in particular, has fallen sharply-
-consumption of CFC-11 and CFC-12 is about 20 percent of 1990 
consumption.13 

A relevant aspect of the Montreal Protocol is that 

production of CFCs in any year by any country is banned after 
the phase-out date unless the Parties to the Montreal Protocol 
agree to designate the use as "essential" and approve a quantity 
of new production for that use.  Each year, each Party nominates 
the amount of CFCs needed for each essential use and provides 
the reason why such use is essential.  Agreement on both the 
essentiality and the amount of CFCs needed  for  each nominated 
use has been reached by consensus at the annual Meeting of the 
Parties. 

3.  Benefits of the Montreal Protocol 

EPA has generated a series of estimates of the 

environmental and public health benefits of the Montreal 
Protocol (Ref. 6).  The benefits include reductions of hundreds 
of millions of nonfatal skin cancers, 6 million fewer fatalities 
due to skin cancer, and 27.5 million cataracts avoided between 
1990 and 2165 if the Montreal Protocol were fully implemented.  

                                                 
13  The ozone depleting potentials of CFC-11 and CFC-12 are equal. See 

 

88 

EPA estimates the value of these and related benefits to equal 
$4.3 trillion in present value when discounted at 2 percent over 
the period of 175 years.  This amount is equivalent to about $6 
trillion after adjusting for inflation between 1990 and 2004.  
This estimate includes all benefits of total global ODS emission 
reductions expected from the Montreal Protocol and is based on 
reductions from a baseline scenario in which ODS emissions would 
continue to grow for decades but for the Montreal Protocol.  

4.  Characteristics of COPD 

Albuterol MDIs are used to treat COPD.  While there is some 

overlap between asthma patients and COPD patients, COPD 
encompasses a group of diseases characterized by relatively 
fixed airway obstruction associated with breathing-related 
symptoms (for example, chronic coughing, expectoration, and 
wheezing).  COPD is generally associated with cigarette smoking 
and is extremely rare in persons younger than 25. 

According to the Centers for Disease Control (CDC), an 

estimated 10 million U.S. adults carried the diagnosis of COPD 
in 2000 (Ref. 7).  Because the underlying surveys depend on 
patient-reported diagnoses and many affected individuals have 
not been formally diagnosed, the National Health Interview 
Survey (NHIS) suggests that as many as 24 million Americans may 

                                                                                                                                                             
http://www.epa.gov/ozone/ods.html. 

 

89 

actually be affected by the disease.  The proportion of the U.S. 
population with mild or moderate COPD has declined over the last 
quarter century, although the rate of COPD in females increased 
relative to males between 1980 and 2000.  The most effective 
intervention in modifying the course of COPD is smoking 
cessation.  Symptoms such as coughing, wheezing, and sputum 
production are treated with medication.  

5.  Characteristics of Asthma 

Albuterol MDIs are also used to treat asthma, a chronic 
respiratory disease characterized by episodes or attacks of 
bronchospasm on top of chronic airway inflammation.  These 
attacks can vary from mild to life-threatening and involve 
shortness of breath, wheezing, cough, or a combination of 
symptoms.  Many factors, including allergens, exercise, viral 
infections, and others, may trigger an asthma attack. 

According to the 2002 National Health Interview Survey 

(NHIS), approximately 20 million patients in the United States 
reported they had asthma (Ref. 8).  The prevalence of asthma 
decreases with age, with the prevalence being 92 per 1,000 
children ages 0-17 (6.1 million children) compared to 83 per 
1,000 among adults ages 18-44 (7.4 million), 71 per 1,000 among 
adults ages 45-64 (4.6 million), and 59 per 1,000 among adults 
age 65 and over (1.9 million) (Ref. 8). 

 

90 

The NHIS reported that during 2002, about 12 million 
patients reported experiencing an asthma attack during the 
previous year (Ref. 8, table 10).  According to the National 
Ambulatory Medical Care Survey, in 2001 there were 1.3 million 
outpatient asthma visits to physician offices and hospital 
clinics and 1.9 million emergency room visits (Ref. 8, table 
16).  According to the National Center for Health Statistics, 
there were 454,000 hospital admissions for asthma in 2001 (Ref. 
8, table 12), and 4,269 mortalities (Ref. 8, table 1).  The 
estimated direct medical cost of asthma (hospital services, 
physician care, and medications) was $9.4 billion (Ref. 8, table 
17). 

While the prevalence of asthma has been increasing in 

recent years, the CDC reports that the incidence of asthma (or 
the rate of new diagnoses) has remained fairly constant since 
1997 (Ref. 9).  Non-Hispanic blacks, children under 17 years 
old, and females have higher incidence rates than the general 
population and also have higher attack prevalence.  The CDC 
notes that although numeric increases have occurred in the 
numbers and rates of physician office visits, hospital 
outpatient visits, and emergency room visits, these increases 
are accounted for by the increase in prevalence.  This 
phenomenon might indicate early successes by asthma intervention 
programs that include access to medications. 

 

91 

6.  Current U.S. Albuterol MDI Market 

Albuterol is the preferred, and most commonly prescribed, 
short-acting relief medication for asthma and is also important 
in the treatment COPD.  For reasons of cost, convenience, and 
effectiveness, MDIs are the preferred, and most commonly 
prescribed, route of administration for albuterol. 

We estimate that, in the first two quarters of 2004, U.S. 

consumers bought about 22.7 million generic albuterol MDIs 
through retail channels.  This estimate is based on our analysis 
of IMS data (Ref. 10).  Total consumption of albuterol MDIs has 
fluctuated around approximately 50 million MDIs annually over 
the last several years (Ref. 11).  Based on retail sales, we 
estimate approximately 96 percent of albuterol MDIs sold were 
generic MDIs or branded MDIs relabeled and sold as generic (Ref. 
10) (all containing CFCs), suggesting a total market for generic 
albuterol MDIs of approximately 48 million MDIs.  

IMS provides data on average retail prices for marketers of 

albuterol MDIs for each of three payer types (cash customers, 
Medicaid recipients, and patients covered by other third-party 
payers), and the proportion of each marketer’s sales to each 
payer type.  As described in table 3 below, the weighted average 
(across all payer types) of retail prescription price for 
generic albuterol CFC MDIs during the first half of 2004 was 

 

92 

about $13.50 per MDI, the weighted average retail prescription 
price for branded versions of albuterol CFC MDIs was about 
$38.90 per MDI, and the weighted average retail prescription 
price for albuterol HFA MDIs was about $39.50 per MDI.

 

93 

Table 3.--Summary of Current Retail Prices for Albuterol CFC and HFA MDIs 

 

 
 
 

 

Payer 
Type 

Generic 
Market 
Share 
(percent) 

Albuterol CFC MDI 
Prices  

Albuterol 
HFA MDI 
Prices  
 
Weighted 
Average 

Price Premium:  
HFA MDI Price 
Relative to 
Generic Price  
Dollars 
per MDI 

Percent  

Estimated 
Units 
(millions)
* 
  

$46.32  $27.19 
$41.14  $25.53 
$38.60  $26.57 
$39.47  $25.94 

142 
164 
221 
192 

5.2 
8.7 
31.4 
45.3 

Generics 
 

$19.13 
$15.61 
$12.03 
$13.53 

Weighted 
Average 
Branded 
Products  
$45.90 
$37.10 
$37.75 
$38.87 

* These estimates reflect retail sales of generic albuterol MDIs, excluding sales 
at internet and mail-order pharmacies. 
**Medicaid prices do not reflect rebates given directly to States by drug companies.  

Cash 
Medicaid** 
Third-party 
Total Market 

97.0 
97.3 
95.4 
96.0 

 

 
 
Source: (Ref. 10) 

 

 

 

94 

We estimate albuterol CFC MDIs are responsible for roughly 
1,200 metric tons of CFC emissions annually.  Each albuterol CFC 
MDI contains about 21 grams of CFCs.14 The estimated 48 million 
albuterol CFC MDIs sold annually therefore contain about 1,000 
metric tons of CFCs.  Adding an additional 20 percent to account 
for use in production, unusable batches, and other factors (as 
manufacturers typically do in the process of requesting 
essential-use allocations of CFCs for manufacturing) brings the 
total emissions to about 1,200 metric tons.  To the extent that 
CFCs used in the production process are reclaimed and destroyed, 
this estimate overstates expected emissions reductions. 
D.  Benefits and Costs of the Final Rule 

 

The benefits and costs of a government action are 

conventionally estimated relative to a baseline scenario that in 
this case is a description of the production, use, and access to 
albuterol MDIs in the absence of this rule.  In this section we 
first describe such a baseline and then present our analysis of 
the benefits of the final rule.  Next we turn to the costs of 
the rule and to an analysis of the effects on the Medicare and 
Medicaid programs.   

1.  Baseline Conditions 

                                                 
14 CFC MDI manufacturers disclose the CFC content of their MDIs to EPA as part 
of the process of requesting essential-use allocations; however, the CFC 
content of any particular MDI is considered confidential business information 
and may not be disclosed without the manufacturer's consent.   

 

95 

We developed baseline estimates of future conditions to 

estimate the economic effects of prohibiting marketing of 
albuterol CFC MDIs after December 31, 2008.  It is standard 
practice to use, as a baseline, the state of the world absent 
the rulemaking in question, or where this implements a 
legislative requirement, the world absent the statute.   

For the baseline in this analysis, we assume that access to 
CFC propellants, and therefore to albuterol CFC MDIs, continues 
indefinitely.  This assumption focuses our analysis on the 
impact of removing less expensive generic albuterol CFC MDIs 
from the market, until the date that competition from generic 
albuterol HFA MDIs lowers prices.  As stated earlier, we have 
identified listed patents on the HFA technology with expiration 
dates of 2009, 2010, 2014, 2015, and December 2017.  In 
performing our analysis, we make two different sets of 
assumptions.  First, we perform an evaluation based on the 
assumption that generic versions of albuterol HFA MDIS will come 
on the market after patents expire in 2010.  Second, we perform 
an evaluation based on the assumption that generic albuterol HFA 
MDIs will come on the market after the last listed patent 
expires in 2017.  Without this rule, U.S. commitments to the 
Montreal Protocol could limit future access to CFCs and, 
therefore, inexpensive generic albuterol CFC MDIs.  This 
observation suggests an alternative baseline where Parties to 

 

96 

the Montreal Protocol stop approving nominations for the use of 
CFCs in albuterol MDIs at a particular date.  While the Parties 
could theoretically take such action for calendar year 2008, it 
would be speculative on our part to assume that they would take 
such action for that specific date or any other.  As a result, 
we do not pursue a quantitative analysis with such alternative 
baselines.   

Throughout our analysis, we assume that future prices for 
albuterol CFC and HFA MDIs do not change from current levels.  
This assumption overstates prices to the extent that competition 
from new entrants reduces future albuterol HFA MDI prices.  We 
assume, however, that competition among the albuterol HFA MDI 
manufacturers will leave prices roughly stable and note that one 
manufacturer has pledged to freeze prices until at least the 
beginning of 2008. 

Throughout this analysis, we assume that sufficient 

inventories of CFCs are available to meet demand up to December 
31, 2008, and that albuterol HFA MDIs available on and after 
December 31, 2008, will be adequate to meet demand.  In 
calculating the present value of increased expenditures, we 
discount expected future increases in expenditures by both 7 
percent and 3 percent annually for each year after 2005. 

2.  Benefits of the Final Rule 

 

97 

The benefits of the final rule include environmental and 
public health improvements from protecting stratospheric ozone 
by reducing CFC emissions.  Benefits also include expectations 
of increased returns on investments in environmentally friendly 
technology, reduced risk of unexpected disruption of supply of 
albuterol MDIs, and continued international cooperation to 
comply with the spirit of the Montreal Protocol, thereby 
potentially reducing future emissions of ODS throughout the 
world. 

a.  Reduced CFC emissions.  Market withdrawal of albuterol 

CFC MDIs will reduce emissions by approximately 1,200 metric 
tons of CFCs per year.  We have reviewed current CFC inventories 
and believe currently available quantities are likely to be 
sufficient to supply the albuterol CFC MDI market for 
approximately 12 months.  Nominations for new CFC production are 
generally approved by the Parties to the Montreal Protocol 2 
years in advance.  The final rule bans marketing of albuterol 
CFC after December 31, 2008.   There is considerable uncertainty 
with respect to the amount of inventories that will be available 
in the future, but we anticipate that utilization of existing 
inventory will allow the United States to avoid requesting a 
2008 exemption, or to significantly reduce the amount requested.  
Therefore, we estimate the final regulation will reduce CFC use 

 

98 

by 1200 metric tons per year after the end of 2008, a benefit 
that will continue beyond the evaluation period.  

In an evaluation of its program to administer the Clean Air 

Act, EPA has estimated that the benefits of controlling ODSs 
under the Montreal Protocol are the equivalent of $6 trillion in 
current dollars.  However, EPA’s report provides no information 
on the total tons of reduced emissions or the incremental value 
per ton of reduced emissions.  EPA derived its benefits 
estimates from a baseline that included continued increases in 
emissions in the absence of the Montreal Protocol.  We have 
searched for authoritative scientific research that quantifies 
the marginal economic benefit of incremental emission reductions 
under the Montreal Protocol, but have found none conducted 
during the last 10 years.  As a result, we are unable to 
quantify the environmental and human health benefits of reduced 
ODS emissions from this regulation.  Such benefits, in any 
event, were apparently included in EPA’s earlier estimate of 
benefits. 

As a share of total global emissions, the reduction 

associated with the elimination of albuterol CFC MDIs represents 
only a small fraction of 1 percent.  Current allocations of CFCs 
for albuterol MDIs account for about 0.1 percent of the total 
1986 global consumption of CFCs (Ref. 5).  Furthermore, current 

 

99 

U.S. CFC emissions from MDIs represent a much smaller, but 
unknown share of the total emissions reduction associated with 
EPA’s estimate of $6 trillion in benefits because that estimate 
reflects future emissions growth that has not occurred. 

Although the direct benefits of this regulation are small 
relative to the overall benefits of the Montreal Protocol, we 
believe the reduced exposure to UV-B radiation that will result 
from these reduced emissions will help protect public health.  
However, we are unable to assess or quantify specific reductions 
in future skin cancers and cataracts associated with these 
reduced emissions. 

b.  Returns on investment for environmental technology.  

Establishing a phaseout date prior to the expiration of patents 
on albuterol HFA MDIs not only rewards the developers of the HFA 
technology, but also serves as a signal to other potential 
developers of ozone-safe technologies.  In particular, such a 
phaseout date would preserve expectations that the government 
protects incentives to research and develop ozone-safe 
technologies. 

Newly developed technologies to avoid ODS emissions have 
resulted in more environmentally "friendly" air conditioners, 
refrigerants, solvents, and propellants, but only after 
significant investments.  Several manufacturers have claimed 

 

100 

development costs that total between $250 million and $400 
million to develop HFA MDIs and new propellant-free devices for 
the global market (Ref. 11). 

These investments have resulted in several innovative 
products in addition to albuterol HFA MDIs.  For example, 
breath-activated delivery systems, dose counters, dry powder 
inhalers, and mini-nebulizers have also been successfully 
marketed.  This technology could also affect other drugs used 
for the treatment of asthma and COPD because of the likelihood 
that, eventually, CFCs will not be available for any drug use.  
To compare the effect of alternative phaseout dates on these 
returns to investment, we compare the ratio of the present value 
of increased revenues expected to accrue to innovative firms 
from a December 31, 2008, phaseout date and the present value of 
the future revenue stream of alternative phaseout dates, using 
both 7 percent and 3 percent annual discount rates.  This ratio 
can provide a basis for relative assessments of the returns to 
investors for alternative phaseout dates.  We present estimates 
of this ratio in a later discussion of alternatives.  

Returns on investment are very sensitive to the current 

market prices in the United States.  The pharmaceutical markets 
of other Parties to the Montreal Protocol operate with implicit 
or explicit price controls.  These controls have depressed the 

 

101 

potential returns to technological innovation.  For example, in 
2003, the ex-manufacturer prices (the prices of the drugs when 
they leave the production facilities) of the albuterol HFA MDIs 
most widely sold in France, Germany, and the United Kingdom 
ranged between roughly $3.30 and $6.40; in the United States 
these prices were in the neighborhood of $29 to $30.15 

c.  International cooperation.  The advantages of selecting 
a date that maintains international cooperation are substantial 
because the Montreal Protocol, like most international 
environmental treaties, relies primarily on a system of national 
self-enforcement, although it also includes a mechanism to 
address noncompliance.  In addition, compliance with its 
directives is subject to differences in national implementation 
procedures.  Economically less-developed nations, which have 
slower phaseout schedules than developed nations, have 
emphasized that progress in eliminating ODSs in developing 
nations is affected by observed progress by developed nations, 
such as the United States.  If we had adopted a later phaseout 
date, other Parties could attempt to delay their own control 
measures.   

3.  Costs of the Final Rule   

                                                 
15 Analysis completed by FDA based on information provided by IMS Health, IMS 
MIDAS™, U.S., Germany, France and the United Kingdom, 2003. 

 

102 

The effects of the final rule include increased spending 

for needed albuterol medication.  The social costs of the final 
rule include the lost benefits of albuterol use that may result 
from the price increase.  We discuss the increased spending and 
then the social costs in turn.   

In the absence of this regulation, we would expect 430 
million generic albuterol MDIs to be sold during the entire 
period between December 31, 2008, and December 2017, when the 
last patent listed in Orange Book for an albuterol HFA MDI will 
expire.  Of these, 96 million would be sold before 2010, an 
earlier date when generics might arrive. These figures are based 
on the estimate that approximately 96 percent (Ref. 10) of the 
approximately 50 million albuterol MDIs sold per year (Ref. 11) 
are generic, suggesting that about 48 million generic albuterol 
MDIs are sold annually.  

With this regulation, patients who would have used generic 
albuterol CFC MDIs are expected generally to switch to albuterol 
HFA MDIs.  We estimated in section V.C.6 of this document a 
weighted average price difference at retail pharmacies (across 
all payer types) of about $26 between these products.  If this 
difference can be applied to future transactions involving 48 
million generic albuterol MDIs annually (less the 2 million free 
samples promised by GSK and decreased demand of 300,000 to 

 

103 

900,000 MDIs resulting from price increases--as calculated later 
in this analysis), then increased expenditures from consumers 
and private or public third-party payers would reach about $1.2 
billion per year.  This estimate is based, in part, on estimated 
increases in Medicaid prices that do not take into account 
rebates given directly to States by drug companies.  To the 
extent that such rebates are larger for branded albuterol MDIs, 
which are more expensive, the increased expenditures are 
overestimated.   

The present value of these increased expenditures in 2005 

is about $6.2 billion using a 7 percent annual discount rate and 
$8.3 billion using a 3 percent annual discount rate.  In 
estimating this increased spending, we focus on the period 
between December 31, 2008, and December 2017, when the last 
patent listed in Orange Book will expire.  We also ignore the 
fact that after a VENTOLIN HFA MDI is first used, it expires 
much more quickly than a PROVENTIL HFA MDI or albuterol CFC 
MDIs.  Although this change in the usable life of some MDIs may 
affect the quantity consumed, we are unable to quantify the 
magnitude of such an effect.   

These increased expenditures represent primarily transfers 

from consumers and third-party payers, including State and 
Federal Governments, to branded pharmaceutical manufacturers; 

 

104 

they are, therefore, not net costs to society.  Because these 
estimates are based on average retail prices, they include 
additional spending that will go to parties other than 
innovative manufacturers, such as distributors and retail 
pharmacies.  We estimate that about 11 percent of this increase-
—about $130 million annually--may be paid by uninsured customers 
($130 million) (Ref. 10).  We derive these estimates assuming 
increased spending is the product of the number of albuterol 
MDIs sold for cash and the difference between the average price 
for generic albuterol MDIs and the simple mean of the prices for 
albuterol HFA MDIs.  We estimate that 5 million generic 
albuterol MDIs are sold to uninsured patients annually and that 
retail cash prices for albuterol MDIs will rise by about $27 per 
MDI (details of these estimates follow later in this section.)  
Taking in to account savings from coupons and free samples, 
uninsured albuterol users would therefore spend about $120 
million more each year.16 

According to MEPS, private nongroup and uninsured 

individuals used, on average, 3.3 albuterol prescriptions per 
year (Ref. 12).  Based on IMS data, we estimate the average 
albuterol prescription is for 1.2 MDIs (Ref. 10).  The average 
uninsured, or underinsured, albuterol user would therefore use 

                                                 
16 (5 million MDIs - 300,000 free sample MDIs) x ($25/MDI) - (450,000 coupons) 
x ($10) = $117,500,000. Here, we assume coupons and free samples reach 

 

105 

about 4 MDIs/year.  Based on these figures, we estimate that a 
population of uninsured albuterol users of about 1.25 million17 
would pay, on average, $95 more per year for albuterol.18  This 
estimate does not take in to account the reduced use of 
albuterol MDIs among the uninsured that may result from higher 
prices or the extent to which quicker expiration of some HFA 
albuterol MDIs, relative to CFC MDIs, will increase albuterol 
MDI demand and expenditures.  In the future, some fraction of 
these cash payers will likely be covered by Medicare (Ref. 10). 

We expect price increases resulting from market withdrawal 
of less expensive generic albuterol MDIs will reduce albuterol 
use by several hundred thousand MDIs annually (as explained 
below), although there is substantial uncertainty about these 
estimates.  The impact of this reduction on health outcomes is 
too uncertain to quantify given available data.  Some patients, 
however, respond to price increases for medications for chronic 
conditions in ways that may adversely affect their health.  A 
recent article found that: 

copayment increases led to increased use of emergency 
department visits and hospital days for the sentinel 
conditions of diabetes, asthma, and gastric acid disorder:  
predicted annual emergency department visits increased by 17 

                                                                                                                                                             
uninsured albuterol users in proportion to estimates of the uninsured 
fraction of the overall population (15 percent). 
17 (5 million MDIs) / 4 MDIs per uninsured user = 1.25 million uninsured 
users. 
18 ($117,500,000) / (1.25 million uninsured users) = $94.00 per uninsured 
user.  

 

106 

percent and hospital days by 10 percent when copayments 
doubled * * *. 

 

However, the article proceeds to characterize these results 

as "not definitive." (Ref. 4)  This finding suggests that 
increased prices for albuterol may lead to some adverse public 
health effects among the populations that would face increased 
prices.  This evidence is insufficient to permit us to quantify 
any adverse public health effects.  We use expected reductions 
in albuterol MDI purchases as a surrogate measure of the impact. 

Our approach to estimating the effects of the rule assumes 
that the primary effect of an elimination of albuterol CFC MDIs 
from the market would be an increase in the average price of 
albuterol MDIs.  Given the price increase expected from the 
elimination of generics and existing estimates of market 
responses to price increases, we have projected how the quantity 
of albuterol MDIs consumed may decline as a result of this rule.  
As in the proposal, we assume that the reduction in the use of 
albuterol MDIs attributable to this rule can be calculated as 
the product of the sensitivity of use with respect to the price 
increase, the baseline use of albuterol MDIs among price-
sensitive patients, and the price increase in percentage terms.  
We discuss these in turn.  

 

107 

We have no information about how consumers react to 

increases in the price of MDIs per se or to increases in the 
price of "rescue" types of MDIs, such as albuterol, in 
particular.  Economists have researched the response of 
consumers to higher insurance copayments for drugs in general.  
The results appear to indicate price elasticities in the range 
of -.1 to -.2, meaning that a 10 percent increase in insurance 
copayments appears to lead to a reduction in the number of 
prescriptions of between 1 and 2 percent (Ref. 13).  Some 
researchers have reported estimates of price elasticities as 
great as -.3 for asthma drugs (Ref. 4), but the authors report 
that there is wide variance based on the availability of over-
the-counter substitutes.  For example, for drugs with no over-
the-counter substitute--a set that presumably includes 
albuterol—-the reported price elasticity was -.15.19  We have 
used price elasticities of between -.05 and -.15 to estimate the 
potential effect of price increases on demand.  We recognize 
that elasticity estimates derived from insurance copayment 
studies may not be specifically applicable to the effects of 
average retail price increases on uninsured patients' demand for 
albuterol.    

                                                 
19 Some patients may view PRIMATENE, an epinephrine MDI available over the 
counter, as a substitute for prescription albuterol MDIs.  If this view is 
widespread, the decline in albuterol MDI use may be greater than that 
estimated here.  However, insofar as PRIMATENE is effective in treating 

 

108 

To derive an estimate of the number of albuterol MDIs not 

sold as a result of this rule, we need an estimate of the 
baseline use of albuterol MDI sales by price-sensitive 
consumers.  From data on retail sales by payer type from the 
first half of 2004, we find about 5 million generic albuterol 
MDIs are sold to uninsured patients annually.  This estimate 
includes sales to people over age 65 not covered by Medicaid who 
we expect will be covered by Medicare in the future, but it 
excludes mail order and Internet sales and sales through 
hospitals and nursing homes.  Alternatively, if uninsured 
individuals under age 65 use albuterol MDIs in proportion to 
their share of the population (roughly 15 percent) (Ref. 14), 
then roughly 7 million of 46 million generic albuterol MDIs 
would be sold to the uninsured (46 million = 48 million generic 
albuterol MDIs - 2 million free samples). 

Finally, to estimate the price increase from this rule, we 
first assess IMS data, which indicate that cash payers paid, on 
average, $19.10 for generic albuterol MDIs and $46.30 for 
albuterol HFA MDIs, a difference that would suggest a price 
increase of $27.20 per MDI, or 142 percent.  However, 
alternative assumptions about the future market share of 
different albuterol HFA MDI manufacturers would result in a 

                                                                                                                                                             
asthma, the adverse health effects would not be greater.  We lack data to 
evaluate patients' willingness to substitute PRIMATENE for albuterol MDIs. 

 

109 

smaller price increase--130 percent.  These estimated price 
differences faced by cash payers are only a proxy for price 
differences faced by uninsured patients, because some people 
with insurance may pay cash, and some uninsured patients may buy 
drugs from mail-order and Internet pharmacies. 

We believe that estimates of the recent price premium for 

albuterol HFA MDIs may be a reasonable approximation of the 
price increase anticipated from this rule, at least to the 
extent that patent protection and the more costly criteria for 
FDA approval of albuterol HFA MDIs substantially curb 
competition.  At least one listed patent is expected to expire 
in December 2017.  While increased competition from new patented 
albuterol HFA MDIs may reduce future albuterol HFA MDI prices, 
such reduction may be small until generic albuterol MDIs are 
reintroduced into the market.  Apart from any patents, marketing 
of new albuterol HFA MDIs before the patents expire requires FDA 
approval of a completed NDA.  After the patents expire, FDA can 
approve generic albuterol HFA MDIs by the abbreviated new drug 
application (ANDA) process.  The NDA process is more 
complicated, expensive, and time consuming than the abbreviated 
new drug application (ANDA) process by which new generic drugs 
are brought to market.  This NDA requirement constitutes a 
barrier to entry in the market that will tend to further limit 
competition until the patents expire as compared to markets 

 

110 

where generic drugs can be marketed.  Finally, as noted earlier, 
one manufacturer has also announced a voluntary price freeze on 
its albuterol HFA MDI until 2008. 

We combine different measures of price elasticities (-.05 

to -.15), the size of the uninsured generic albuterol MDI market 
(5 to 7 million MDIs), and estimated price increases (130 
percent to 140 percent) to estimate the impact of price 
increases on use.  For example, assuming a price elasticity of 
- .15 and 6 million generic albuterol MDIs sold to the uninsured 
annually, a 130 percent price increase would reduce demand for 
albuterol MDIs from the uninsured by about 1.2 million MDIs 
annually (6 million x -.15 elasticity x 130 percent price 
increase = 1,200,000 MDIs).  These preliminary estimates do not 
take into account offsetting increases in consumption from 
changes in promotional efforts already announced by GSK.  We 
also note that the elasticity estimates are based on relatively 
small price changes and may not be applicable to large price 
changes such as these. 

Manufacturers have announced programs to distribute free 
samples and coupons to mitigate any adverse effect of higher 
prices on utilization.  For example, GSK has committed to 
provide 2 million albuterol HFA MDIs each year to physician 
offices in expectation that they would be distributed to 

 

111 

patients in need (03P-0029/CR1, p. 7). In addition, GSK has 
committed to annually providing 3 million coupons worth $10 each 
in rebates for VENTOLIN HFA to any patient.  Both GSK and 
Schering currently operate outreach programs that assist 
patients to obtain needed medications, but we are unable to 
assess how many albuterol MDI users are currently helped by 
these programs or how many more would be helped in the future. 

Free samples and coupons help mitigate adverse impacts on 
uninsured patients only to the extent that they are distributed 
to physicians and other health care professionals who then give 
them to uninsured individuals.20  To assess how free samples and 
coupons might affect albuterol MDI use, we conducted a thorough 
review of the relevant peer-reviewed literature and found two 
pertinent articles.  One found that, while 54 percent of the 
free samples were actually distributed to patients, only 9 
percent of the patients who received free samples were uninsured 
(Ref. 15).  These data suggest that 4.8 percent of the free 
samples were actually distributed to uninsured patients.  
Assuming this estimate is applicable to the albuterol HFA MDIs 
distributed by the GSK program, then about 96,000 albuterol HFA 
MDIs per year would reach the uninsured.  The second article 
estimated that 71 percent of free samples were given to patients 

 

112 

(Ref. 16).  As an upper bound, assuming all samples are 
distributed to patients and that the uninsured receive them in 
proportion to their share of the population, approximately 
300,000 MDIs (15 percent of 2 million) would reach the uninsured 
each year. 

We expect coupons will do relatively little to improve 

access to albuterol among the uninsured.  If 150,000 (5 percent 
(Ref. 15)) to 450,000 (15 percent) of the 3 million coupons 
reach uninsured patients each year and 100 percent of them are 
redeemed, this would increase albuterol MDI consumption by 
roughly 2,000-15,000 MDIs per year, based on the range of price 
elasticities considered. 

Taking into account the offsetting effect of free samples 

and coupons, we focus on a range of 300,000 to 900,000 fewer 
albuterol MDIs sold each year as a result of increased prices 
stemming from removal of generic albuterol MDIs from the market.  
This assessment does not take into account Schering's and GSK's 
patient assistance programs designed to provide free or low cost 
drugs to low-income patients as we are unable to assess how many 
albuterol MDI users are currently helped by these programs or 
how many more would be helped in the future.  Over the course of 
the evaluation period, this would equal between 2.7 million and 

                                                                                                                                                             
20 We found no information addressing how pharmaceutical companies distribute 
free samples among physicians and clinics, but assume that GSK will not 

 

113 

8.1 million fewer albuterol MDIs sold.  We recognize that due to 
varying measures of the size of the generic albuterol MDI market 
for the uninsured, uncertainty about the magnitude of price 
increases, consumers' response, and the impact of free samples 
and coupons, and other factors, the true impact of the rule 
could fall outside this range. 

4.  Effects on Medicare and Medicaid 

In order to apportion the possible spending increases 

described above to the Medicaid and Medicare programs, FDA and 
the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) have analyzed 
utilization data related to Medicaid and Medicare, as well as 
Medicaid program spending data.  As explained below, these data 
suggest that, were this rule in effect in 2003, Medicaid 
spending (including spending by States) would have increased by 
approximately $100 million for that year.  In addition (based on 
2001 utilization and 2004 prices), it would have increased drug 
spending on Medicare beneficiaries by roughly $240 million, 
although this estimate includes copayments and coinsurance paid 
by individuals and may be too low because the estimate does not 
take into account increases in utilization associated with the 
increase in insurance coverage.  These data yield the very rough 
estimate that the rule would increase Medicare and Medicaid 

                                                                                                                                                             
systematically channel free samples away from low-income areas. 

 

114 

spending by $340 million annually relative to a situation where 
access to generic albuterol CFC MDIs continued.   

a.  Medicaid.  Medicaid spending on albuterol MDIs would 
have been higher by roughly $100 million in 2003--after taking 
into account rebates from drug companies--if albuterol CFC MDIs 
were not available.  CMS estimates that 58 percent of this 
amount would be paid by the Federal Government and 42 percent by 
States.  

Deriving this cost estimate required making some 

adjustments to available data.  Our point of departure is the 
State Drug Utilization Data, available at 
http://www.cms.hhs.gov/medicaid/drugs/drug5.asp for 2003.  These 
data on utilization and spending on drugs paid for by the 
Medicaid program suggest that State reimbursements under 
Medicaid would have been approximately $127 million higher in 
2003 if no albuterol CFC MDIs were available (that is, if only 
albuterol HFA MDIs were available).  This estimate assumes 
substitutes for all albuterol CFC MDIs were purchased at the 
weighted average price of albuterol HFA MDIs.  However, it does 
not take into account the effect of the rebates from drug 
companies to States and the Federal Government.  CMS estimates 
that Medicaid program rebates constitute roughly 20 percent of 
gross spending on prescription drugs under the Medicaid program, 
suggesting that Medicaid spending on albuterol MDIs after 

 

115 

rebates would have been roughly $100 million higher in 2003 if 
albuterol CFC MDIs were not available.  It is important to note 
that this is a rough estimate, as rebates for a specific drug 
may differ from the 20 percent estimate.  Incomplete data for 
2004 suggest that comparable estimates for 2004 are higher but 
we believe that these are not reliable because of the 
incompleteness of the data.  

b.  Medicare.  Our analysis of the impacts of this rule on 
Medicare addresses: (1) The total utilization of albuterol MDIs, 
(2) the likely price increase, and (3) the aggregate spending 
increase.   

CMS estimates that noninstitutionalized Medicare 

beneficiaries not eligible for Medicaid drug coverage filled 
about 8 million prescriptions for albuterol MDIs (including 
VENTOLIN and PROVENTIL) in 2001, based on the Medicare Current 
Beneficiary Survey (MCBS) and with an adjustment for under-
reporting for aggregate analysis purposes.  As noted below, this 
estimate is based on Medicare beneficiaries' self-reported 
outpatient prescription drug utilization, including 
prescriptions filled at both retail and mail order pharmacies.  
In addition, the adjustment for underreporting is normally used 
for aggregate use or spending data in MCBS and may not 
necessarily reflect actual underreporting for albuterol. 

 

116 

This analysis used data from the 2001 MCBS, a continuous, 

multipurpose survey of a nationally representative sample of 
Medicare beneficiaries.  The survey is focused on health care 
use, cost, and sources of payment.  No "paid claims" data on use 
of albuterol MDIs exist because Medicare will pay for albuterol 
MDIs only after the implementation of the new Medicare 
outpatient prescription drug benefit in January 2006.  MCBS is 
the largest nationally representative set of data available on 
prescription drug utilization and spending by Medicare 
beneficiaries.  The MCBS data have been used by both CMS’s 
Office of the Actuary and the Congressional Budget Office to 
prepare estimates related to the new Medicare prescription drug 
benefit.  However, because the data are self-reported, there are 
considerable limitations, most notably underreporting.  CMS has 
studied the underreporting in the survey and has developed 
methods to adjust the data.  For purposes of the estimates done 
for the Medicare drug benefit, the data on drug spending are 
analyzed in the aggregate (that is, for large collections of 
drugs).  Estimates of individual drug product utilization and 
spending, however, may be even more vulnerable to the 
limitations inherent in self-reported utilization data. 

A reliable assessment of impacts must avoid double counting 
of people who are eligible for both Medicaid and Medicare.  With 
the implementation of the new Medicare prescription drug 

 

117 

benefit, payment for outpatient prescription drugs on behalf of 
Medicare beneficiaries who are also eligible for prescription 
drug benefits under Medicaid will be moved from the Medicaid 
program to the Medicare program.  For purposes of this analysis, 
this population of dually eligible beneficiaries (that is, 
Medicare beneficiaries also eligible for full-benefits under 
Medicaid) is excluded from the analysis of the MCBS data, since 
their albuterol MDI utilization is captured within the Medicaid 
data.  Approximately half of total Medicaid prescription drug 
spending is for this dually eligible population.  However, the 
proportion will vary based on the type of drug involved.  It is 
worth noting that albuterol MDIs are used to treat asthma in 
both the aged and disabled in the Medicare/Medicaid dually 
eligible population, as well as to treat asthma in children, who 
make up a large share of Medicaid beneficiaries.     

For purposes of this analysis, we assess only data for the 

time periods for which data are available and we do not make 
projections for future years.  As was noted in the impact 
analysis for the proposed rule on the Medicare prescription drug 
benefit (69 FR 46731, August 3, 2004), there is considerable 
uncertainty in making estimates when there is no program 
experience from prior years.  This uncertainty is exacerbated in 
the context of making estimates related to a particular drug.  
For example, in the context of preparing aggregate estimates for 

 

118 

the Medicare drug benefit, CMS makes assumptions about how 
increased coverage induces greater utilization and, based on the 
National Health Expenditures, projects growth in per capita drug 
spending.  But making such calculations for a specific 
individual drug would be difficult and not likely reliable.  
Furthermore, in the case of albuterol MDIs, the drug is subject 
to large annual fluctuations in demand per user and size of 
population using the drug due to the nature of the conditions 
being treated, such as asthma where acute episodes may vary by 
environmental factors (for example, allergies), prevalence of 
infectious diseases (for example, colds), and seasonal weather 
conditions (for example, temperature-related bronchial 
conditions).  In addition, analyzing the effect on Medicare of a 
change related to one drug is further complicated, for example, 
by the need to consider the interactions with beneficiary cost-
sharing in the context of the Medicare drug benefit design and 
the availability of additional low-income subsidies for certain 
populations.  Also, the introduction of an albuterol HFA MDI 
from IVAX is expected to increase competition in the market to 
some extent, potentially dampening anticipated price increases 
in part.  Our estimates, therefore, apply only to past years.  

We believe that prices paid by private insurers offer a 

potentially reasonable approximation of prices negotiated in the 
context of a privately administered risk-based insurance program 

 

119 

such as the new Medicare Part D drug plans.  Using proprietary 
data from IMS Health, we determined that prices for patients 
with third-party insurance were on average about$30 more per 
prescription for albuterol HFA MDIs than for albuterol CFC MDIs, 
according to IMS’s National Prescription Audit for the first 
half of 2004 (Ref. 10).  This price estimate reflects 
transactions in U.S. retail pharmacies, excluding Internet and 
mail order sales.  It also reflects both payments by insurers 
and copayments or coinsurance payments by patients.  We 
calculate the average price per prescription for the albuterol 
HFA MDIs and the albuterol CFC MDIs, respectively, as the 
weighted average of the price per prescription of different 
firms' products, where the weights are the firms' shares of the 
total albuterol MDIs sold.  Price differences per prescription 
are larger than price differences per MDI, because some 
prescriptions are for more than one MDI.   

Given this estimate of the price difference that would have 

existed without CFC albuterol MDIs, spending by, and on behalf 
of, Medicare beneficiaries without Medicaid drug coverage could 
have been roughly $240 million more in order to fill the 8 
million prescriptions estimated to have been filled in 2001 
(based on the MCBS data).  This estimate is quite approximate 
because it relies on an estimate of albuterol MDI prescriptions 
from 2001 and estimates of prescription price differences from 

 

120 

the first half of 2004.  In addition, albuterol MDI use may grow 
as the Medicare drug benefit reduces the cost to individuals of 
using albuterol MDIs.  

E.  Alternative Phaseout Dates  

In developing this rule, we considered removing the 
essential-use designation for ODSs in albuterol MDIs for 
different dates between 12 months after issuance of a final rule 
and December 31, 2009.  As shown previously, earlier removal 
would increase consumer expenditures while increasing 
environmental benefits.  A later date would reduce the potential 
health effect from reduced access, but also reduce the 
environmental benefit and potentially put at risk international 
cooperation.  We also considered and rejected small business 
exemptions as inconsistent with international commitments.  

Table 4 shows the effects of selecting December 31, 2005, 
as the effective date, and Table 5 shows the effects if we had 
selected December 31, 2009 (assuming continued availability of 
CFCs).

 

121 

Table 4.–-Effects of Phaseout as of December 31, 2005 

Number of 
Affected of 
Albuterol MDIs 
(million) 

Increased 
Expenditures for 
Albuterol MDIs 
Present Value in 2005 
(billions) 

Possible 
Reduction in 
MDI Use 
(millions) 

 
 

576 

3-percent 
discount 

rate 
$11.6 

7-percent 
discount 

rate 
$9.3 

 
 

3.6 to 9.8 

 

Table 5.--Effects of Phaseout as of December 31, 2009 

Number of 
Affected 
Albuterol MDIs  
(million) 

Increased 
Expenditures for 
Albuterol MDIs 
Present Value in 2005 
(billions) 

Possible 
Reduction in 
Albuterol MDI 
Use 
(millions) 

Reduced 
Aggregate CFC 
Emissions 
Related to 
Phaseout 
(metric tons) 

 
 

14,400 

Relative Return on 
Investment to New 
Technology 
(return for 12/31/08 
phaseout = 1) 

3-percent 
discount 
rate of 

1.4 

7-percent 
discount 
rate of 

1.5 

Reduced 
Aggregate CFC 
Emissions 
Related to 
Phaseout 
(metric tons) 

Relative Return on 
Investment to New 
Technology 
(return for 12/31/08 
phaseout = 1) 

 
 

384 

3-percent 
discount 

rate 
$7.3 

7-percent 
discount 

rate 
$5.3 

 
 

2.4 to 7.2 

 
 

8,400 

3-percent 
discount 

rate 
.88 

7-percent 
discount 

rate 
.85 

 

 

122 

F. Sensitivity Analyses   

We have conducted a sensitivity analysis to address how key 
sources of uncertainty may affect our estimates. Our key focus 
is the effect of alternative dates when generic competition for 
albuterol HFA MDIs may begin.    In Table 6, we present 
estimates assuming that generic competition arrives in 2015.

 
 

123 

Table 6.--Effects of Phaseout on December 31, 2008--Assuming Generic Entry in 2015 

Number of 
Affected 
Albuterol 
MDIs 
(millions) 

 
 

336 

             

Increased Expenditures 
for Albuterol Present 
Value in 2005 
(billions) 

Possible 
Reduction in 
MDI Use 
(millions) 

Reduced 
Aggregate 
Emissions 
Related to 
Phaseout 
(metric tons) 

3-percent 
discount 

rate 
$6.7 

7-percent 
discount 

rate 
$5.2 

 
 

2.1 to 5.6 

 
 

8,400 

Relative Return on 
Investment to New 
Technology 
(return for 12/31/08 
phaseout with genetic 
entry in 2017 = 1) 
3-percent 
discount 

7-percent 
discount 

rate 
.81 

rate 
.84 

 
 

124 

 
This analysis suggests that the eventual date that generic 
competition arrives will have a substantial effect on the total 
reduction in albuterol MDI use and the aggregate reductions in 
CFC emissions.  Further analysis of the arrival of generic 
competition would require an evaluation of the legal merits of 
the different patents, but such an evaluation is beyond the 
expertise of FDA.  
G.  Small Business Impact 

Current HHS guidance (Ref. 17) suggests that a 3 to 5 
percent impact on total costs or revenues of small entities 
could constitute a significant regulatory impact.  We lack the 
data to certify that this final rule will not have a significant 
economic impact on a substantial number of small entities.  
Therefore, this analysis, together with other relevant sections 
of this document, serves as FDA's Regulatory Flexibility 
Analysis, as required under the Regulatory Flexibility Act.   

1.  Affected Sector and Nature of Impacts 

The affected industry sector includes manufacturers of 

pharmaceutical products (NAICS 32514).  We obtained data on this 
industry from the 1997 Economic Census and estimated revenues 
per establishment.  Although other economic measures, such as 
profitability, may provide preferable alternatives to revenues 
as a basis for estimating the significance of regulatory 

 
 

125 

impacts, we do not believe it would change the results of this 
analysis. 

The impact of this rule on generic manufacturers is the 

lost revenues currently generated by sales of generic albuterol 
CFC MDIs.  While "lost revenues" are an imperfect measure, 
because production resources could be shifted to alternative 
markets, they provide a measure that suggests the magnitude of 
the impact. 

The Small Business Administration (SBA) has defined as 

small any entity in this industry with fewer than 750 employees.  
According to Census data, 84 percent of the industry is 
considered small.  The average annual revenue for a small entity 
is $26.6 million per entity.  However, the agency does not have 
revenue information specific to the affected entities.  
According to retail sales in the first half of 2004, of the 22.7 
million generic or relabeled annual prescriptions for albuterol, 
approximately 63 percent (14.3 million MDIs) were distributed by 
Schering, a large firm, under the Warrick label.  Six different 
companies marketed the other 8.4 million albuterol MDIs, with 
three companies accounting for over 99 percent of these 8.4 
million (Ref. 10).  According to data collected by the 
Congressional Budget Office (Ref. 18), the value of shipments 
from manufacturers of generic drug products accounts for 

 
 

126 

approximately 35 percent of the retail price of the product.  If 
so, revenue from 1.7 million albuterol MDIs would approximate 
$8.0 million per year (1.7 million prescriptions X $13.50 per 
generic prescription X 35 percent).  Because we lack company-
specific revenue data, we are unable to estimate the impact of 
this rule on these small entities.  To the extent that generic 
albuterol HFA MDIs might become available prior to the removal 
of the essential-use designation, any impact on small entities 
would be mitigated.   

2.  Outreach 

The Montreal Protocol and Clean Air Act have been in place 

for more than a decade.  Manufacturers of albuterol CFC MDIs 
have long known that CFCs would eventually lose their essential-
use designations for this purpose.  During the proposal stage of 
this rule-making, we specifically solicited comments on the 
impact on small entities.  No comments were received that 
explicitly addressed this issue. 

H.  Conclusion 

This final rule could result in increased health care 

expenditures of about $1.2 billion for each year between the 
removal of the essential-use designation and reintroduction of 
generic competition at patent expiration.  Taking into account 
GSK’s commitment to provide free samples and coupons, we 

 
 

127 

estimate that higher prices due to the elimination of generic 
competition will reduce the number of MDIs sold by between 
300,000 and 900,000 per year.  This estimate does not take into 
account Schering's and GSK's patient assistance programs 
designed to provide free or low cost drugs to low-income 
patients as we are unable to assess how many albuterol MDI users 
are currently helped by these programs or how many more would be 
helped in the future.   In addition, each year without using 
CFCs in albuterol MDIs will reduce atmospheric emissions of ODSs 
by 1,200 metric tons and provide increased investment returns 
for environmentally friendly technology that may induce further 
gains.  Removal of the essential-use designation is consistent 
with FDA’s role in determining the essentiality of MDIs under 
section 601 of the Clean Air Act, and also meets U.S. 
obligations under international agreements.  Finally, we lack 
the data to certify that this final rule will not have a 
significant economic impact on a substantial number of small 
entities.   

VI.  References 

The following references have been placed on display in the 

Division of Dockets Management (see ADDRESSES) and may be seen 
by interested persons between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., Monday through 
Friday. 

 
 

128 

1.  U.S. Food and Drug Administration, 
"Guidance for Industry: Integration of Dose-
Counting Mechanisms into MDI Drug Products," 
March 2003.   

2.  Penick, Brock T. et al., "Accuracy 

of Float Testing for Metered-Dose Inhaler 
Canisters," Journal of the American 
Pharmaceutical Association, 42:582, 
July/August 2002.   

3.  Craig-McFeely, P.M. et al., 

"Prospective Observational Cohort Safety 
Study to Monitor the Introduction of a Non-
CFC Formulation of Salbutamol with HFA 134a 
in England," International Journal of 
Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 
41:67-76, 2003. 

4.  Goldman, J. et al., "Pharmacy 

Benefits and the Use of Drugs by the 
Chronically Ill," The Journal of the America 
Medical Association, May 19, 2004; 291:2344-
2350, 2349. 

5.  United Nations Environmental 

Programme, "Production and Consumption of 

 
 

129 

Ozone-Depleting Substances 1986-2000," 2003.  
 
6.  The Benefits and Costs of the Clean 
Air Act: 1990-2010, 
(http://www.epa.gov/air/sect812/copy.html) 

7.  Mannino, D.M. et al., "Chronic 

Obstructive Pulmonary Disease Surveillance--
United States, 1971-2000," Morbidity and 
Mortality Weekly Report, 51(SS06):1-16, 
August 2, 2002. 

8.  American Lung Association, “Trends 

in Asthma Morbidity and Mortality,” 
Epidemiology & Statistics Unit, Research and 
Scientific Affairs, Table 7, April 2004.  

9.  Mannino, D.M. et al., "Surveillance 

for Asthma--United States, 1980-1999," 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 
51(SS01):1-13, March 29, 2002. 

10.  Analysis completed by FDA based on 

information provided by IMS Health, IMS 
National Prescription Audit™, 2004; IMS 
Health, IMS MIDAS™, Q1/2004–-Q2/2004. These 
data can be purchased from IMS Health. Please 
send all inquiries to:  IMS Health, Attn:  

 
 

130 

Brian Palumbo, Account Manage, 660 W. 
Germantown Pike, Plymouth Meeting, PA 19462. 

11.  Rozek, R.P., and E.R. Bishko, 

"Economics Issues Raised in the FDA's 
Proposed Rule on Removing the Essential-Use 
Designation for Albuterol MDIs," National 
Economic Research Associates, August 13, 2004 
(FDA Docket No. 2003P-0029/C25). 

12.  Agency for Healthcare Research and 

Quality, "Albuterol Inhalers: Prescriptions 
per User, Price per Prescription and 
Expenditure Given Use," spreadsheet prepared 
at FDA's request for this rulemaking, 2004.  

13.  Ringel, J.S. et al., "The 

Elasticity of Demand for Health Care," 
National Defense Research Institute, Rand 
Health, 2002. 

14.  U.S. Census Bureau, “Income, 

Poverty, and Health Insurance Coverage in the 
United States: 2003,” Current Population 
Reports, U.S. Department of Commerce, August 
2004, pp. 14-15. 

 
 

131 

15.  Morelli, D., and M.R. Koenigsberg, 
“Sample Medication Dispensing in a Residency 
Practice,” Journal of Family Practice, 
34(1):42-48, 1992. 

16.  Peterson, M.C. et al., “Disposition 

of Pharmaceutical Samples from a Private 
Medical Clinic,” Journal of the American 
Pharmacists Association, 44(3):397-398, 2004. 

17.  U.S. Department of Health & Human 
Services, “Guidance on Proper Consideration 
of Small Entities in Rulemakings of the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services,” May 
2003. 

18.  Congressional Budget Office, “How 
Increased Competition from Generic Drugs Has 
Affected Prices and Returns in the 
Pharmaceutical Industry,” July 1998. 

VII.  The Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 

This final rule contains no collections of information.  
Therefore, clearance by OMB under Paperwork Reduction Act of 
1995 is not required. 
VIII.  Federalism 

 
 

132 

We have analyzed this final rule in accordance with the 

principles set forth in Executive Order 13132.  We have 
determined that the rule does not contain policies that have 
substantial direct effects on the States, on the relationship 
between the National Government and the States, or on the 
distribution of power and responsibilities among the various 
levels of government.  While this rule may result in States 
increasing spending for albuterol MDIs in programs such as 
Medicaid, the increased spending is not a substantial direct 
compliance cost, as the term is used in Executive Order 13132. 
Accordingly, we have concluded that the rule does not contain 
policies that have federalism implications as defined in the 
Executive order and, consequently, a federalism summary impact 
statement is not required. 
 

List of Subjects in 21 CFR Part 2 

Administrative practice and procedure, Cosmetics, Devices, 

Drugs, Foods. 

Therefore, under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act 

and the Clean Air Act and under authority delegated to the 
Commissioner of Food and Drugs, after consultation with the 
Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, 21 CFR 
part 2 is amended as follows: 
PART 2--GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE RULINGS AND DECISIONS 

 
 

133 

1. The authority citation for 21 CFR part 2 continues to 

read as follows: 

Authority: 15 U.S.C. 402, 409; 21 U.S.C. 321, 331, 335, 
342, 343, 346a, 348, 351, 352, 355, 360b, 361, 362, 371, 372, 
374; 42 U.S.C. 7671 et seq. 
§2.125 [Amended] 

2.  Section 2.125 Use of ozone-depleting substances in 

foods, drugs, devices, or cosmetics is amended by removing and 
reserving paragraph (e)(2)(i).

 
 

134 

 

 
 

135 

