Wednesday, 
July 23, 2008 
Part IV 
Department of Labor 
Employee Benefits Security 
Administration 
29 CFR Part 2550 
Fiduciary Requirements for Disclosure in 
Participant-Directed Individual Account 
Plans; Proposed Rule 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 19:17 Jul 22, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00001 Fmt 4717 Sfmt 4717 E:\FR\FM\23JYP3.SGM 23JYP3pw
al
ke
r o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
71
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
43014 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 142 / Wednesday, July 23, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
1 2005 Form 5500 Data, U.S. Department of Labor. 
The estimated 437,000 plans include plans that 
permit participants to direct the investment of all 
or a portion of their individual accounts. 
2 72 FR 20457 (April 25, 2007). 
3 This report may be accessed at http:// 
www.dol.gov/ebsa/publications/ 
AC_111704_report.html. 
DEPARTMENT OF LABOR 
Employee Benefits Security 
Administration 
29 CFR Part 2550 
RIN 1210-AB07 
Fiduciary Requirements for Disclosure 
in Participant-Directed Individual 
Account Plans 
AGENCY: Employee Benefits Security 
Administration. 
ACTION: Proposed regulation. 
SUMMARY: This document contains a 
proposed regulation under the 
Employee Retirement Income Security 
Act of 1974 (ERISA) that, upon 
adoption, would require the disclosure 
of certain plan and investment-related 
information, including fee and expense 
information, to participants and 
beneficiaries in participant-directed 
individual account plans (e.g., 401(k) 
plans). This proposal is intended to 
ensure that all participants and 
beneficiaries in participant-directed 
individual account plans have the 
information they need to make informed 
decisions about the management of their 
individual accounts and the investment 
of their retirement savings. This 
document also contains proposed 
conforming changes to the regulations 
applicable to ERISA section 404(c) plans 
(29 CFR 2550.404c–1). Upon adoption, 
these proposals will affect plan 
sponsors, fiduciaries, participants and 
beneficiaries of participant-directed 
individual account plans, as well as 
providers of services to such plans. 
DATES: Written comments on the 
proposed regulation should be received 
by the Department of Labor on or before 
September 8, 2008. 
ADDRESSES: To facilitate the receipt and 
processing of comment letters, the 
Employee Benefits Security 
Administration (EBSA) encourages 
interested persons to submit their 
comments electronically by e-mail to e- 
ORI@dol.gov (enter into subject line: 
Participant Fee Disclosure Project) or by 
using the Federal eRulemaking portal at 
http://www.regulations.gov. Persons 
submitting comments electronically are 
encouraged not to submit paper copies. 
Persons interested in submitting paper 
copies should send or deliver their 
comments to the Office of Regulations 
and Interpretations, Employee Benefits 
Security Administration, Attn: 
Participant Fee Disclosure Project, 
Room N–5655, U.S. Department of 
Labor, 200 Constitution Avenue, NW., 
Washington, DC 20210. All comments 
will be available to the public, without 
charge, online at http:// 
www.regulations.gov and http:// 
www.dol.gov/ebsa and at the Public 
Disclosure Room, N–1513, Employee 
Benefits Security Administration, U.S. 
Department of Labor, 200 Constitution 
Avenue, NW., Washington, DC 20210. 
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: 
Susan M. Halliday or Kristen L. 
Zarenko, Office of Regulations and 
Interpretations, Employee Benefits 
Security Administration, (202) 693– 
8510. This is not a toll-free number. 
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 
A. Background 
According to the Department’s most 
recent data, there are an estimated 
437,000 participant-directed individual 
account plans, covering an estimated 65 
million participants, and holding almost 
$2.3 trillion in assets.1 With the 
proliferation of these plans, which 
afford participants and beneficiaries the 
opportunity to direct the investment of 
all or a portion of the assets held in their 
individual plan accounts, participants 
and beneficiaries are increasingly 
responsible for making their own 
retirement savings decisions. This 
increased responsibility has led to a 
growing concern that participants and 
beneficiaries may not have access to, or 
if accessible, may not be considering 
information critical to making informed 
decisions about the management of their 
accounts, particularly information on 
investment choices, including attendant 
fees and expenses. 
Under ERISA, the investment of plan 
assets is a fiduciary act governed by the 
fiduciary standards in ERISA section 
404(a)(1)(A) and (B), which require 
fiduciaries to act prudently and solely 
in the interest of the plan’s participants 
and beneficiaries. Where a plan assigns 
investment responsibilities to the plan’s 
participants and beneficiaries, it is the 
view of the Department that plan 
fiduciaries must take steps to ensure 
that participants and beneficiaries are 
made aware of their rights and 
responsibilities with respect to 
managing their individual plan accounts 
and are provided sufficient information 
regarding the plan, including its fees 
and expenses, and designated 
investment alternatives, including fees 
and expenses attendant thereto, to make 
informed decisions about the 
management of their individual 
accounts. To some extent, such 
disclosures are already required by 
plans that elect to comply with the 
requirements of section 404(c) (see 
§ 2550.404c–1(b)(2)(i)(B)). However, 
compliance with section 404(c)’s 
disclosure requirements is voluntary 
and does not extend to participants and 
beneficiaries in all participant-directed 
individual account plans. 
The Department believes that all 
participants and beneficiaries with the 
right to direct the investment of assets 
held in their individual plan accounts 
should have access to basic plan and 
investment information. For this reason, 
the Department is issuing this proposed 
regulation under section 404(a), with 
conforming amendments to the 
regulations under section 404(c). These 
proposals would establish uniform, 
basic disclosures for such participants 
and beneficiaries, without regard to 
whether the plan in which they 
participate is a section 404(c) plan. In 
addition, the proposal would require 
participants and beneficiaries to be 
provided investment-related 
information in a form that encourages 
and facilitates a comparative review 
among investment options. 
To facilitate the development of a 
proposed regulation, the Department 
published, on April 25, 2007, a Request 
for Information (RFI) in the Federal 
Register 2 requesting suggestions, 
comments and views from interested 
persons on a variety of issues relating to 
the disclosure of plan and investment- 
related fee and expense and other 
information to participants and 
beneficiaries in participant-directed 
individual account plans. The 
Department received and reviewed 106 
comment letters on these important 
issues. Copies of these letters are posted 
on the Department’s Web site at 
http://www.dol.gov/ebsa/regs/cmt- 
feedisclosures.html. 
The RFI encouraged persons 
preparing comments to consider a 2004 
report and recommendations of a 
working group of the ERISA Advisory 
Council. The Employee Welfare and 
Pension Benefit Plans’ Working Group 
on Fee and Related Disclosures to 
Participants reviewed the disclosure 
requirements applicable to participant- 
directed individual account plans. The 
Working Group assessed the adequacy 
and usefulness of such requirements 
and recommended changes to the 
requirements to help participants more 
effectively manage their retirement 
savings.3 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 19:17 Jul 22, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00002 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\23JYP3.SGM 23JYP3pw
al
ke
r o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
71
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
43015 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 142 / Wednesday, July 23, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
4 The GAO report, GAO–07–21, referenced above 
may be accessed at http://www.gao.gov/htext/ 
d0721.html. 
5 72 FR 67790 (November 30, 2007). 
Additionally, the RFI encouraged 
commenters to consider the Government 
Accountability Office’s (GAO) 2006 
report and recommendations contained 
in ‘‘Private Pensions: Changes Needed 
to Provide 401(k) Plan Participants and 
the Department of Labor Better 
Information on Fees.’’ 4 Also relevant to 
the Department’s consideration was the 
work of the Securities and Exchange 
Commission (Commission). The 
Commission has proposed, among other 
matters, the use of a summary 
prospectus with additional information 
provided on an Internet Web site. The 
proposal is intended to improve mutual 
fund disclosure by providing investors 
with key information in plain English in 
a clear and concise format, while 
enhancing the means of delivering more 
detailed information to investors.5 
Following consultation with the 
Commission, the Department’s proposal 
is coordinated with the Commission’s 
summary prospectus approach where 
feasible. As ERISA plan investment 
options include many products not 
subject to the Commission’s disclosure 
requirements, the Department seeks 
comments addressing the application of 
this proposed regulation to funds and 
investment products not subject to the 
securities laws. 
B. Overview of Proposal § 2550.404a–5 
1. General 
Paragraph (a) of proposed 
§ 2550.404a–5 sets forth the general 
principle that, where documents and 
instruments governing an individual 
account plan provide for the allocation 
of investment responsibilities to 
participants and beneficiaries, plan 
fiduciaries, consistent with ERISA 
section 404(a)(1)(A) and (B), must take 
steps to ensure that such participants 
and beneficiaries, on a regular and 
periodic basis, are made aware of their 
rights and responsibilities with respect 
to the investment of assets held in, or 
contributed to, their accounts and are 
provided sufficient information 
regarding the plan, including plan fees 
and expenses, and regarding designated 
investment alternatives available under 
the plan, including fees and expenses 
attendant thereto, to make informed 
decisions with regard to the 
management of their individual 
accounts. As discussed below, the 
proposal addresses the information that 
must be provided participants and 
beneficiaries, as well as timeframes for 
providing that information. 
Paragraph (b) of the proposal 
addresses the disclosure requirements 
that must be met by plan fiduciaries for 
plan years beginning on or after January 
1, 2009. Under this paragraph, plan 
fiduciaries must comply with the 
requirements of paragraph (c), dealing 
with plan-related information, and 
paragraph (d), dealing with investment- 
related information. Paragraph (e) 
describes the form in which the 
required information may be disclosed, 
such as via the plan’s summary plan 
description, a quarterly benefit 
statement, or the use of the provided 
model, depending on the specific 
information. Paragraph (e) merely 
recognizes various acceptable means of 
disclosure; it does not preclude other 
means for satisfying disclosure duties 
under the proposed regulation. 
Fiduciaries that meet the requirements 
of paragraphs (c) and (d) will have 
satisfied the duty to make the regular 
and periodic disclosures described in 
paragraph (a) of this section. 
The Department believes, as an 
interpretive matter, that ERISA section 
404(a)(1)(A) and (B) impose on 
fiduciaries of all participant-directed 
individual account plans a duty to 
furnish participants and beneficiaries 
information necessary to carry out their 
account management and investment 
responsibilities in an informed manner. 
In the case of plans that elected to 
comply with section 404(c) before 
finalization of this proposal, the 
requirements of section 404(a)(1)(A) and 
(B) typically would have been satisfied 
by compliance with the disclosure 
requirements set forth at 29 CFR 
§ 2550.404c–1(b)(2)(i)(B). However, the 
Department expresses no view with 
respect to plans that did not comply 
with section 404(c) and the regulations 
thereunder as to the specific 
information that should have been 
furnished to participants and 
beneficiaries in any time period before 
this regulation is finalized. 
2. Plan-Related Information 
In general, paragraph (c) of the 
proposal sets forth what is characterized 
as ‘‘plan-related’’ information. This 
information falls into three categories— 
general plan information, administrative 
expense information and individual 
expense information. Paragraph (c) also 
describes when this information must 
be provided to participants and 
beneficiaries and requires that it be 
based on the latest information available 
to the plan. 
First, paragraph (c)(1) of the proposal 
provides for the disclosure of general 
plan information regarding: How 
participants and beneficiaries may give 
investment instructions; any specified 
limitations on such instructions, 
including any restrictions on transfer to 
or from a designated investment 
alternative; the exercise of voting, 
tender and similar rights appurtenant to 
an investment in a designated 
investment alternative as well as any 
restrictions on such rights; the specific 
designated investment alternatives 
offered under the plan; and any 
designated investment managers to 
whom participants and beneficiaries 
may give investment directions. Under 
the proposal, this information is 
required to be furnished to an 
individual on or before the date he or 
she becomes eligible to be a participant 
or beneficiary under the plan and at 
least annually thereafter. In addition, 
the proposal requires that participants 
and beneficiaries be furnished a 
description of any material changes to 
the required information not later than 
30 days after the date of adoption of 
such changes. The Department believes 
that, by referencing the ‘‘date of 
adoption,’’ the regulation will increase 
the likelihood that participants and 
beneficiaries will be provided 
notification of material changes in 
advance of the changes becoming 
effective, thereby putting them in a 
better position to consider such changes 
(e.g., changes in designated investment 
alternatives) in managing their accounts. 
Paragraph (e)(1) of the proposal 
provides that the disclosures required 
by this paragraph (c)(1) may be made as 
part of the plan’s summary plan 
description, provided that the 
applicable timing requirements are 
satisfied. 
Second, paragraph (c)(2)(i) sets out 
the required disclosures for 
administrative expenses. Specifically, it 
provides that, on or before the date of 
an individual’s eligibility to become a 
participant or beneficiary under the 
plan, and at least annually thereafter, 
participants and beneficiaries must be 
furnished an explanation of any fees 
and expenses for plan administrative 
services (e.g., legal, accounting, 
recordkeeping) that, to the extent not 
included in investment-related fees and 
expenses, may be charged against the 
individual accounts of participants or 
beneficiaries and the basis on which 
such charges will be allocated to, or 
affect the balance of, each individual 
account (e.g., pro rata, per capita). This 
requirement is intended to ensure that 
the plan fiduciary informs all 
participants and beneficiaries about the 
plan’s day-to-day operational expenses 
that will be charged against their 
accounts. Because of its general nature, 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 19:17 Jul 22, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00003 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\23JYP3.SGM 23JYP3pw
al
ke
r o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
71
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
43016 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 142 / Wednesday, July 23, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
the information described in paragraph 
(c)(2)(i) may, pursuant to paragraph 
(e)(1) of the proposal, be disclosed as 
part of the plan’s summary plan 
description, provided that the 
applicable timing requirements are met. 
In addition to the general disclosures 
concerning plan administrative 
expenses, paragraph (c)(2)(ii) of the 
proposal requires that, at least quarterly, 
participants and beneficiaries be 
furnished statements of the dollar 
amounts actually charged during the 
preceding quarter to the participants’ or 
beneficiaries’ accounts for 
administrative services, and general 
descriptions of the services to which the 
charges relate. The statements should be 
sufficiently specific to inform the 
participants or beneficiaries of the 
actual charge(s) to their accounts and 
enable them to distinguish the 
administrative services from other 
charges and services that may be 
assessed against their accounts. An 
identification of the total administrative 
fees and expenses assessed during the 
quarter, with, for example, an indication 
that the charges for plan administrative 
expenses include legal, accounting, and 
recordkeeping costs to the plan, would 
be sufficient. The Department does not 
believe that it is necessary, or 
particularly useful, for participants to 
have administrative charges broken out 
and listed on a service-by-service basis. 
Commenters on the Department’s RFI 
argued that an overly detailed 
breakdown of administrative fees may 
overwhelm participants and that 
meaningful information would not be 
conveyed by such a breakdown. Many 
commenters explicitly supported the 
disclosure of ‘‘aggregate’’ or summary 
fees. The requirement to furnish the 
information described in paragraph 
(c)(2)(ii) of the proposal may be satisfied 
by including the information as part of 
a quarterly benefit statement furnished 
pursuant to ERISA section 
105(a)(1)(A)(i). See paragraph (e)(2) of 
the proposal. 
Third, paragraph (c)(3) describes the 
required disclosures for individual 
expenses. This is identical to paragraph 
(c)(2) except that it focuses on the 
disclosure of information relating to 
individual expenses, i.e., expenses that 
are assessed on an individual-by- 
individual, rather than plan-wide, basis. 
Such expenses might be attendant to a 
qualified domestic relations order, a 
participant loan, or investment advice 
services. Paragraph (c)(3)(i) requires the 
disclosure of information concerning 
what expenses might be assessed and 
paragraph (c)(3)(ii) requires the 
disclosure of amounts actually assessed 
and identification of the service to 
which an expense relates. Also, like 
paragraph (c)(2), information described 
in paragraph (c)(3)(i) may be disclosed 
in the plan’s summary plan description 
and the information described in 
paragraph (c)(3)(ii) may be included in 
a quarterly benefit statement. 
The Department invites comments on 
the type of information required to be 
disclosed, the timing of the information 
required to be disclosed and the form in 
which the information may be 
disclosed. 
3. Investment-Related Information 
Paragraph (d) of the proposal sets 
forth the investment-related information 
required to be furnished or made 
accessible to participants and 
beneficiaries in participant-directed 
individual account plans. Paragraph 
(d)(1) sets forth the investment-related 
information required to be automatically 
furnished to each participant and 
beneficiary. Paragraph (d)(2) addresses 
the format of the required information. 
Paragraph (d)(3) addresses the 
furnishing of post-investment 
information. And paragraph (d)(4) sets 
forth information required to be 
furnished only upon the request of a 
participant or beneficiary. 
Paragraph (d)(1) provides that, on or 
before the date of eligibility and at least 
annually thereafter, participants and 
beneficiaries must be furnished certain 
basic information with respect to each 
designated investment alternative 
offered under the plan. For purposes of 
the proposal, paragraph (h)(1) defines 
the term ‘‘designated investment 
alternative’’ to mean any investment 
alternative designated by the plan into 
which participants and beneficiaries 
may direct the investment of assets held 
in, or contributed to, their individual 
accounts. The term ‘‘designated 
investment alternative’’ does not 
include ‘‘brokerage windows,’’ ‘‘self- 
directed brokerage accounts,’’ or similar 
plan arrangements that enable 
participants and beneficiaries to select 
investments beyond those designated by 
the plan. 
For purposes of identifying the 
information essential for participants 
and beneficiaries to consider in 
evaluating their investment choices 
under the plan, the Department 
carefully reviewed the many comments 
received in response to the RFI, as well 
as the Commission’s proposal for a 
summary prospectus. The majority of 
RFI commenters believe that, in 
addition to basic fee and expense 
information, participants and 
beneficiaries need additional disclosure 
to put fee-related information into 
context and to educate them about a 
plan’s investment alternatives. On the 
basis of its review, the Department 
concluded that fee and expense 
information, although important, is only 
one of the factors to be considered in 
making informed investment decisions 
along with investment performance and 
other information relating to a 
designated investment alternative. Also, 
the Department is persuaded by RFI 
commenters that most participants and 
beneficiaries will probably not review 
large amounts of detailed investment 
information. Information that is too 
detailed may overwhelm participants, 
and commenters are concerned that the 
costs associated with providing overly 
detailed information, which ultimately 
will be borne by participants, 
significantly outweigh any possible 
benefits. However, the Department also 
is persuaded that the form in which 
information is required to be presented 
should serve to encourage and facilitate 
its review by participants and 
beneficiaries. Many commenters on the 
RFI, for example, supported the 
disclosure of fee information in a format 
that would facilitate comparison across 
a plan’s investment alternatives. For this 
reason, paragraph (d)(2) of the proposal, 
as discussed later, requires the 
investment-related information set forth 
in paragraph (d)(1) to be presented in a 
comparative format. 
Specifically, paragraph (d)(1) requires 
the following disclosures with respect to 
each designated investment alternative 
under the plan: 
Paragraph (d)(1)(i) requires, among 
other items, the name and category (e.g., 
money market mutual fund, balanced 
fund, index fund, and whether the 
investment alternative is actively or 
passively managed) of the designated 
investment alternative and an Internet 
Web site address that is sufficiently 
specific to lead participants and 
beneficiaries to supplemental 
information regarding the investment 
alternative, including its principal 
strategies, risks, performance and costs. 
For example, such information may be 
contained in a Commission-required 
prospectus (or other document) made 
available at a Web site address. The 
Department believes that ready access to 
such information via the Internet 
alleviates the need to automatically 
furnish otherwise important, detailed 
investment-related information directly 
to every participant and beneficiary. 
This accommodates different levels of 
participant interest in such information. 
The Department recognizes that, while 
many investment fund providers do 
maintain Web sites to inform interested 
investors concerning specific 
investment funds, other providers of 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 19:17 Jul 22, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00004 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\23JYP3.SGM 23JYP3pw
al
ke
r o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
71
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
43017 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 142 / Wednesday, July 23, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
investment funds and products may not. 
The Department specifically invites 
comments on what, if any, challenges 
this proposed requirement may present 
for service providers and employers, 
such as in the case of in-house managed 
funds that might be offered as a 
designated investment alternative under 
a plan. The Department also is 
interested in comments on whether this 
proposed requirement raises any issues 
under the Department’s rules on the use 
of electronic media (29 CFR 2520.104b– 
1(c)), given that plan fiduciaries may, in 
some cases, have to provide paper 
copies of the supplemental information 
listed in this requirement (i.e., 
information that would otherwise be 
accessible through the Internet Web site 
address) to participants who fail to 
affirmatively consent to receiving such 
information electronically. 
Paragraph (d)(1)(ii) of the proposal 
requires the disclosure of specified 
performance data for each of the plan’s 
designated investment alternatives. For 
designated investment alternatives with 
respect to which the return is not fixed, 
e.g., an equity index fund, the fiduciary 
(or designee) must provide the average 
annual total return (expressed as a 
percentage) of the investment for the 
following periods, if available: 1-year, 5- 
year, and 10-year, measured as of the 
end of the applicable calendar year; as 
well as a statement indicating that an 
investment’s past performance is not 
necessarily an indication of how the 
investment will perform in the future. 
For this purpose, the term ‘‘if available’’ 
is intended merely to reflect that some 
plan investments may not have been in 
existence for 1, 5, or 10 years. In such 
cases, plans are expected to explain that 
the data is not available for this reason 
(e.g., ‘‘not applicable’’ or ‘‘not 
available’’). In the case of designated 
investment alternatives for which the 
return is fixed for the term of the 
investment, e.g., a guaranteed 
investment contract, the fiduciary (or 
designee) must provide both the fixed 
rate of return and the term of the 
investment. For purposes of paragraph 
(d)(1)(ii), the term ‘‘average annual total 
return’’ is defined in section (h)(2) of the 
proposal by reference to standards 
applicable to open-end management 
investment companies registered under 
the Investment Company Act of 1940 
(the 1940 Act). The Department 
specifically invites comments on what, 
if any, problems the proposed definition 
presents for investment funds and 
products that are not subject to the 1940 
Act and, if problematic, suggestions for 
alternative definitions or approaches. 
As a corollary to the disclosure of 
performance data, paragraph (d)(1)(iii) 
requires disclosure of performance data 
for an appropriate broad-based 
benchmark over time periods that are 
comparable to the performance data 
periods required under paragraph 
(d)(1)(ii). As structured, the proposal 
provides flexibility in identifying an 
appropriate benchmark. In general, the 
Department expects that most plans will 
simply identify the performance 
benchmark already being used for the 
investment option pursuant to the 
Commission’s prospectus requirements, 
if applicable. The Department seeks 
comments on whether and how the 
proposed requirement may need to be 
modified to include a more narrowly 
based index that reflects the financial 
market sector for ERISA plan 
investment options that are not subject 
to the securities laws. 
Paragraph (d)(1)(iv) specifically 
addresses the disclosure of fees and 
expenses attendant to the purchase, 
holding and sale of each of the plan’s 
designated investment alternatives. For 
designated investment alternatives with 
respect to which the return is not fixed, 
the fiduciary (or designee) must 
provide: (A) The amount and a 
description of each shareholder-type fee 
(i.e., fees charged directly against a 
participant’s or beneficiary’s 
investment), such as sales loads, sales 
charges, deferred sales charges, 
redemption fees, surrender charges, 
exchange fees, account fees, purchase 
fees, and mortality and expense fees; (B) 
the total annual operating expenses of 
the investment expressed as a 
percentage (e.g., expense ratio); and (C) 
a statement indicating that fees and 
expenses are only one of several factors 
that participants and beneficiaries 
should consider when making 
investment decisions. In the case of 
designated investment alternatives with 
respect to which the return is fixed for 
the term of the investment, the fiduciary 
(or designee) must provide the amount 
and a description of any shareholder- 
type fees that may be applicable to a 
purchase, transfer or withdrawal of the 
investment in whole or in part. The 
description of each shareholder-type fee 
must include the amount on which the 
charge is applied, e.g., 4% of amount 
invested. For purposes of paragraph 
(d)(1)(iv), the term ‘‘total annual 
operating expenses’’ is defined in 
paragraph (h)(3) of the proposal by 
reference to standards applicable to 
open-end management investment 
companies registered under the 1940 
Act. The Department specifically invites 
comments on what, if any, problems the 
proposed definition presents for 
investment funds and products that are 
not subject to the 1940 Act and, any 
suggestions for alternative definitions or 
approaches. 
The Department has differentiated the 
fee and expense disclosures required for 
designated investment alternatives with 
returns that vary over time from 
alternatives with fixed returns based on 
the financial nature of each of these 
investment types. While the disclosure 
requirements for investments with 
respect to which the return is not fixed 
are more comprehensive, the 
Department decided that the most 
essential information for participants 
who choose to invest in fixed 
investment alternatives is the 
contractual interest rate paid to their 
accounts and the term of the investment 
during which their monies are shielded 
from market price fluctuations and 
reinvestment risks. Any fees assessed, of 
course, are factored into determining the 
contractual interest rate and RFI 
commentary suggested that there would 
be little benefit to participants to 
disclosing such fees for investments 
with fixed returns. 
Paragraph (d)(1)(v) provides that, for 
purposes of the requirement that 
participants be provided information on 
or before the date they are eligible to be 
covered under the plan, plan fiduciaries 
may provide such participants the most 
recent annual disclosure furnished to 
participants and beneficiaries pursuant 
to paragraph (d)(1), in addition to any 
material changes to the information 
described in paragraph (c)(1)(i). This 
provision ensures that new participants 
receive at least the same information 
that has been furnished to other plan 
participants and beneficiaries with 
respect to the designated investment 
alternatives under the plan. It also 
avoids the possible burdens and costs of 
a requirement that fiduciaries update 
the required disclosures for each new 
plan participant, which could result in 
a daily updating requirement for many 
plans. 
Paragraph (d)(2) of the proposal 
requires the fiduciary to furnish the 
information required by paragraph (d)(1) 
in a chart or similar format that will 
permit straightforward comparison of 
the plan’s designated investment 
alternatives by participants and 
beneficiaries. Many commenters on the 
RFI supported this requirement and 
agreed that any required disclosure 
should enable participants and 
beneficiaries to easily compare data 
across a plan’s menu of designated 
investment alternatives. Further, GAO 
indicated in its 2006 report that plan 
sponsors should be required to disclose 
fee information on each 401(k) 
investment option in a way that 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 19:17 Jul 22, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00005 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\23JYP3.SGM 23JYP3pw
al
ke
r o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
71
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
43018 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 142 / Wednesday, July 23, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
6 See supra note 4. 
7 The Department notes that the model set forth 
in the Appendix includes information and 
statements that are merely illustrative of the type 
of information that might appear in the required 
disclosure. It is the responsibility of each plan 
fiduciary to assure itself that the information 
contained in its disclosure statement is complete 
and accurate. However, such fiduciaries shall not be 
liable for their reasonable and good faith reliance 
on information furnished by their service providers 
with respect to those disclosures required by 
paragraph (d)(1). 
8 Also, with regard to ERISA’s general fiduciary 
standards, it should be noted that there may be 
extraordinary situations when fiduciaries will have 
a disclosure obligation beyond those addressed by 
this regulation. For example, if a plan fiduciary 
knew that, due to a fraud, information contained in 
a public financial report would mislead investors 
concerning the value of a designated investment 
alternative, the fiduciary would have an obligation 
to take appropriate steps to protect the plan’s 
participants, such as disclosing the information or 
preventing additional investments in that 
alternative by plan participants until the relevant 
information is made public. See also Varity Corp. 
v. Howe, 516 U.S. 489 (1996) (plan fiduciary has a 
duty not to misrepresent to participants and 
beneficiaries material information relating to a 
plan). 
9 See 57 FR 46906, 46924, n.27 (preamble to 
§ 2550.404c–1) (October 13, 1992). 
facilitates comparison among the 
options.6 The fiduciary’s name and 
contact information must also be 
provided so that participants and 
beneficiaries may request the additional 
information listed in paragraph (d)(4). 
The chart or similar document also must 
include a statement informing 
participants and beneficiaries that more 
current information about a designated 
investment alternative, including 
performance and cost updates, may be 
available on the Web site for the 
investment alternative. 
In response to commenters on the RFI, 
the Department has developed a model 
disclosure form that can be used for 
purposes of satisfying the disclosure 
requirements of paragraph (d)(2) of the 
proposal. The model appears in the 
Appendix to this regulation. Paragraph 
(e)(3) of the proposal specifically 
provides that a fiduciary that uses and 
accurately completes the model format 
set forth in the Appendix will be 
deemed to have satisfied the 
requirements of paragraph (d)(2) relating 
to the disclosure of the information in 
paragraph (d)(1) in a comparative form.7 
The Department notes that the proposal 
would not mandate use of the model as 
the exclusive means for satisfying the 
requirement to provide a chart or 
similar format that facilitates 
comparison. This proposal provides 
fiduciaries with the flexibility to create 
a chart or comparative format of their 
own design, provided the required 
information is displayed in a manner 
facilitating comparisons. 
Paragraph (d)(3) of the proposal 
requires that when a plan provides for 
the pass-through of voting, tender and 
similar rights, the fiduciary must 
furnish participants and beneficiaries 
who have invested in a designated 
investment alternative with these 
features any materials about such rights 
that have been provided to the plan. 
This requirement is similar to the 
requirement currently applicable to 
section 404(c) plans. See § 2550.404c– 
1(b)(2)(i)(B)(1)(ix). 
Paragraph (d)(4) of the proposal 
requires a fiduciary to furnish certain 
identified information either 
automatically or upon request by 
participants and beneficiaries, based on 
the latest information available to the 
plan. This provision is modeled on the 
requirements currently applicable to 
section 404(c) plans with respect to 
information to be furnished upon 
request of a participant or beneficiary. 
See § 2550.404c–1(b)(2)(i)(B)(2). 
4. Timing of Disclosures 
As discussed above, each of the 
various disclosures must be made 
within specific timeframes. The plan- 
related information concerning certain 
administrative procedures and expenses 
required by subparagraphs (c)(1)(i), 
(c)(2)(i), (c)(3)(i), and the investment- 
related information required by 
subparagraph (d)(1) must be provided to 
each participant or beneficiary ‘‘on or 
before the date of plan eligibility’’ and 
‘‘at least annually thereafter.’’ The 
proposal defines ‘‘at least annually 
thereafter’’ in paragraph (h)(4) to mean 
at least once in any 12-month period, 
without regard to whether the plan 
operates on a calendar or fiscal year 
basis. 
The proposal also requires that certain 
information be provided to participants 
and beneficiaries on a more frequent 
basis. Specifically, the actual dollar 
amounts charged to an individual’s 
account during the preceding quarter for 
administrative and individual services 
must be disclosed in a statement to 
participants and beneficiaries ‘‘at least 
quarterly’’ pursuant to subparagraphs 
(c)(2)(ii) and (c)(3)(ii) of the proposal. 
The proposal defines ‘‘at least 
quarterly’’ in paragraph (h)(5) to mean at 
least once in any 3-month period. 
5. Other Fiduciary Duties 
Paragraph (f) makes clear that nothing 
in the regulation would relieve a 
fiduciary of its responsibilities to 
prudently select and monitor service 
providers to the plan and the 
investments made available under the 
plan (i.e., designated investment 
alternatives).8 
C. Proposed Amendments to 
§ 2550.404c–1 
Also included in this notice are 
proposed amendments to the regulation 
under section 404(c) of ERISA, 29 CFR 
§ 2550.404c–1. The proposed 
amendments to section 2550.404c–1(b), 
(c) and (f) would integrate the disclosure 
requirements in the section 404(c) 
regulation with the new proposed 
section 2550.404a–5 disclosure 
requirements and thereby avoid having 
different disclosure rules for plans 
intending to comply with the section 
404(c) requirements. In brief, the 
proposed amendments to the section 
404(c) regulation eliminate references to 
disclosures encompassed in the new 
§ 2550.404a–5 proposal and incorporate 
cross-references to the new proposal, 
thereby establishing a uniform 
disclosure framework for all participant- 
directed individual account plans. The 
Department also is taking this 
opportunity to reiterate its long held 
position that the relief afforded by 
section 404(c) and the regulation 
thereunder does not extend to a 
fiduciary’s duty to prudently select and 
monitor designated investment 
managers and designated investment 
alternatives under the plan. 
Accordingly, it is the Department’s view 
that a fiduciary breach or an investment 
loss in connection with the plan’s 
selection of a designated investment 
alternative is not afforded relief under 
section 404(c) because it is not the result 
of a participant’s or beneficiary’s 
exercise of control.9 The Department is 
proposing to amend paragraph (d)(2) 
(entitled ‘‘Limitation on liability of plan 
fiduciaries’’) of § 2550.404c–1 to add a 
new subparagraph (iv) providing that, 
‘‘[P]aragraph (d)(2)(i) does not relieve a 
fiduciary from the duty to prudently 
select and monitor any designated 
investment manager or designated 
investment alternative offered under the 
plan.’’ 
D. Effective Date 
The Department proposes that the 
regulations and amendments contained 
in this notice be effective for plan years 
beginning on or after January 1, 2009. 
The Department specifically invites 
comments on the earliest date on which 
the proposed regulation and 
amendments can or should be effective, 
addressing any administrative or 
programming costs or other issues that 
should be considered in establishing an 
effective date. 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 19:17 Jul 22, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00006 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\23JYP3.SGM 23JYP3pw
al
ke
r o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
71
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
43019 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 142 / Wednesday, July 23, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
10 The Commission reported that a $10,000 
investment with an expense ratio of 1.5% invested 
for 20 years and having an annual return of 10% 
before fees will return roughly $49,725, while a 
similar investment with lower fees of 0.5% will 
return $60,858—an 18% difference. Invest Wisely: 
An Introduction to Mutual Funds, http:// 
www.sec.gov/investor/pubs/inwsmf.htm. 
E. Regulatory Impact Analysis 
As discussed in the preceding 
sections, the proposed regulation would 
establish a uniform basic disclosure 
regime for participant-directed plans. 
Many of the disclosures contained in 
the proposed regulation are similar to 
those required for participant-directed 
individual account plans that currently 
comply with section 404(c) and the 
Department’s regulations issued 
thereunder. For other participant- 
directed plans which choose not to be 
section 404(c) compliant there is some 
uncertainty as to what information is 
provided to participants; accordingly, 
the Department is assuming for 
purposes of this analysis that for some 
of the plans that choose not to be 404(c) 
compliant the proposal’s disclosure 
requirements are new. 
Given the foregoing assumptions, the 
average incremental costs and benefits 
for participants in plans that provide 
section 404(c) compliant or similar 
disclosures will be smaller than for 
those in plans that do not provide this 
information. Participants in section 
404(c) compliant plans or in plans that 
provide similar information will not 
receive as large an added benefit from 
the proposal’s new disclosure 
requirements because they are already 
receiving some of the information that 
would be required under the proposed 
regulation. 
Executive Order 12866 Statement 
Under Executive Order 12866, the 
Department must determine whether a 
regulatory action is ‘‘significant’’ and 
therefore subject to the requirements of 
the Executive Order and subject to 
review by the Office of Management and 
Budget (OMB). Under section 3(f) of the 
Executive Order, a ‘‘significant 
regulatory action’’ is an action that is 
likely to result in a rule (1) having an 
effect on the economy of $100 million 
or more in any one year, or adversely 
and materially affecting a sector of the 
economy, productivity, competition, 
jobs, the environment, public health or 
safety, or State, local or tribal 
governments or communities (also 
referred to as ‘‘economically 
significant’’); (2) creating serious 
inconsistency or otherwise interfering 
with an action taken or planned by 
another agency; (3) materially altering 
the budgetary impacts of entitlement 
grants, user fees, or loan programs or the 
rights and obligations of recipients 
thereof; or (4) raising novel legal or 
policy issues arising out of legal 
mandates, the President’s priorities, or 
the principles set forth in the Executive 
Order. The Department has determined 
that this action is ‘‘significant’’ under 
section 3(f)(1) because it is likely to 
have an effect on the economy of more 
than $100 million in any one year. 
Accordingly, the Department has 
undertaken, as described below, an 
analysis of the costs and benefits of the 
proposed regulation in satisfaction of 
the requirements of the Executive Order 
and OMB Circular A–4. The Department 
believes that the proposed regulation’s 
benefits justify its costs. The present 
value of the benefits over the ten year 
period is expected to be about $6.9 
billion. The present value of the costs 
over the same time period is expected 
to be $759 million. Overall, the 
Department estimates that the proposed 
regulation will generate a net present 
value (or net present benefit) of almost 
$6.1 billion over the time period 2009– 
2018, as is shown in Table 1. 
TABLE 1.—SUMMARY OF DISCOUNTED BENEFITS AND COSTS 
Year Benefits ($millions/year) 
Costs 
($millions/year) 
1 2009 ............................................................................................................................................. 914.9 127.3 
2 2010 ............................................................................................................................................. 855.0 90.7 
3 2011 ............................................................................................................................................. 799.1 84.7 
4 2012 ............................................................................................................................................. 746.8 79.2 
5 2013 ............................................................................................................................................. 698.0 74.0 
6 2014 ............................................................................................................................................. 652.3 69.2 
7 2015 ............................................................................................................................................. 609.6 64.7 
8 2016 ............................................................................................................................................. 569.8 60.4 
9 2017 ............................................................................................................................................. 532.5 56.5 
10 2018 ........................................................................................................................................... 497.6 52.8 
Total with 7% Discounting ............................................................................................................ 6875.6 759.4 
Net Present Value 7% Discounting .............................................................................................. .................................. 6,116 
Net Present Value 3% Discounting .............................................................................................. .................................. 7,158 
Need for Regulatory Action 
A growing number of workers are 
preparing for retirement by participating 
in ERISA governed retirement plans that 
allow for participant direction of 
investments. How well plan participants 
are prepared for retirement is partly 
determined by how well they have 
invested their retirement savings. 
Among the key determinants of the 
return on an investment are fees and 
expenses. A one percentage point 
difference in fees can result in an 18 
percent difference in savings.10 
In developing this proposed 
regulation, the Department considered 
why the market alone does not provide 
transparent fee disclosure to 
participants comparable to that 
prescribed by this regulation. In general, 
the market delivers products that are 
deemed valuable by consumers. The 
lack of transparent fee disclosure in this 
market suggests to the Department that 
individuals may underestimate the 
impact that fees and expenses can have 
on their account balances, and thus 
undervalue transparent fee disclosure. 
The Department believes that this 
causes individuals to make uninformed 
investment decisions that result in 
inferior outcomes to those that would 
result from making investment 
decisions based on full information. 
Retirement plan characteristics, 
including disclosure practices, are 
shaped in significant measure by labor 
market forces. Employers want to attract 
and retain productive employees and 
minimize cost. If employees undervalue 
disclosure, plans sponsors might under- 
provide it. Sub-optimal levels of 
disclosure translate into inefficiencies 
in participant’s choices of investment 
products and services. Evidence for this 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 19:17 Jul 22, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00007 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\23JYP3.SGM 23JYP3pw
al
ke
r o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
71
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
43020 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 142 / Wednesday, July 23, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
11 Investment Company Institute, ‘‘The 
Economics of Providing 401(k) Plans: Services, 
Fees, and Expenses, 2006,’’ 
http://www.ici.org/pdf/fm-v16n4.pdf. 
12 For example, the ERISA Advisory Council 
Working group reported that ‘‘The Working Group 
questions the utility of the prospectus as a source 
of investment information. While its delivery is 
required under SEC rules for investment, it lacks 
any marginal utility to a plan participant in terms 
of making an investment decision,’’ Report of the 
Working Group on Prudent Investment Process, 
2006, http://www.dol.gov/ebsa/publications/ 
AC_1106A_report.html. The Department also 
received similar comments in response to its 
Request of Information regarding Fee Disclosures to 
401(k) Plan Participants from service providers and 
trade organizations. These comments can be 
accessed at 
http://www.dol.gov/ebsa/regs/cmt- 
feedisclosures.html. 
13 ‘‘Higher than necessary’’ here means that the 
participant could have obtained equal value 
without incurring the expense. This calculation, 
based on fees paid in 401(k) plans, assumes that 
participants on average pay 11 or more basis points 
in unnecessary fees and expenses, in the form of 
expense ratios or loads. This assumption is 
conservative in light of evidence on the distribution 
of investor expense levels presented in: Brad M. 
Barber, Terrance Odean and Lu Zheng, ‘‘Out of 
Sight, Out of Mind, The Effects of Expenses on 
Mutual Fund Flows,’’ Journal of Business Vol. 79, 
No. 6 p. 2095–2119 (2005); James J. Choi, David I. 
Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian, ‘‘Why Does the 
Law of One Price Fail? An Experiment on Index 
Mutual Funds,’’ NBER Working Paper No. W12261 
(May 2006); Report, Deloitte Financial Advisory 
Services LLP. ‘‘Fees and Revenue Sharing in 
Defined Contribution Retirement Plans,’’ (December 
6, 2007) (on file with the Department); Edwin J. 
Elton, Martin J. Gruber, and Jeffrey A. Busse, ‘‘Are 
Investors Rational? Choices Among Index Funds,’’ 
NYU Working Paper, Social Science Research 
Network Abstract 340482 (June 2002); Sarah Holden 
and Michael Hadley, Investment Company Institute, 
‘‘The Economics of Providing 401(k) Plans: 
Services, Fees and Expenses 2006,’’ 16 Research 
Fundamentals, No. 4. (September 2007). This 
estimate of excess expense does not take into 
account less visible expenses such as mutual funds’ 
internal transaction costs (including explicit 
brokerage commissions and implicit trading costs), 
which are sometimes larger than funds’ expense 
ratios. Deloitte, supra; Jason Karceski, Miles 
Livingston, and Edward O’Neal, ‘‘Portfolio 
Transactions Costs at U.S. Equity Mutual Funds,’’ 
University of Florida Working Paper (2004) at 
http://thefloat.typepad.com/the_float/files/
2004_zag_study_on_mutual_fund_
trading_costs.pdf. 
14 While increased disclosure to plan participants 
is expected to reduce fees, it is not clear by how 
much. Some participants may not make optimal use 
of the disclosed information to reduce fees when 
making investment decisions. Also, the proposal’s 
disclosures are limited to plan’s designated 
investment alternatives chosen by plan fiduciaries 
rather than by plan participants. 
15 In their mutual fund experiment, Choi et al. 
found that presenting the participants with a 
comparison fee chart, and not just a prospectus, 
reduced the fees paid by 12% to 49% depending 
on the group studied. 
James J. Choi, David I. Laibson, and Brigitte C. 
Madrian. May 2006. ‘‘Why Does the Law of One 
Price Fail? An Experiment on Index Mutual 
Funds.’’ NBER Working Paper No. W12261. 
16 The Department assumes that plan participants 
that already receive the section 404(c) required 
information will receive a benefit from the proposal 
that is two-thirds of that received by participants 
that do not already receive this information. In 
addition, the Department assumes that at least 80% 
of participants in plans that choose not to be 404(c) 
compliant, nevertheless, receive similar disclosures 
to participants in section 404(c) compliant plans. 
The Department specifically requests comments on 
the percentage of participants that already receive 
this information and the additional benefits that 
plan participants will receive due to the proposed 
regulation. 
undervaluation includes a wide 
dispersion of fees paid in 401(k) plans. 
As supported by a report of the 
Investment Company Institute,11 the 
fees that plans pay vary over a wide 
range. According to their study, 23% of 
401(k) stock mutual fund assets are in 
funds with an expense ratio of less than 
50 basis points, while an equal amount 
of assets are in funds with an expense 
ratio of over 100 basis points. Some of 
this variation could be explained by the 
varying amount of assets in plans and 
their accompanying economies of scale. 
In addition, some plans might offer 
more, or more expensive, plan features. 
The Department believes, however, that 
a significant portion of the variation in 
plan fees is due to market inefficiencies. 
Understanding and comparing 
investment options available in a 401(k) 
plan can be complicated and confusing 
for many participants. The magnitude of 
complexity and confusion may be 
defined by reference to the number of 
available investment options and the 
materials utilized for communicating 
investment-related information. For 
example, in plans that offer a large 
number of investment options, for 
which the primary communication is a 
full prospectus-like disclosure, 
understanding and comparing 
investment options may be challenging 
for the less financially savvy or less 
interested plan participants.12 
Moreover, the process of gathering and 
comparing information may itself be 
time consuming. 
The proposed regulation will help a 
large number of plan participants by 
placing investment-related information 
in a format that facilitates comparison of 
investment alternatives. This simplified 
format will make it easier and less time 
consuming for participants to find and 
compare the needed information. As a 
result, plan participants may make 
better investment decisions and may be 
better financially prepared for 
retirement. 
Benefits 
The proposed regulation’s disclosure 
requirements will provide important 
benefits to society. The provision of 
investment-related information in a 
comparative format is a new 
requirement for all participant directed 
individual account plans, including 
section 404(c) compliant plans, and is 
anticipated to be especially beneficial to 
plan participants. The Department 
believes that such information will 
enable participants to make better 
decisions on how to structure their 
investments on a prospective basis. 
These benefits with respect to the 
provision of investment-related 
information are quantified in more 
detail below. 
(a) Reduction in Fees 
A review of the relevant literature 
suggests that plan participants on 
average pay fees that are higher than 
necessary by 11.3 basis points per 
year.13 The proposal’s required 
disclosure of fees and expenses is 
expected to result in the payment of 
lower fees for many participants, 
assuming that participants will more 
consistently pick the lower cost 
comparable investment alternatives 
under their plans.14 Selection of the 
lower cost comparable investment 
alternatives will, in turn, result in 
increased plan participant account 
investment returns. In addition, the 
required disclosure could lead to 
reduced fees 15 in the investment 
alternatives market as more fee 
transparency fosters more price 
competition in the market. Furthermore, 
the fee disclosure requirements may 
lead plan fiduciaries to give additional 
scrutiny to fees, and consequently to 
select less expensive comparable 
investment alternatives. 
Although participants in section 
404(c) compliant plans already receive 
much of the information that would be 
required under the proposed regulation, 
they are expected to receive a 
substantial incremental benefit. 
Participants in section 404(c) compliant 
plans, as well as many participants in 
plans that are not choosing to be section 
404(c) compliant, who invest in mutual 
funds that are designated investment 
alternatives under the plan already 
receive the fee information in the 
related funds’ prospectuses. The 
proposal’s required disclosure of a 
summary of fee and performance 
information in a comparable format may 
nevertheless be beneficial in assisting 
plan participants to make better 
investment decisions. Thus, the 
Department assumes that participants in 
plans that are not providing disclosures 
similar to that required under section 
404(c) receive a larger added benefit 
from the proposal’s disclosures than 
plan participants that receive section 
404(c) compliant or similar 
disclosures.16 
The Department estimates that there 
will be assets of about $2.6 trillion in 
participant-directed individual account 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 19:17 Jul 22, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00008 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\23JYP3.SGM 23JYP3pw
al
ke
r o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
71
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
43021 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 142 / Wednesday, July 23, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
17 The Department estimates, using 2005 Form 
5500 data, that in 2005 $2.3 trillion in assets were 
held in participant directed accounts. To arrive at 
a 2009 dollar estimate, this number is then adjusted 
for inflation. This estimate does not include growth 
due to new participants or contributions and it also 
ignores increases or decreases due to the returns on 
the assets. Overall, the Department believes it under 
estimates the total amount of assets in 2009. 
18 Choi et al. (2006) found that providing 
comparative fee information to the treatment groups 
reduced fees by 12% to 49%. While this estimate 
originated from an experiment using young 
educated subjects, the Department believes that the 
assumptions made here are reasonable as they were 
selected from the lower range of values. 
19 Fees vary due to the number and type of 
investment alternatives selected by the plan 
fiduciary. Nevertheless, plan participants can still 
influence the amount of fees they pay. Participants 
can choose among, on average almost 19 
alternatives (Vanguard. ‘‘How America Saves 
2006.’’) in the plan and select lower cost investment 
options or change their allocation percentages. 
Participants can also ask the plan fiduciaries to 
offer lower cost alternatives. 
20 Employee Benefit Research Institute Issue Brief 
#292, April, 2006. 
21 Feather and Shaw (1999), using an econometric 
model, found that the opportunity cost of leisure 
time is 10 percent less than observed wages for 
employed workers. See Feather, P. and Shaw, W.D., 
‘‘Estimating the Cost of Leisure Time for Recreation 
Demand Models,’’ Journal of Environmental 
Economics and Management, Volume 38, Issue 1, 
July 1999, Pages 49–65. 
22 This wage rate estimate is based on hourly 
wages from Panel 7 of the 2001 wave from the 
Survey of Income Program Participation (SIPP) and 
Continued 
plans in 2009 17 and that about $3.0 
billion in higher than necessary fees are 
being paid by plan participants. 
Assuming the proposal’s fee disclosures 
will reduce the amount of higher than 
necessary fees paid on average (a) by 
10% (11.3 basis points*10%=1.13 basis 
points) 18 for participants in section 
404(c) compliant plans or plans that 
provide similar information, and (b) by 
15% (11.3 basis points*15%=1.70 basis 
points) for participants in plans that do 
not receive section 404(c) compliant or 
similar information, the Department 
believes that the proposal’s fee 
disclosures will result in $307 million 
in fee savings for plan participants in 
2009 as shown in Table 2. 
TABLE 2.—BENEFITS DUE TO REDUCTION IN FEES (2009) 
Type of plan 
Total amount 
of assets in 
plans 
(in millions of 
2009 dollars) 
Basis points of 
higher than 
necessary 
fees 
Percent 
correction due 
to disclosure 
Benefits from 
reduction in 
fees 
(percent) 
(A) (B) (C) (A * B * C) 
404(c) Plans and Plans with Similar Information ............................................ 2,500,000 0.11 10 $282,754,000 
Non-404(c) Plans without Similar Information ................................................. 144,000 0.11 15 24,487,000 
Total Undiscounted Benefits .................................................................... ........................ ........................ ........................ 307,241,000 
Note: The displayed numbers are rounded to the nearest thousand and therefore may not add up to the totals. 
There is some question as to whether 
some reductions in fees might represent 
transfers (such as consumer surpluses 
being recaptured by participants from 
investment managers) rather than 
efficiency gains. The Department 
believes that fee reductions attributable 
to this proposed regulation will mostly 
reflect efficiency gains, especially in the 
longer run. Downward pressure on fees 
will favor more efficient means of 
producing investment and other plan 
services. It will also reflect a diminution 
of the market for services whose costs 
exceeds their benefits (such as 
movement from more active to more 
passive investment management in 
cases where the latter is more efficient). 
However, it is possible that some 
fraction of reduced fees could reflect a 
transfer.19 The Department invites 
comments on this possibility. Since a 
purpose of the proposed regulation is to 
help plan participants increase their 
retirement savings, and because the 
expected fee reduction furthers this 
goal, the Department’s motivation is the 
same irrespective of whether fee savings 
reflect transfers or efficiency gains. In 
the absence of information of what 
portion of fee savings might reflect 
transfers, for purposes of this 
assessment all such savings is counted 
as benefits. 
(b) Reduction in Participant Search 
Time 
The proposed regulation will benefit 
plan participants by reducing the time 
they spend searching for and compiling 
fee and expense information. Although 
it is possible that all of these 65 million 
participants in participant directed 
individual account plans could benefit 
from increased disclosure, only a subset 
will choose to act on the disclosed 
information. The Department estimates 
that about at least 29 percent of plan 
participants will spend time researching 
their plans’ designated investment 
alternatives fee and expense information 
and are, therefore, likely to benefit from 
reduced search time and corresponding 
reduced costs. This estimate is based on 
an EBRI survey 20 which found that 29 
percent of the respondents that received 
educational materials from their plans 
read the materials and made a change in 
their retirement plan investments. This 
assumption results in nearly 19 million 
plan participants that could benefit from 
reduced search costs. The Department 
seeks comments on the extent to which 
this proposal may increase the 
percentage of plan participants who will 
spend time researching their plans. 
The same EBRI study found that 
respondents spent 19 hours per year on 
average planning for retirement. Of 
these 19 hours, the Department assumes 
that one-and-a-half hours could be 
saved on average for participants that 
are not receiving information like that 
required in section 404(c) and one hour 
for participants that are receiving 
section 404(c) compliant or similar 
disclosures based on the proposal’s 
increased fee disclosure information. 
This assumption results in 
approximately 19 million hours being 
saved by affected plan participants as a 
result of the proposed regulation. The 
Department seeks comments on this 
assumption. 
In order to convert the time-savings 
into a dollar estimate, the Department 
estimated how much the average 
participants would value the time 
saved. Since the search time is assumed 
to be spent during leisure time and in 
order to adjust for the difference that 
plan participants attribute to leisure 
time versus work time, an average total 
wage rate for private sector workers 
participating in a pension plan with 
individual accounts was reduced by 10 
percent to derive at an average value 
rate of leisure time.21 Using a wage rate 
of a little less than $35 22 for private 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 19:17 Jul 22, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00009 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\23JYP3.SGM 23JYP3pw
al
ke
r o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
71
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
43022 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 142 / Wednesday, July 23, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
on wage growth data for private-sector workers that participate in a pension plan with individual 
accounts from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). 
23 These comments can be found under http:// 
www.dol.gov/ebsa/regs/cmt-feedisclosures.html. 
sector workers participating in a 
pension plan with individual accounts 
results in an average value of an hour 
of leisure time of $31 for 2009. Thus, the 
benefits from reduced search time for 
plan participants are estimated at $608 
million for 2009 as shown in Table 3 
below. 
TABLE 3.—BENEFITS FROM REDUCED PARTICIPANT SEARCH TIME (2009) 
Type of plan 
Number of 
(affected) par-
ticipants in par-
ticipant-directed 
Accounts 
Percentage of 
participants 
predicted to 
make a change 
in allocation to 
lower fee in-
vestments 
Number of 
search hours 
saved by 
participant 
Average hourly 
value of 
participants’ lei-
sure time 
(in 2009 Dol-
lars) 
Total benefits 
from reduced 
participant 
search time 
(A) (B) (C) (D) (A * B * C * D) 
404(c) Plans and Plans with Similar Information ...... 62,058,000 29 1.0 $31.33 $563,884,000 
Non-404(c) Plans without Similar Information ........... 3,211,000 29 1.5 $31.33 43,770,000 
Total Undiscounted Benefits ............................... .......................... .......................... .......................... .......................... 607,654,000 
Note: The displayed numbers are rounded to the nearest thousand and therefore may not add up to the totals. 
(c) Summary of Benefits 
The quantified benefits of the 
proposed regulation consist of benefits 
from the reduction in fees and from the 
reductions in search time for 
participants seeking information on 
fees, which will occur primarily as a 
result of the comparative disclosure of 
investment-related information, and 
secondarily due to the disclosure of 
non-investment-related fee and expense 
disclosures. Estimates of these total 
benefits due to prospective fee 
disclosure are presented in Table 4 and 
amount to a total net present value of 
$6.9 billion over the 10-year period. 
TABLE 4.—TOTAL DISCOUNTED BENEFITS OF THE PROPOSAL 
Year Benefits from reduction in fees 
Benefits from 
reduced partici-
pant search time 
Total benefits 
(A) (B) (A + B) 
2009 ................................................................................................................................. $307,241,000 $607,654,000 $914,895,000 
2010 ................................................................................................................................. 287,141,000 567,901,000 855,042,000 
2011 ................................................................................................................................. 268,356,000 530,748,000 799,105,000 
2012 ................................................................................................................................. 250,800,000 496,027,000 746,827,000 
2013 ................................................................................................................................. 234,393,000 463,576,000 697,969,000 
2014 ................................................................................................................................. 219,059,000 433,249,000 652,308,000 
2015 ................................................................................................................................. 204,728,000 404,905,000 609,633,000 
2016 ................................................................................................................................. 191,334,000 378,416,000 569,751,000 
2017 ................................................................................................................................. 178,817,000 353,660,000 532,477,000 
2018 ................................................................................................................................. 167,119,000 330,523,000 497,642,000 
Total with 7% Discounting ........................................................................................ ............................ ............................ 6,875,649,000 
Total with 3% Discounting ........................................................................................ ............................ ............................ 8,038,368,000 
Note: The displayed numbers are rounded to the nearest thousand and therefore may not add up to the totals. 
In addition to the benefits that will 
derive from the disclosure of 
investment-related information in a 
comparative format, which are 
quantified above, participants also will 
benefit from a retrospective disclosure 
of plan administrative fees actually 
charged to their accounts in the prior 
quarter. The Department believes that 
participants who are trying to plan for 
retirement are entitled to a 
comprehensive disclosure that includes 
not only information about fees and 
expenses that may occur depending on 
investment options selected, but also 
information on other fees that were 
actually assessed against their accounts 
in the previous quarter. RFI commentary 
indicates that participant advocates, 
plan sponsors and service providers, 
support such a disclosure 
requirement.23 Information about actual 
charges to participants’ accounts may, 
among other things, help participants 
understand their current reported 
account balance, help detect errors in 
prior charges by the plan, help them in 
relation to their general household 
budgeting and retirement planning, and 
help insure the reasonableness of the 
charges. The Department seeks 
comments that would help quantify the 
benefits of the retrospective disclosure. 
Costs 
The regulation may result in 
increased administrative burdens and 
costs for plans (or plan sponsors). 
(a) Increased Administrative Burden 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 19:17 Jul 22, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00010 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\23JYP3.SGM 23JYP3pw
al
ke
r o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
71
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
43023 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 142 / Wednesday, July 23, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
24 This estimate reflects that plans may employ 
service providers for making disclosures and that 
these service providers are likely to spread fixed 
and start-up costs across many plan clients. 
25 EBSA wage estimates are based on the National 
Occupational Employment Survey (May 2006, 
Bureau of Labor Statistics) and the Employment 
Cost Index (March, 2007, Bureau of Labor 
Statistics), unless otherwise noted. 
26 GAO–03–551T, ‘‘Mutual Funds: Information on 
Trends in Fees and Their Related Disclosure,’’ 
March 12, 2003, p. 14. 
27 As a reference, Investment Management 
Consultants (IMC) has indicated that the cost to 
plan sponsors of producing an Internet report to 
comply with PPA ranges from $0.50 per participant 
per year for the largest plans to $3.00 per 
participant per year for the smallest plans. This 
cost, representing what IMC charges plan sponsors 
for industry-wide information on fees, is based on 
their data set containing 15,000 plans through 
September 2007, but does not include costs 
associated with printing reports, such as postage, 
stationary, and envelopes. 
28 The GAO report estimates that implementing 
specific dollar disclosures of fees would cost $1.00 
Continued 
Costs Due to Upfront Review and 
Updating of Plan Documents 
Plans are likely to incur 
administrative burdens and costs in 
order to comply with the requirements 
of the regulation. The proposed 
regulation will require each plan to 
incur an upfront cost to have the 
regulation reviewed by professionals, 
such as lawyers. This cost will be 
incurred by all participant-directed 
individual account plans. The 
Department assumes it will require a 
professional to spend one half hour to 
perform the review.24 Using in-house 
labor rates for a legal professional of 
nearly $113,25 the up-front legal review 
cost is estimated at $24.6 million. In 
addition, the Department estimates that 
each plan will spend one-half hour of 
clerical time at an (in-house) hourly rate 
of $26 preparing the disclosures. This 
would result in a cost of $5.7 million for 
2009. The costs of reviewing and 
preparing plan related information are 
summarized in Table 5. The Department 
seeks comments on its assumptions 
regarding hourly rates and number of 
hours in the table below. 
TABLE 5.—REVIEW AND PREPARE PLAN RELATED INFORMATION, (2009) 
Year 
Number of 
participant-di-
rected plans 
Legal 
professional 
hours required 
to review each 
plan 
Hourly labor 
cost for legal 
professional 
(in 2009 dol-
lars) 
Clerical pro-
fessional 
hours required 
to prepare 
plan docu-
ments 
Hourly labor 
cost for 
clerical profes-
sional 
(in 2009 dol-
lars) 
Review cost 
(A) (B) (C) (D) (E) (A*B*C) 
+ (A*D*E) 
2009 ......................................................... 436,862 0.5 $113 0.5 $26 $30,322,591 
Total Undiscounted Costs ................ ........................ ........................ ........................ ........................ ........................ 30,322,591 
Note: The displayed numbers are rounded to the nearest thousand and therefore may not add up to the totals. 
Based on the 2005 Form 5500 data, 
the Department estimates that 
approximately 59,000 new participant- 
directed individual account plans 
would be required to disclose general 
plan information each year. The 
Department assumes that writing a new 
disclosure notice for these plans would 
require, on average, one-half hour of 
legal professional time and one-half 
hour of clerical time per plan leading to 
a cost estimate of $4 million annually. 
The Department estimates that about 
378,000 existing plans will require one- 
quarter hour of legal professional time 
and one-quarter hour of clerical staff 
time to update plan documents to take 
into account plan changes, such as new 
investment alternatives, in subsequent 
years. This results in a cost of 
approximately $13 million as 
summarized in Table 6. The Department 
seeks comments on the assumptions 
used to develop this figure. 
TABLE 6.—REVIEW AND UPDATE PLAN RELATED INFORMATION, (SUBSEQUENT YEARS) 
Type of plan 
Number of par-
ticipant-directed 
plans 
Legal 
professional 
hours required 
to review each 
plan 
Hourly labor 
cost for legal 
professional 
(in 2009 dol-
lars) 
Clerical 
professional 
hours required 
to prepare 
plan docu-
ments 
Hourly labor 
cost for 
clerical profes-
sional 
(in 2009 dol-
lars) 
Review cost 
(A) (B) (C) (D) (E) (A*B*C) 
+ (A*D*E) 
Existing Plans ........................................ 378,000 0.25 $113 0.25 $26 $13,107,000 
New Plans .............................................. 59,000 0.50 113 0.50 26 4,109,000 
Total undiscounted costs ................ .......................... ........................ ........................ ........................ ........................ 17,216,000 
Note: The displayed numbers are rounded to the nearest thousand and therefore may not add up to the totals. 
Costs Due to Production of Quarterly 
Dollar Amount Disclosures 
The proposed regulation will require 
plan administrators to send out 
disclosures about administrative 
charges—on a plan-wide as well as a 
participant-specific basis—to 
participants’ accounts and engage in 
record keeping. The increase in 
administrative costs resulting from 
disclosing actual dollar fee and expense 
disclosure is derived from a GAO report 
that measures the cost of the disclosures 
of the actual dollar amount of mutual 
fund investment expenses on a 
participant level.26 The GAO report 
estimates the initial cost to generate 
these disclosures in 2001 at $1 per 
account,27 and the annual cost of 
continued compliance at $0.35 per 
account.28 The cost to plans to calculate 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 19:17 Jul 22, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00011 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\23JYP3.SGM 23JYP3pw
al
ke
r o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
71
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
43024 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 142 / Wednesday, July 23, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
per participant in the initial year (in 2001 dollars). 
In subsequent years this would annually cost about 
$0.35 (in 2001 dollars). This cost estimate includes 
the cost to enhance the current data processing 
systems, modify investor communication systems 
and media, develop new policies and procedures 
and implement employee training and customer 
support programs. This estimate does not include 
the reportedly significant costs that would be borne 
by third party financial institutions that maintain 
accounts on behalf of individual mutual fund 
shareholders. 
29 The Department used (a) historical CPI data to 
inflate the $1.00 estimate to $1.19 (in 2007 dollars) 
and the $0.35 estimate to $0.42 (in 2007 dollars) 
and (b) the projected inflation rate from the 
November 2007 President’s Economic Forecast for 
2008 (2.1 percent) to inflate the $1.19 value to $1.22 
and the $0.42 value to $0.43 (in 2009 dollars). The 
President’s Economic Forecast can be found at: 
http://www.whitehouse.gov/cea/econ- 
outlook20071129.html. 
30 The Department did not account for additional 
paper costs, given that no additional pages need be 
added as long as this information is included as 
part of the quarterly benefit statement. 
31 This section does not include distribution or 
material costs for the disclosures of administrative 
fees charged to participants’ accounts as the 
Department assumes that this information can be 
included as part of the quarterly benefit statement. 
administrative fees for purposes of this 
proposed regulation is expected to be 
less, because most of the expense 
information to be disclosed under the 
regulation is already tracked. The 
Department assumes it will cost both 
section 404(c) compliant and non- 
section 404(c) compliant plans one-third 
of the costs of disclosure of investment 
costs by mutual funds to disclose actual 
dollars charged, leading to cost 
estimates of about $0.41 per plan 
participant in the first year and $0.14 
thereafter.29 Thus, the cost to produce 
the actual dollar disclosure is estimated 
at $26.5 million for 2009 as shown in 
Table 7.30 The Department invites 
comments on the cost to plans to 
produce actual dollar disclosures of the 
required fees, including the extent to 
which the costs differ for plans that are 
already making actual dollar disclosures 
and plans that are not. 
TABLE 7.—COST OF ADDITIONAL RECORD KEEPING AND OF PRODUCING ACTUAL DOLLAR DISCLOSURES 
Year 
Number of 
(affected) 
participants in 
participant-di-
rected 
accounts 
Per participant 
cost from GAO 
report 
Percent of cost 
for calculating 
administrative 
fees 
Cost of record 
keeping and of 
producing actual 
dollar disclosures 
(A) (B) (C) (A * B * C) 
2009 ................................................................................................. 65,269,000 $1.22 33 $26,543,000 
Subsequent year .............................................................................. 65,269,000 0.43 33 9,355,000 
Note: The displayed numbers are rounded to the nearest thousand and therefore may not add up to the totals. 
Costs Due to Consolidation of Fee 
Information 
Additional administrative burdens 
and costs are likely to arise because of 
the need for plans to consolidate 
information from more than one source 
to prepare the required comparative 
chart. The Department estimates that it 
takes a staff person with some financial 
background about one hour per plan to 
consolidate the information from 
multiple sources for the comparative 
chart. Using a wage rate of about $60 for 
such an employee, results in estimated 
costs for the consolidation of fee 
information from multiple sources of 
approximately $26 million for 2009 as 
shown in Table 8. 
TABLE 8.—COST OF CONSOLIDATION OF FEE INFORMATION 
Year 
Number of 
participant-di-
rected plans 
Average plan 
staff time (hours) 
required to 
consolidate fee 
information from 
multiple sources 
for comparative 
format 
Accountant 
hourly labor cost 
(in 2009 dollars) 
Cost of consoli-
dation of fee 
information for 
comparative 
format 
(A) (B) (C) (A * B * C) 
2009 ................................................................................................. 437,000 1 $60 $26,290,000 
Total Undiscounted Costs ........................................................ ............................ ............................ ............................ 26,290,000 
Note: The displayed numbers are rounded to the nearest thousand and therefore may not add up to the totals. 
Costs of Distribution and Materials Due 
to the Disclosure of Plan and Fee 
Information 
These disclosures must be sent to 
plan participants on an annual or 
quarterly basis.31 The Department 
assumes that it takes clerical staff two 
additional minutes to assemble and 
send out disclosures. The Department 
also assumes that 38% of disclosures 
will be sent electronically and therefore 
require only a de minimis amount of 
time to prepare. With wage rates of 
about $26 for clerical personnel, these 
dissemination labor costs are estimated 
at $35.1 million in 2009, as shown in 
Table 9. 
Following a participant’s investment 
in an investment alternative, the plan 
must provide any materials it receives 
regarding voting, tender or similar rights 
in the alternative (‘‘pass-through 
materials’’) (29 CFR 2550.404a–5(d)(3)). 
This information is already required for 
404(c) compliant plans and by the 
Department’s Qualified Default 
Investment Alternative regulation. In 
addition, a large majority of plans 
voluntarily provide this information to 
its participants. As a result only an 
estimated number of 699,000 
participants will be receiving this 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 19:17 Jul 22, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00012 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\23JYP3.SGM 23JYP3pw
al
ke
r o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
71
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
43025 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 142 / Wednesday, July 23, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
32 The proposed regulation would amend the 
regulation under ERISA section 404(c), 29 CFR 
2550.404c–1, to make the disclosure requirements 
for section 404(c) compliant plans consistent with 
those that would apply to participant directed 
individual account plans generally. The Department 
assumes for purposes of the economic and 
paperwork analysis that the disclosure costs of 
404(c) compliant plans under the amended 
regulation would be similar to those absent the 
proposed regulation. 
33 The postage rate for First-Class Mail is 
increasing to $0.42 as of May 12, 2008 (http:// 
pe.usps.com/2008_RateCase/RateCharts/R08_Rate_
Charts.htm). 
information for the first time because of 
the proposed regulation. 
The Department assumes that clerical 
staff will prepare and send the required 
materials. It may take the clerical staff 
on average one and one-half minutes to 
prepare and mail the post-investment 
materials. The Department assumes that 
this information will be sent annually 
resulting in nearly 699,000 disclosures. 
The Department expects that 38 percent 
of the disclosures will be sent 
electronically. Table 9 reports the cost 
of $283,000 to prepare and send the 
required post-investment information. 
TABLE 9.—COST OF DISTRIBUTING DISCLOSURES 
Type of disclosure 
Number of 
disclosures to 
be sent 
Percentage of 
disclosures not 
transmitted via 
e-mail 
Hourly labor 
cost (in 2009 
dollars) 
Hours per 
disclosure 
Materials costs 
for distribution 
of disclosures 
(A) (B) (C) (D) (A * B * C * D) 
Annual Disclosures 65,269,000 62 $26.07 0.033 $35,166,000 
Pass-Though Materials ........................................................ 699,000 62 26.07 0.025 283,000 
Total Undiscounted Costs ............................................ ........................ ........................ ........................ ........................ 35,448,000 
Note: The displayed numbers are rounded to the nearest thousand and therefore may not add up to the totals. 
In addition to labor costs associated 
with the disclosure, plans will also bear 
materials and postage costs. The annual 
disclosure is assumed to include 13 
pages for plans that are not already 
providing disclosures similar to section 
404(c) disclosures. Plans already 
providing section 404(c) compliant or 
similar disclosures are assumed to 
already be making annual disclosure of 
information and are therefore assumed 
to need to add only three pages of 
additional information to what they are 
already disclosing to participants.32 The 
pass-through information is assumed to 
be ten pages and sent on an annual basis 
to plan participants as described above. 
Paper and printing costs are assumed to 
be $0.05 a page and mailing costs to be 
$0.42.33 It is further assumed that 38 
percent of statements will be available 
electronically. In total, this leads to an 
estimate for materials and postage of 
$8.2 million in 2009 for the annual 
disclosures as shown in Table 10 and 
$473,000 for the post-investment pass- 
through information as shown in Table 
11. 
TABLE 10.—ANNUAL DISCLOSURES MATERIALS AND POSTAGE COSTS (2009) 
Type of plan 
Number of 
(affected) 
participants in 
participant-di-
rected 
accounts 
Percentage of 
disclosures not 
transmitted via 
e-mail 
Number of 
pages for 
annual disclo-
sure 
Paper and 
printing cost 
per page 
Mailing costs 
Materials costs 
for distribution 
of disclosures 
(A) (B) (C) (D) (E) (A * B) 
* (C * D + E) 
404(c) Plans and Plans with Similar 
Information ........................................ 62,058,000 62 3 $0.05 $0.00 $5,771,000 
Non-404(c) Plans without Similar Infor-
mation ............................................... 3,211,000 62 13 0.05 0.59 2,468,000 
Total Undiscounted Costs ............ ............................ ........................ ........................ ........................ ........................ 8,240,000 
Note: The displayed numbers are rounded to the nearest thousand and therefore may not add up to the totals. 
TABLE 11.—PASS-THROUGH MATERIALS AND POSTAGE COSTS (2009) 
Number of disclosures to be sent 
Percentage of 
disclosures not 
transmitted via 
e-mail 
Number of 
pages for 
annual disclo-
sure 
Paper and 
printing cost 
per page 
Mailing costs 
Materials costs 
for distribution 
of disclosures 
(A) (B) (C) (D) (E) (A * B) 
* (C * D + E) 
699,000 ............................................................................ 62 10 $0.05 $0.59 $473,000 
Total Undiscounted Costs ........................................ ............................ ........................ ........................ ........................ 473,000 
Note: The displayed numbers are rounded to the nearest thousand and therefore may not add up to the totals. 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 20:49 Jul 22, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00013 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\23JYP3.SGM 23JYP3pw
al
ke
r o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
71
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
43026 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 142 / Wednesday, July 23, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
34 The survey defines small employers as those 
having up to 100 full-time workers. Other reasons 
small employers do not offer a retirement plan are 
that workers prefer wages or other benefits, that a 
large portion of employees are seasonal, part-time, 
or high turnover, and that revenue is too low or 
uncertain. See http://www.ebri.org/surveys/sers for 
more detail. 
35 The clerical time to distribute disclosures 
remains unchanged in this sensitivity analysis. 
In total, the Department estimates that 
in 2009 participant-directed plans incur 
increased administrative costs of 
approximately $127 million. 
(b) Discouragement of Some Employers 
From Sponsoring a Retirement Plan 
Increased administrative burdens may 
discourage some employers, particularly 
small employers, from sponsoring a 
retirement plan. For small plan 
sponsors, the administrative burden is 
felt disproportionately because of their 
limited resources. Small business 
owners who do not have the resources 
to analyze plan fees or to hire an analyst 
may be discouraged from offering a plan 
at all. 
Regulatory burden is one among many 
reasons for small businesses not to 
sponsor a retirement plan. According to 
the 2000, 2001, and 2002 Employee 
Benefit Research Institute (EBRI)’s Small 
Employer Retirement Surveys, about 2.7 
percent of small employers cited ‘‘too 
many government regulations’’ as the 
most important reason for not offering a 
retirement plan.34 Due to very limited 
data in this area, the Department is not 
able to quantitatively estimate this 
impact. The Department seeks 
comments on the extent to which this 
proposal discourages small employers 
from offering retirement plans. 
(c) Summary of Costs 
The quantified total costs of the 
proposed regulation include costs due 
to the increased administrative burden. 
Columns (A) and (B) of Table 12 below 
show the estimated costs of up-front 
review of the regulation and updating of 
plan documents. Column (C) shows the 
costs of producing quarterly Dollar 
amounts for administrative fees charged 
to participant accounts. The largest cost 
of the regulation, though, results from 
the disclosure of the administrative 
expenses and investment-related fees 
that may be charged to participants’ 
accounts—the consolidation of fee 
information costs, and the distribution 
and material costs as can be seen in 
columns (D), (E), and (F). Table 12 
reports that the total present value of 
these costs is estimated at $759 million 
over the ten-year period. 
TABLE 12.—TOTAL DISCOUNTED COSTS OF PROPOSAL 
Year Up-front review cost 
Update plan 
documents 
Consolidation 
of fee 
information 
Production of 
quarterly dollar 
amount 
disclosures 
Distribution 
materials costs 
Staff cost to 
distribute 
disclosures 
Total costs 
(A) (B) (C) (D) (E) (F) (A + B + C 
+ D + E + F) 
2009 ......................... $30,323,000 0 $26,290,000 $26,543,000 $8,713,000 $35,448,000 $127,317,000 
2010 ......................... 3,840,000 $12,250,000 24,570,000 8,743,000 8,143,000 33,129,000 90,675,000 
2011 ......................... 3,589,000 11,448,000 22,963,000 8,171,000 7,610,000 30,962,000 84,743,000 
2012 ......................... 3,353,000 10,699,000 21,461,000 7,637,000 7,112,000 28,936,000 79,199,000 
2013 ......................... 3,134,000 9,999,000 20,057,000 7,137,000 6,647,000 27,043,000 74,018,000 
2014 ......................... 2,929,000 9,345,000 18,745,000 6,670,000 6,212,000 25,274,000 69,176,000 
2015 ......................... 2,738,000 8,734,000 17,518,000 6,234,000 5,806,000 23,621,000 64,650,000 
2016 ......................... 2,559,000 8,162,000 16,372,000 5,826,000 5,426,000 22,075,000 60,421,000 
2017 ......................... 2,391,000 7,628,000 15,301,000 5,445,000 5,071,000 20,631,000 56,468,000 
2018 ......................... 2,234,000 7,129,000 14,300,000 5,089,000 4,739,000 19,281,000 52,774,000 
Total with 7% Discounting ............................................................................................................................................................ 759,440,000 
Total with 3% Discounting ............................................................................................................................................................ 880,339,000 
Note: The displayed numbers are rounded to the nearest thousand and therefore may not add up to the totals. 
Summary 
As shown in Table 1 above, the 
Department concludes that the 
estimated benefits ($6.9 billion) of the 
proposed regulation outweigh its 
estimated costs ($759 million) by almost 
$6.1 billion over the ten-year period. 
Uncertainty 
Although the Department sought to 
anchor its analysis on empirical 
evidence, there are a number of 
variables that are subject to uncertainty. 
While the Department is confident that 
increased fee disclosures can induce 
changes in participant behavior and 
reductions in plan fees, it is uncertain 
about the exact magnitude of these 
changes. The variables with the most 
uncertainty in the analysis are: 
• The percentage of plan fees that 
could be saved, 
• The percentage of participants that 
would save search time for fee 
information, 
• The amount of search time saved 
per participant, 
• The time required for legal 
professionals, clerical professionals 35 
and accountants to perform their tasks, 
• And the cost to obtain the actual 
dollar amounts of participant’s plan and 
administrative expenses. 
To estimate the influence of these 
variables on the analysis, the 
Department re-estimated the costs and 
benefits of the proposed regulation 
under different assumptions for these 
uncertain variables. 
Table 13 presents the effects of 
changing the variables of interest. The 
first two variables on the list were 
decreased, while the remaining 
variables were increased. Changing the 
variables of concern by 25 percent still 
resulted in a net present value of $5.1 
billion. Changing the variables by 50 
percent still resulted in a net present 
value of $3.6 billion. Even after 
changing the key variables by 75 percent 
the net present value of the proposed 
regulation was $1.5 billion. The 
Department, however, does not believe 
that a change of 75% in these variables 
is a very likely scenario. 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 21:24 Jul 22, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00014 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\23JYP3.SGM 23JYP3pw
al
ke
r o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
71
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
43027 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 142 / Wednesday, July 23, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
36 However, the Department recognizes that many 
plan participants in participant-directed individual 
account plans that choose not to comply with all 
of the section 404(c) requirements are receiving 
similar information to what they would receive if 
the plans had chosen to comply with all 
requirements of section 404(c). 
37 Under the proposal, plans would be required to 
disclose specified identifying information, past 
performance data, comparable benchmark returns, 
and fee and expense information for each 
investment alternative. Under the existing 404(c) 
rule, plans only have to provide past performance 
data and operating expense information directly or 
upon request and benchmark returns do not have 
to be provided. 
TABLE 13.—SENSITIVITY OF BENEFITS AND COSTS TO KEY VARIABLES 
Percent change in variables Benefits ($millions/ year) 
Costs ($millions/ 
year) 
Net present value 
($millions/year) 
25 ......................................................................................................................... 6,013 866 5,147 
50 ......................................................................................................................... 4,579 973 3,606 
75 ......................................................................................................................... 2,575 1,080 1,495 
Note: The displayed numbers are rounded to the nearest million. 
Regulatory Alternatives 
Executive Order 12866 directs Federal 
Agencies promulgating regulations to 
evaluate regulatory alternatives. The 
Department considered the following 
alternatives to the proposed regulation, 
and will also briefly discuss the status 
quo baseline: 
• Extending the existing section 
404(c) regulation disclosure 
requirements to all participant-directed 
individual account plans; 
• Establishing a general, nonspecific 
disclosure requirement; or 
• Requiring more extensive and 
detailed disclosures. 
These alternatives, and the status quo 
baseline, are described further below: 
• Keeping the status quo 
OMB Circular A–4 recommends that 
‘‘benefits and costs are defined in 
comparison with a clearly stated 
alternative. This normally will be a ’no 
action’ baseline: what the world will be 
like if the proposed rule is not 
adopted.’’ The Department followed this 
recommendation, and weighed the 
option of keeping the status quo and 
relying on the current regulatory 
framework. By definition, as the 
regulatory baseline, this ‘‘alternative’’ 
would have zero costs and benefits; 
however, the Department feels it is 
useful to briefly describe the status quo, 
and the reasons for rejecting it in favor 
of a regulation, before we discuss 
regulatory alternatives. As stated above, 
regulations already exist specifying the 
information that must be provided to 
participants of 404(c) compliant plans 
in order to relieve plan fiduciaries of 
responsibility for participant investment 
decisions (see § 2550.404c–1(b)(2)(i)(B)). 
Many of the proposal’s disclosures are 
identical or similar to the required 
disclosures of section 404(c) and the 
regulations issued thereunder. However, 
compliance with section 404(c) is 
elective and according to 2005 Form 
5500 data only about 275,000 plans 
covering 49 million participants and 
beneficiaries make this election. About 
16 million participants and beneficiaries 
are participating in 49,000 participant- 
directed individual account plans that 
are choosing not to be section 404(c) 
compliant and a significant number of 
these individuals may not receive 
disclosures in compliance with section 
404(c), and, therefore, may not receive 
the information the Department believes 
they need to make informed account 
management and investment 
decisions.36 More importantly, the 
section 404(c) disclosure of investment- 
related information is not required to be 
in a comparative format that encourages 
and facilitates review by plan 
participants and beneficiaries. Neither 
does such a requirement exist for any 
other type of participant-directed 
individual account plan. 
• Extending the existing 404(c) 
disclosure requirements to all 
participant-directed individual account 
plans 
The Department considered requiring 
all participant-directed individual 
account plans to comply with section 
404(c) and the regulations issued 
thereunder. This would not have 
required any additional disclosures to 
participants in existing section 404(c) 
compliant plans, and, therefore, may 
have required less extensive effort by 
such plans, such as review of the 
proposed regulation and development of 
materials in order to come into 
compliance. Participants and 
Beneficiaries, however, would also not 
have had the benefit of receiving critical 
information in a comparative chart.37 
Compared to the status quo, only 
participants in participant-directed 
individual account plans that do not 
receive similar information to the 
required 404(c) disclosures would 
experience additional benefits by 
extending the existing 404(c) 
disclosures. As noted above, the 
Department assumes that only 20% of 
the participants of plans that are 
presently not choosing to be section 
404(c) compliant are not receiving 
similar information. These participants 
would experience benefits from a 
reduction in fees (5% of 0.113% of their 
assets, as shown in Table 14 below) and 
from a reduction in their search time 
(0.5 hour for 29% of the affected 
participants, as shown in Table 15 
below). This would lead to annual 
benefits of approximately $8.1 million 
due to the reduction in fees and of about 
$14.6 million for the reduction in 
participant search time. In total, benefits 
add up to about $22.8 million, a much 
smaller amount than the expected 
benefits of the proposal. 
TABLE 14.—ANNUAL BENEFITS DUE TO MANDATORY 404(C) COMPLIANCE, REDUCTION IN FEES 
Type of plan 
Total amount 
of assets in 
affected plans 
(in millions of 
2009 dollars) 
Basis points of 
higher than 
necessary 
fees 
Percent cor-
rection due to 
404(c) disclo-
sure 
Benefits from 
reduction in 
fees due to 
404(c) disclo-
sures 
(A) (B) (C) (A * B * C) 
Non-404(c) Plans without Similar Information ................................................. 144,000 0.11% 5% $8,162,000 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 19:17 Jul 22, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00015 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\23JYP3.SGM 23JYP3pw
al
ke
r o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
71
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
43028 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 142 / Wednesday, July 23, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
38 In subsequent years, these costs fall on newly 
created 404(c) plans and reduced costs for updates 
are expected for existing 404(c) plans. 
TABLE 14.—ANNUAL BENEFITS DUE TO MANDATORY 404(C) COMPLIANCE, REDUCTION IN FEES—Continued 
Type of plan 
Total amount 
of assets in 
affected plans 
(in millions of 
2009 dollars) 
Basis points of 
higher than 
necessary 
fees 
Percent cor-
rection due to 
404(c) disclo-
sure 
Benefits from 
reduction in 
fees due to 
404(c) disclo-
sures 
(A) (B) (C) (A * B * C) 
Total Undiscounted Benefits .................................................................... ........................ ........................ ........................ 8,162,000 
Note: The displayed numbers are rounded to the nearest thousand and therefore may not add up to the totals. 
TABLE 15.—ANNUAL BENEFITS DUE TO MANDATORY 404(C) COMPLIANCE, REDUCED PARTICIPANT SEARCH TIME 
Type of plan 
Number of 
(affected) 
participants in 
participant-di-
rected ac-
counts 
Percentage of 
participants 
predicted to 
make a 
change in 
allocation to 
lower 
fee invest-
ments 
Number of 
search hours 
saved by 
participant 
Average 
hourly value of 
participants’ 
leisure time (in 
2009 dollars) 
Total benefits 
from reduced 
participant 
search time 
due to 404(c) 
disclosures 
(A) (B) (C) (D) (A * B * C * D) 
Non-404(c) Plans without Similar Information ..................... 3,211,000 29% 0.5 $31.33 $14,590,000 
Total Undiscounted Benefits ......................................... ........................ ........................ ........................ ........................ 14,590,000 
Note: The displayed numbers are rounded to the nearest thousand and therefore may not add up to the totals. 
Additional costs for review, update 
and preparation of related information, 
as compared to the status quo, would 
fall on all participant-directed 
individual account plans that are 
presently not choosing to comply with 
section 404(c).38 The Department 
estimates that these costs would amount 
to about $11.3 million in the first year 
and would fall to $9.0 million in 
subsequent years, as shown in Table 16 
below. 
TABLE 16.—ANNUAL COSTS DUE TO ADDITIONAL REVIEW, UPDATE, AND PREPARATION OF PLAN RELATED INFORMATION 
Type of plan 
Number of 
affected 
participant-di-
rected plans 
Legal 
professional 
hours 
required to re-
view each plan 
Hourly labor 
cost for legal 
professional 
(in 2009 dol-
lars) 
Clerical 
professional 
hours required 
to prepare 
plan 
documents 
Hourly labor 
cost for 
clerical 
professional 
(in 2009 dol-
lars) 
Review cost 
(A) (B) (C) (D) (E) (A * B * C) + 
(A * D * E) 
First Year (2009) 
Existing and New Plans .................... 162,000 0.5 $113 0.5 $26 $11,250,000 
Total Undiscounted Costs First 
Year ........................................ ........................ ........................ ........................ ........................ ........................ 11,250,000 
Subsequent Years, Annually 
Existing Plans ................................... 140,000 0.25 $113 0.25 $26 $4,863,000 
New Plans ......................................... 59,000 0.5 113 0.5 26 4,109,000 
Total Undiscounted Costs Sub-
sequent Years ........................ ........................ ........................ ........................ ........................ ........................ 8,971,000 
Note: The displayed numbers are rounded to the nearest thousand and therefore may not add up to the totals. 
In addition to costs for review, 
updating, and preparation of 
information, plans would also incur 
material and postage costs and labor 
costs for sending out the required 
disclosures to participants that 
presently are not receiving similar 
information and would receive the 
disclosures by mail, rather than via 
electronic means. As shown in Table 17 
and Table 18 below, the Department 
estimates postage and material costs of 
about $2.6 million and labor costs of 
about $2 million. 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 19:17 Jul 22, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00016 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\23JYP3.SGM 23JYP3pw
al
ke
r o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
71
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
43029 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 142 / Wednesday, July 23, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
TABLE 17.—ANNUAL COSTS FOR ANNUAL ADDITIONAL DISCLOSURES MATERIALS AND POSTAGE AND PASS-THROUGH 
MATERIALS 
Type of plan 
Number of 
(affected) 
participants in 
participant-di-
rected ac-
counts 
Percentage of 
disclosures not 
transmitted via 
e-mail (per-
cent) 
Number of 
pages for an-
nual disclosure 
Paper and 
printing cost 
per page 
Mailing costs 
Materials costs 
for distribution 
of disclosures 
(A) (B) (C) (D) (E) (A * B) * 
(C * D + E) 
Annual Disclosures .................................. 3,211,000 62 10 $0.05 $0.59 $2,170,000 
Pass Through Material ............................. 699,000 62 10 0.05 0.59 473,000 
Total Undiscounted Costs ................ ........................ ........................ ........................ ........................ ........................ 2,643,000 
Note: The displayed numbers are rounded to the nearest thousand and therefore may not add up to the totals. 
TABLE 18.—ANNUAL COSTS OF ADDITIONAL DISTRIBUTING DISCLOSURES 
Type of disclosure 
Number of dis-
closures to be 
sent 
Percentage of 
disclosures not 
transmitted via 
e-mail 
(percent) 
Hourly labor 
cost (in 2009 
dollars) 
Hours per dis-
closure 
Materials costs 
for distribution 
of disclosures 
(A) (B) (C) (D) (A * B * C * D) 
Annual Disclosures .............................................................. 3,211,000 62 $26 0.033 $1,730,000 
Pass-Though Materials ........................................................ 699,000 62 26 0.025 283,000 
Total Undiscounted Costs ..................................... ........................ ........................ ........................ ........................ 2,013,000 
Note: The displayed numbers are rounded to the nearest thousand and therefore may not add up to the totals. 
Table 19 below shows the annual 
costs and benefits and Table 20 below 
presents the net present benefit. The 
Department estimates that extending the 
existing 404(c) requirements would 
have resulted in ten-year costs of about 
$105 million and benefits of 
approximately $171 million. The ten- 
year net present value would have been 
about $66 million (in 2009 dollars). 
TABLE 19.—ADDITIONAL BENEFITS AND COSTS OF MANDATORY 404(C) COMPLIANCE FOR ALL PARTICIPANT-DIRECTED 
INDIVIDUAL ACCOUNT PLANS 
2009 Annual 2010–2018 Annual 
Benefits 
Fee Reduction .................................................................................................................................................. $8,162,000 $8,162,000 
Reduction in Participant Search Time .............................................................................................................. 14,590,000 14,590,000 
Total Benefits ............................................................................................................................................ 22,752,000 22,752,000 
Costs 
Review, Update, and Preparation of Documents ............................................................................................. 11,250,000 8,971,000 
Annual Disclosures and Pass-Through Information ......................................................................................... 2,643,000 2,643,000 
Distribution ........................................................................................................................................................ 2,013,000 2,013,000 
Total Costs ................................................................................................................................................ 15,905,000 13,627,000 
Net Benefits in 2009 ................................................................................................................................................ 6,847,000 ........................
Note: The displayed numbers are rounded to the nearest thousand and therefore may not add up to the totals. 
TABLE 20.—TOTAL (ADDITIONAL) DISCOUNTED BENEFITS OF THE ALTERNATIVE 
Year 
Additional 
benefits from 
extending 
404(c), 7% 
discounting 
Additional 
costs from 
extending 
404(c), 7% 
discounting 
Additional net 
benefits, 7% 
discounting 
(A) (B) (A¥B) 
2009 ............................................................................................................................................. $22,752,000 $15,905,000 $6,847,000 
2010 ............................................................................................................................................. 21,264,000 12,736,000 8,528,000 
2011 ............................................................................................................................................. 19,873,000 11,902,000 7,970,000 
2012 ............................................................................................................................................. 18,573,000 11,124,000 7,449,000 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 19:17 Jul 22, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00017 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\23JYP3.SGM 23JYP3pw
al
ke
r o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
71
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
43030 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 142 / Wednesday, July 23, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
39 Under ERISA section 104(a)(3), the Secretary 
may also provide exemptions or simplified 
reporting and disclosure requirements for welfare 
benefit plans. Pursuant to the authority of ERISA 
section 104(a)(3), the Department has previously 
issued at 29 CFR 2520.104–20, 2520.104–21, 
2520.104–41, 2520.104–46, and 2520.104b–10 
certain simplified reporting provisions and limited 
exemptions from reporting and disclosure 
requirements for small plans, including unfunded 
or insured welfare plans, that cover fewer than 100 
participants and satisfy certain other requirements. 
TABLE 20.—TOTAL (ADDITIONAL) DISCOUNTED BENEFITS OF THE ALTERNATIVE—Continued 
Year 
Additional 
benefits from 
extending 
404(c), 7% 
discounting 
Additional 
costs from 
extending 
404(c), 7% 
discounting 
Additional net 
benefits, 7% 
discounting 
(A) (B) (A¥B) 
2013 ............................................................................................................................................. 17,358,000 10,396,000 6,962,000 
2014 ............................................................................................................................................. 16,222,000 9,716,000 6,506,000 
2015 ............................................................................................................................................. 15,161,000 9,080,000 6,081,000 
2016 ............................................................................................................................................. 14,169,000 8,486,000 5,683,000 
2017 ............................................................................................................................................. 13,242,000 7,931,000 5,311,000 
2018 ............................................................................................................................................. 12,376,000 7,412,000 4,964,000 
Total with 7% Discounting .................................................................................................... 170,989,000 104,689,000 66,301,000 
Total with 3% Discounting .................................................................................................... 199,905,000 122,007,000 77,898,000 
Note: The displayed numbers are rounded to the nearest thousand and therefore may not add up to the totals. 
• Establishing a general non-specific 
disclosure requirement 
The Department considered 
establishing a general, non-specific 
disclosure rule requiring that plan 
fiduciaries take steps to ensure that 
participants and beneficiaries of 
participant-directed individual account 
plans are provided sufficient 
information to make informed decisions 
about the management of their 
individual accounts without further 
specifying what information would have 
to be disclosed. This alternative would 
have provided fiduciaries with more 
flexibility in providing disclosures to 
participants and beneficiaries, but may 
have also created uncertainty as to the 
scope of the required disclosures. It is 
possible that the costs to fiduciaries, 
and consequently plans, would be lower 
than the costs under the proposed 
regulation, but not all participants and 
beneficiaries may have received the 
critical information required under the 
proposed regulation. This approach also 
may have had the negative effect of 
having fiduciaries err on the side of 
being conservative and providing more, 
but not necessarily useful or 
meaningful, information to plan 
participants, creating a disincentive for 
participants and beneficiaries to review 
the furnished material. 
• Requiring more extensive and 
detailed disclosures 
The Department considered requiring 
more extensive and detailed prospectus- 
like disclosure of investment-related 
information to participants and 
beneficiaries. However, based on a 
review of RFI comments and the 
Commission’s summary prospectus 
initiative, the Department concluded 
that a user-friendly summary of key 
information would be more beneficial 
than more extensive and detailed 
disclosures. In this regard, the 
Department attempted to define the 
most essential information about 
available investment options that 
should be automatically furnished in a 
comparative format to participants and 
beneficiaries, and included that 
information in the proposal. That 
information includes historical and 
benchmark performance, and fees and 
expenses. In addition, the Department 
considered including information on 
risk, but believes that risk information is 
not easily translated into a simple 
uniform comparative format that can be 
described in a regulatory standard. The 
Department notes that in most cases 
more detailed information, including 
information on risk is readily available 
to participants and beneficiaries through 
Internet Web sites, should they decide 
to review such information in assessing 
the various investment options available 
under their plan. Importantly, under the 
proposed regulation participants and 
beneficiaries will be advised that risks 
exist, and will be directed and 
encouraged to review more detailed 
information prior to making decisions 
concerning the investment options most 
appropriate for them. The Department 
invites comments on any additional 
information that should be required. 
Regulatory Flexibility Act 
The Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 
U.S.C. 601 et seq.) (RFA) imposes 
certain requirements with respect to 
Federal rules that are subject to the 
notice and comment requirements of 
section 553(b) of the Administrative 
Procedure Act (5 U.S.C. 551 et seq.) and 
that are likely to have a significant 
economic impact on a substantial 
number of small entities. Unless an 
agency certifies that a proposed rule 
will not, if promulgated, have a 
significant economic impact on a 
substantial number of small entities, 
section 603 of the RFA requires that the 
agency present an initial regulatory 
flexibility analysis at the time of the 
publication of the notice of proposed 
rulemaking describing the impact of the 
rule on small entities and seeking public 
comment on such impact. Small entities 
include small businesses, organizations, 
and governmental jurisdictions. For 
purposes of analysis under the RFA, 
EBSA proposes to continue to consider 
a small entity to be an employee benefit 
plan with fewer than 100 participants. 
The basis of this definition is found in 
section 104(a)(2) of ERISA, which 
permits the Secretary to prescribe 
simplified annual reports for pension 
plans that cover fewer than 100 
participants.39 
Further, while some large employers 
may have small plans, in general small 
employers maintain most small plans. 
Thus, EBSA believes that assessing the 
impact of these proposed rules on small 
plans is an appropriate substitute for 
evaluating the effect on small entities. 
The definition of small entity 
considered appropriate for this purpose 
differs, however, from a definition of 
small business that is based on size 
standards promulgated by the Small 
Business Administration (SBA) (13 CFR 
121.201) pursuant to the Small Business 
Act (15 U.S.C. 631 et seq.). EBSA 
therefore requests comments on the 
appropriateness of the size standard 
used in evaluating the impact of these 
proposed rules on small entities. EBSA 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 19:17 Jul 22, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00018 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\23JYP3.SGM 23JYP3pw
al
ke
r o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
71
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
43031 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 142 / Wednesday, July 23, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
has consulted with the SBA Office of 
Advocacy concerning use of this 
participant count standard for RFA 
purposes. See 13 CFR 121.902(b)(4). 
The Department prepared an initial 
RFA of the proposal because, although 
the Department considers it unlikely 
that the rule will have a significant 
effect on a substantial number of small 
plans, the Department does not have 
enough information to certify to that 
effect. The following subsections 
address specific requirements of the 
RFA. 
(a) Reasons for and Objectives of the 
Proposal 
A growing number of workers are 
preparing for retirement by participating 
in participant-directed plans that are 
governed by ERISA. Key determinants 
of the return on an investment include 
the fees and expenses paid. This 
proposal is intended to improve the 
information that is available to 
participants in participant-directed 
individual account plans and thereby 
enable participants to make good 
investment decisions. 
The reasons for and objectives of this 
proposed regulation are discussed in 
detail in Section A of this preamble, 
‘‘Background,’’ and in section ‘‘Need for 
Regulatory Action’’ of the Regulatory 
Impact analysis (RIA) above. The legal 
basis for the proposal is set forth in the 
‘‘Authority’’ section of this preamble, 
below. 
(b) Estimating Compliance 
Requirements for Small Entities/Plans 
The Department believes that the 
effects of this proposed regulation will 
be to increase retirement savings by 
reducing investment fees paid by 
participants. The Department also 
believes that small plans will benefit 
from the proposal, because it will clarify 
what information must be disclosed to 
plan participants. 
While small and large plans will incur 
administrative costs due to the proposed 
regulation, these costs are reasonable 
compared to the benefits and will 
probably be borne by the participants 
who will also receive the benefits of the 
proposed regulation. From industry 
comments, the Department inferred that 
participants in larger plans more often 
than participants in smaller plans have 
access to needed investment 
information. The Department believes 
that participants in small plans need as 
much information about their plan 
investments as participants in larger 
plans. 
Some expenses, like the legal review 
of the proposal that plans may incur due 
to the disclosure requirements of the 
regulation do not increase 
proportionally with plan size. 
Nonetheless, it is possible that small 
plans incur smaller costs per participant 
than larger plans. In general, small plans 
offer fewer and less complex plan 
investment options than large plans. 
Less complex plan investments require 
less extensive disclosures and make 
disclosures less expensive. Thus, it is 
possible that smaller plans will 
experience lower per-participant 
disclosure costs than larger plans. The 
Department invites comments on the 
validity of this hypothesis. 
Assuming that the plan incurs the 
average costs for all disclosure activities 
that are considered in the RIA section 
above, the following calculation 
illustrates how large the costs of the 
disclosures would be for a very small 
plan (one-participant plan). As can be 
seen in Table 21, the total cost of 
compliance for a one-participant plan 
amounts to less than $134 in the first 
year and less than that amount in the 
subsequent years. The costs in 2009 
include a review cost of about $69 per 
plan (one-half hour of a legal 
professional’s time plus one-half hour of 
a clerical professional’s time), labor 
costs of $60 for consolidating the 
information for the comparative chart 
(one hour), costs of on average $0.40 per 
participant for record keeping and 
disclosure of information, additional 
annual labor cost for distribution of 
$0.90 in section 404(c) compliant plans 
or plans that already provide similar 
information ($1.50 in plans that do not 
already provide section 404(c) 
compliant or similar information), and 
material and postage costs of $0.15 in 
404(c) compliant plans or plans that 
already provide similar information 
($2.30 in plans that do not already 
provide section 404(c) compliant or 
similar information). 
TABLE 21.—COSTS FOR ONE-PARTICIPANT PLAN (UNDISCOUNTED) 
Type of cost 
404(c) plans and plans with 
similar information 
Non-404(c) plans without simi-
lar information 
Initial 
year 
Subsequent 
year 
Initial 
year 
Subsequent 
year 
Plan Review ..................................................................................................... $69.00 $35.00 $69.00 $35.00 
Consolidation of Information ............................................................................ 60.00 60.00 60.00 60.00 
Actual Dollar Disclosure .................................................................................. 0.40 0.15 0.40 0.15 
Labor Cost for Distribution ............................................................................... 0.90 0.90 1.50 1.50 
Material Cost .................................................................................................... 0.15 0.15 2.30 2.30 
Total .......................................................................................................... 131.00 96.00 134.00 99.00 
Note: The displayed numbers are rounded to the nearest thousand and therefore may not add up to the totals. 
(c) Considered Alternatives 
The Department considered several 
alternatives that would have required 
broader or narrower disclosures and 
which in turn would have increased or 
decreased the burden on plans. 
Exempting small plans from the 
disclosure requirements or limiting the 
disclosures from small plans would 
have reduced the costs small plans may 
incur, but would have also failed to 
ensure that participants in small plans 
receive the information that they need 
to make good investment decisions. 
(d) Duplicative, Overlapping, and 
Conflicting Rules 
ERISA section 404(c) and the 
regulations thereunder contain 
disclosure requirements for plan 
fiduciaries of certain participant- 
directed account plans that are to some 
extent similar to the ones that are 
contained in the proposed regulation. 
As explained in more detail in section 
‘‘A. Background’’ of this preamble the 
Department amended the regulations 
under section 404(c) in order to 
establish a uniform set of basic 
disclosure requirements and to ensure 
that all participants and beneficiaries in 
participant-directed individual account 
plans have access to the same 
investment-related information. 
In addition, the Department has 
consulted the Securities and Exchange 
Commission to avoid duplicative, 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 19:17 Jul 22, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00019 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\23JYP3.SGM 23JYP3pw
al
ke
r o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
71
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
43032 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 142 / Wednesday, July 23, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
40 See 29 CFR 2550.404c–1. The information 
collection provisions of the NPRM impose new 
hour and cost burdens on all participant directed 
individual account plans, and the Department 
intends to include the burden imposed by the 
proposal on 404(c) and not-404(c) compliant 
participant directed individual account plans under 
one control number. 
41 All numbers stated in this document have been 
rounded to the nearest 1,000. Any apparent 
discrepancy in the calculations described here is 
due to this rounding. 
overlapping, or conflicting 
requirements. 
The Department is unaware of any 
additional relevant federal rules for 
small plans that duplicate, overlap, or 
conflict with these proposed 
regulations. 
(e) Comments 
The Department invites interested 
persons to submit comments regarding 
the impact on small plans of the 
proposed regulation and on the 
Department’s assessment thereof. The 
Department also requests comments on 
the alternatives considered and its 
conclusions regarding those 
alternatives; on any additional 
alternatives it should have considered; 
on what, if any, special problems small 
plans might encounter if the proposal 
were to be adopted; and what changes, 
if any, could be made to minimize those 
problems. 
Paperwork Reduction Act 
As part of its continuing effort to 
reduce paperwork and respondent 
burden, the Department of Labor 
conducts a pre-clearance consultation 
program to provide the general public 
and Federal agencies with an 
opportunity to comment on proposed 
and continuing collections of 
information in accordance with the 
Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 (PRA 
95) (44 U.S.C. 3506(c)(2)(A)). This helps 
to ensure that the public understands 
the Department’s collection 
instructions; respondents can provide 
the requested data in the desired format, 
reporting burden (time and financial 
resources) is minimized, collection 
instruments are clearly understood, and 
the Department can properly assess the 
impact of collection requirements on 
respondents. 
Currently, the Department is soliciting 
comments concerning the proposed 
information collection request (ICR) 
included in the proposed regulation. A 
copy of the ICR may be obtained by 
contacting the PRA addressee shown 
below or at http://www.RegInfo.gov. 
The Department has submitted a copy 
of the proposed regulation to OMB in 
accordance with 44 U.S.C. 3507(d) for 
review of its information collections. 
The Department and OMB are 
particularly interested in comments 
that: 
• Evaluate whether the collection of 
information is necessary for the proper 
performance of the functions of the 
agency, including whether the 
information will have practical utility; 
• Evaluate the accuracy of the 
agency’s estimate of the burden of the 
collection of information, including the 
validity of the methodology and 
assumptions used; 
• Enhance the quality, utility, and 
clarity of the information to be 
collected; and 
• Minimize the burden of the 
collection of information on those who 
are to respond, including through the 
use of appropriate automated, 
electronic, mechanical, or other 
technological collection techniques or 
other forms of information technology, 
e.g., permitting electronic submission of 
responses. 
Comments should be sent to the 
Office of Information and Regulatory 
Affairs, Office of Management and 
Budget, Room 10235, New Executive 
Office Building, Washington, DC 20503; 
Attention: Desk Officer for the 
Employee Benefits Security 
Administration. OMB requests that 
comments be received within 30 days of 
publication of the Notice of Proposed 
Rulemaking to ensure their 
consideration. Please note that 
comments submitted to OMB are a 
matter of public record. 
PRA Addressee: Gerald B. Lindrew, 
Office of Policy and Research, U.S. 
Department of Labor, Employee Benefits 
Security Administration, 200 
Constitution Avenue, NW., Room N– 
5718, Washington, DC 20210. 
Telephone (202) 693–8410; Fax: (202) 
219–4745. These are not toll-free 
numbers. 
In connection with publication of this 
proposed rule, the Department has 
submitted an ICR to OMB for its request 
of a revised information collection 
under OMB Control number 1210–0090. 
This is the control number for the 
Department’s existing regulation under 
ERISA section 404(c), which would be 
amended by the proposal.40 The public 
is advised that an agency may not 
conduct or sponsor, and a person is not 
required to respond to, a collection of 
information unless it displays a 
currently valid OMB control number. 
The Department will include a notice 
announcing OMB’s action at the final 
rule stage. 
The proposed regulation on Fiduciary 
Requirements for Disclosure in 
Participant-Directed Individual Account 
Plans would require the disclosure of 
plan and investment-related fee and 
expense information to participants and 
beneficiaries in participant-directed 
individual account plans. This ICR 
pertains to two categories of information 
that is required to be disclosed: ‘‘plan- 
related’’ and ‘‘investment-related’’ 
information. The information collection 
provisions of the proposal are intended 
to ensure that fiduciaries provide 
participants and beneficiaries with 
sufficient information regarding plan 
fees and expenses and designated 
investment alternatives to make 
informed decisions regarding the 
management of their individual 
accounts. 
The estimates of respondents and 
responses are derived primarily from 
the Form 5500 Series filings for the 2005 
plan year, which is the most recent 
reliable data available to the 
Department. The burden for the 
preparation and distribution of the 
disclosures is treated as an hour burden. 
Additional cost burden derives from 
materials and postage and costs to track 
and report required information. It is 
assumed that electronic means of 
communication will be used in 38 
percent of the responses pertaining to 
annual notices and that such 
communications will make use of 
existing systems that comply with the 
Department’s electronic media 
disclosure guidance (29 CFR 2520.104b– 
1(c)). Accordingly, no cost has been 
attributed to the electronic distribution 
of the information. 
The Department estimates that 
approximately 437,000 participant 
directed individual account plans 41 
covering 65,269,000 participants would 
be affected by the proposed regulation. 
Of these plans, 275,000 plans, covering 
49,212,000 participants and 
beneficiaries are reported to comply 
with ERISA section 404(c), and the 
remaining 162,000 plans covering 
16,057,000 participants and 
beneficiaries are not. The Department’s 
estimates of the number of plans and 
participants are summarized in Table 22 
below. 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 19:17 Jul 22, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00020 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\23JYP3.SGM 23JYP3pw
al
ke
r o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
71
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
43033 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 142 / Wednesday, July 23, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
42 The hourly wage estimates used in this analysis 
are estimates for 2009 and are based on data from 
the Bureau of Labor Statistics National 
Occupational Employment Survey (May 2005) and 
the Bureau of Labor Statistics Employment Cost 
Index (Sept. 2006). 
43 While plans are allowed to provide the 
disclosure in the SPD or quarterly benefit statement, 
the paperwork analysis assumes that plans would 
provide the required disclosures in a separate 
mailing to reduce costs as they otherwise are not 
required to send the SPD every year. 
TABLE 22.—NUMBER OF PLANS AND PARTICIPANTS 
Type of plan Plans Participants 
404(c) ....................................................................................................................................................................... 275,000 49,212,000 
Non-404(c) ............................................................................................................................................................... 162,000 16,057,000 
Total ......................................................................................................................................................................... 437,000 65,269,000 
Note: The displayed numbers are rounded to the nearest thousand and therefore may not add up to the totals. 
Plan-related Information—29 CFR 
2550.404a–5(c). The proposal requires 
three subcategories of Plan-related 
information to be provided to 
participants and beneficiaries. The first 
sub-category is General Plan 
Information, which provides: how 
participants and beneficiaries may give 
investment instructions; any specified 
limitations on such instructions, 
including any restrictions on transfer to 
or from a designated investment 
alternative; the exercise of voting, 
tender and similar rights appurtenant to 
an investment in a designated 
investment alternative as well as any 
restrictions on such rights; the specific 
designated investment alternatives 
offered under the plan; and any 
designated investment managers to 
whom participants and beneficiaries 
may give investment directions. 
(§ 2550.404a–5(c)(1)(i)). This 
information must be provided on or 
before the date a participant becomes 
eligible to participate in the plan, and 
afterwards at least annually. Material 
changes to this information must be 
disclosed not more than 30 days after 
adoption. Plans may make these 
disclosures in the summary plan 
description. 
The second subcategory of Plan- 
related Information is Administrative 
Expense Information, which refers to an 
explanation of any fees and expenses for 
plan administrative services (e.g., legal, 
accounting, recordkeeping) that, to the 
extent not included in investment- 
related fees and expenses, may be 
charged against the individual accounts 
of participants or beneficiaries and the 
basis on which such charges will be 
allocated to, or affect the balance of, 
each individual account (e.g., pro rata, 
per capita). (§ 2550.404a–5(c)(2)). This 
information must be provided on or 
before the date a participant becomes 
eligible to participate in the plan, and 
afterwards at least annually. At least 
quarterly, plans must furnish statements 
of the aggregate dollar amount charged 
to each participant’s account for these 
services. Plans may make the initial and 
annual disclosures in the summary plan 
description or the quarterly benefit 
statement, and the quarterly information 
may be included in the plan’s quarterly 
benefit statements. 
The third subcategory of Plan-related 
Information is Individual Expense 
Information, which describes expenses 
charged to individual accounts based on 
the actions taken by individual 
participants or beneficiaries. This would 
include charges for processing 
participant loans and qualified domestic 
relations orders. (§ 2550.404a–5(c)(3)). 
Information describing these charges 
must be furnished on or before the date 
a participant’s eligibility and annually 
thereafter. Plans must provide quarterly 
statements identifying and showing the 
dollar amounts of each expense actually 
charged to an account. Plans may make 
the initial and annual disclosures in the 
summary plan description or the 
quarterly benefit statement, and the 
quarterly information may be included 
in the plan’s quarterly benefit 
statements. 
First Year 
Annual Disclosure: The Department 
assumes that in the year of 
implementation, all 437,000 affected 
plans will conduct a legal review to 
verify their compliance with the 
proposed regulation and prepare the 
required disclosures. The Department 
estimates that the review would, on 
average, take one-half hour of a legal 
professional’s time at an (in-house) 
hourly rate 42 of $113 resulting in a total 
aggregate estimate of approximately 
218,000 legal hours at an equivalent cost 
of approximately $24,628,000. In 
addition, the Department estimates that 
each plan will spend one-half hour of 
clerical time at an (in-house) hourly rate 
of $26 preparing the disclosures. This 
would result in an hour burden of about 
218,000 clerical burden hours with an 
equivalent cost of approximately 
$5,694,000. These estimates are 
summarized in Table 23 below. 
TABLE 23.—PLAN-RELATED INFORMATION, GENERAL INFORMATION, FIRST YEAR 
Type of plan Number of affected plans 
Professional 
hours Clerical hours 
Total 
professional 
hours 
Total clerical 
hours 
Equivalent 
cost—profes-
sional 
Equivalent 
cost—clerical 
404(c) ........................... 275,000 0.5 0.5 137,000 137,000 $15,491,000 $3,582,000 
Non-404(c) ................... 162,000 0.5 0.5 81,000 81,000 91,370,200 2,112,000 
Total ...................... 437,000 ........................ ........................ 218,000 218,000 24,628,000 5,694,000 
Note: The displayed numbers are rounded to the nearest thousand and therefore may not add up to the totals. 
The Department assumes that plans 
will send 65,269,000 copies of the 
required plan information 43 to plan 
participants and beneficiaries, which 
will contain an average of 10 pages. 
Paper and printing costs are expected to 
be 5 cents per page and mailing costs 
are expected to be 76 cents per mailed 
disclosure. It is assumed that 38 percent 
of the disclosures will be delivered 
electronically. This results in a cost 
burden of $50,988,000, as shown in 
Table 24. 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 19:17 Jul 22, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00021 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\23JYP3.SGM 23JYP3pw
al
ke
r o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
71
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
43034 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 142 / Wednesday, July 23, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
44 It is assumed that the inclusion of the actual 
dollar disclosure will add a minimal burden that 
has not been quantified. 
45 The increase in administrative costs resulting 
from disclosing actual dollar fee and expense 
disclosure is derived from a GAO report (GAO–03– 
551T, ‘‘Mutual Funds: Information on Trends in 
Fees and Their Related Disclosure,’’ March 12, 
2003, p. 14), which measures the cost of the 
disclosures of the actual dollar amount of mutual 
fund investment expenses on a participant level. 
The GAO report estimates the initial cost to 
generate these disclosures in 2001 at $1 per 
account, and the annual cost of continued 
compliance at $0.35 per account. The cost to plans 
to calculate administrative fees for purposes of the 
NPRM is expected to be less, because most of the 
expense information to be disclosed under the 
regulation is already tracked. The Department 
assumes it may cost plans one-third less to provide 
these administrative disclosures than it does for 
mutual funds to disclose investment costs, leading 
to cost estimates in 2009 dollars of about 41 cents 
per plan participant in the first year and 14 cents 
thereafter. 
46 The 74,000 new plans include newly created 
participant directed account plans as well as some 
existing participant directed account plans that 
newly elect to be 404(c) compliant in subsequent 
years. Plans that newly elect to be 404(c) compliant 
in subsequent years had to previously comply with 
the new requirements and therefore might need to 
spend slightly less time on the review of the 404(c) 
requirements than the time indicated in Table 19. 
TABLE 24.—PLAN-RELATED INFORMATION, ANNUAL, COST BURDEN 
Type of plan Number of disclosures 
Percent sent 
by mail 
Number of 
pages 
Paper and 
printing cost 
per page 
Mailing cost Cost burden 
404(c) ....................................................... 49,212,000 62% 10 $0.05 $0.76 $38,444,000 
Non-404(c) ............................................... 16,057,000 62% 10 0.05 0.76 12,544,000 
Total .................................................. 65,269,000 ........................ ........................ ........................ ........................ 50,988,000 
Note: The displayed numbers are rounded to the nearest thousand and therefore may not add up to the totals. 
Quarterly Disclosure: Plans will also 
have to determine the administrative 
and individual fees that will be charged 
directly against participants’ accounts 
on a quarterly basis.44 The Department 
estimates a cost burden of 
approximately $26,543,000 in the first 
year to establish new information 
systems or accounting practices that 
will collect, track and report the actual 
dollar amounts charged to the 
individual accounts. This cost is shown 
in Table 25.45 
TABLE 25.—PLAN-RELATED INFORMATION, COST BURDEN, FIRST YEAR 
Type of plan Number of disclosures 
Per participant 
cost from GAO 
report 
Fraction of 
cost for 
calculating 
administrative 
fees 
Cost burden 
404(c) ............................................................................................................... 49,212,000 $1.22 1⁄3 $20,013,000 
Non-404(c) ....................................................................................................... 16,057,000 1.22 1⁄3 6,530,000 
Total .......................................................................................................... 65,269,000 ........................ ........................ 26,543,000 
Note: The displayed numbers are rounded to the nearest thousand and therefore may not add up to the totals. 
Subsequent Years 
Annual Disclosure: Based on the 2005 
Form 5500 data the Department 
estimates that approximately 74,000 
new participant-directed individual 
account plans would be required to 
disclose general plan information each 
year.46 The Department assumes that on 
average writing a new disclosure notice 
for these plans would require one-half 
hour of legal professional time and one- 
half hour of clerical time per plan. 
This results in an hour burden of 
nearly 37,000 hours for legal 
professional work and 37,000 hours of 
clerical work. The hour burden has an 
equivalent cost of approximately 
$4,168,000 for legal professional time at 
$113 per hour and $964,000 for clerical 
time at $26 per hour. These estimates 
are summarized in Table 26 below. 
TABLE 26.—PLAN-RELATED INFORMATION, GENERAL INFORMATION, NEW PLANS, ANNUAL, SUBSEQUENT YEARS 
Type of new plans Number of new plans 
Professional 
hours Clerical hours 
Total 
professional 
hours 
Total clerical 
hours 
Equivalent 
cost—profes-
sional 
Equivalent 
cost—clerical 
404(c) ........................... 46,000 0.5 0.5 23,000 23,000 $2,621,000 $606,000 
Non-404(c) ................... 27,000 0.5 0.5 14,000 14,000 1,546,000 3,578,000 
Total ...................... 74,000 ........................ ........................ 37,000 37,000 4,168,000 964,000 
Note: The displayed numbers are rounded to the nearest thousand and therefore may not add up to the totals. 
The Department also estimates that 
363,000 existing plans will require one- 
quarter hour of legal professional time 
and one-quarter hour of clerical staff 
time to update plan documents to take 
into account plan changes, such as new 
investment alternatives, in subsequent 
years. This results in an hour burden of 
approximately 91,000 hours for 
professional time and 91,000 hours for 
clerical time with an equivalent cost of 
approximately $10,230,000 for 
professional time and $2,365,000 for 
clerical time as summarized in Table 27 
below. 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 19:17 Jul 22, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00022 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\23JYP3.SGM 23JYP3pw
al
ke
r o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
71
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
43035 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 142 / Wednesday, July 23, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
TABLE 27.—PLAN-RELATED INFORMATION, GENERAL INFORMATION, EXISTING PLANS, ANNUAL, SUBSEQUENT YEARS 
Existing plans 
Number of 
revised 
disclosures 
Professional 
hours Clerical hours 
Total 
professional 
hours 
Total clerical 
hours 
Equivalent 
cost—profes-
sional 
Equivalent 
cost—clerical 
404(c) ........................... 228,000 0.25 0.25 57,000 57,000 $6,435,000 $1,488,000 
Non-404(c) ................... 135,000 0.25 0.25 34,000 34,000 3,795,000 878,000 
Total ...................... 363,000 ........................ ........................ 91,000 91,000 10,230,000 2,365,000 
Note: The displayed numbers are rounded to the nearest thousand and therefore may not add up to the totals. 
As with the first year, the Department 
assumes that plans will send 65,269,000 
copies of the required plan information 
to plan participants and beneficiaries in 
all subsequent years, resulting in a cost 
burden of $50,988,000. 
Quarterly Disclosures: In subsequent 
years, plans will also have to determine 
the administrative and individual fees 
that will be charged directly against 
participants’ accounts on a quarterly 
basis. The Department estimates a cost 
burden of approximately $9,355,000 in 
the subsequent years to maintain the 
information systems or accounting 
practices that will collect, track and 
report the actual dollar amounts charged 
to the individual accounts. This cost is 
shown in Table 28. 
TABLE 28.—PLAN-RELATED INFORMATION, COST BURDEN, ANNUAL, SUBSEQUENT YEARS 
Type of plan Number of dis-closures 
Per participant 
cost from GAO 
report 
Fraction of 
cost for 
calculating 
administrative 
fees 
Cost burden 
404(c) ............................................................................................................... 49,212,000 $0.43 1⁄3 $7,054,000 
Non-404(c) ....................................................................................................... 16,057,000 0.43 1⁄3 2,302,000 
Total .......................................................................................................... 65,269,000 ........................ ........................ 9,355,000 
Note: The displayed numbers are rounded to the nearest thousand and therefore may not add up to the totals. 
Investment-related Information—29 
CFR 2550.404a–5(d). The proposal 
requires three sub-categories of 
Investment-related Information to be 
disclosed, which relates to the plans 
designated investment alternatives. 
Sub-Category 1: Information to be 
Provided Automatically 
The first subcategory is information to 
be provided automatically. 
(§ 2550.404a–5(d)(1)). For each 
designated investment alternative, the 
plan, based on the latest information 
available, must disclose specified 
identifying information, past 
performance data, comparable 
benchmark returns, and fee and expense 
information. This information must be 
furnished on or before the date of a 
participant’s eligibility and annually 
thereafter. This information must be 
furnished in a chart or similar format 
designed to help participants compare 
the plan’s investment alternatives. 
(§ 2550.404a–5(d)(2)). To facilitate 
compliance, the proposal includes a 
model disclosure form that may be used 
by plan fiduciaries. 
Preparation: The Department assumes 
that the preparation of a comparative 
chart containing specified identifying 
information, past performance data, 
comparable benchmark returns, and fee 
and expense information will require 
one hour of accountant or financial 
professional time at an hourly rate of 
$60, which would result in an hour 
burden of approximately 437,000 hours 
at an equivalent cost of about 
$26,290,000. These estimates are 
summarized in Table 29 below. 
TABLE 29.—INVESTMENT-RELATED INFORMATION, INFORMATION PROVIDED AUTOMATICALLY, PREPARATION 
Type of plan Number of plans 
Professional 
hours 
Total 
professional 
hours 
Equivalent 
cost—profes-
sional 
Non-404(c) ....................................................................................................... 275,000 1 275,000 $16,537,000 
Non-404(c) ....................................................................................................... 162,000 1 162,000 9,754,000 
Total .......................................................................................................... 437,000 ........................ 437,000 26,290,000 
Note: The displayed numbers are rounded to the nearest thousand and therefore may not add up to the totals. 
Distribution: The comparative chart 
needs to be sent to all participants (65.3 
million). Given that 38 percent (24.8 
million) of all disclosures are made 
electronically, only 62 percent will be 
sent by mail (40.5 million). The 
Department assumes that clerical staff 
could spend, on average, two minutes 
per disclosure to copy and mail this 
information. This burden is shown in 
Table 30. 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 19:17 Jul 22, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00023 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\23JYP3.SGM 23JYP3pw
al
ke
r o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
71
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
43036 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 142 / Wednesday, July 23, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
47 29 CFR 2550.404c–5 (Oct. 24, 2007). 
TABLE 30.—INVESTMENT-RELATED INFORMATION, INFORMATION PROVIDED AUTOMATICALLY, ANNUAL, DISTRIBUTION 
Type of plan Total number of participants 
Disclosures by 
mail 
(percent) 
Number of 
disclosures 
Clerical hours 
per disclosure 
Total clerical 
hours 
Equivalent 
cost—clerical 
404(c) ....................................................... 49,212,000 62 30,511,000 0.033 1,017,000 $26,514,000 
Non-404(c) ............................................... 16,057,000 62 9,955,000 0.033 332,000 8,651,000 
Total .................................................. 65,269,000 ........................ 40,467,000 ........................ 1,349,000 35,166,000 
Note: The displayed numbers are rounded to the nearest thousand and therefore may not add up to the totals. 
It is assumed this disclosure will be 
three pages. As this information is 
required to be sent on an annual basis, 
the Department assumes it will be sent 
with the plan-related information 
required pursuant to § 2550.404a–5(c). 
Mailing costs are already accounted for 
in the calculation of the cost burden for 
delivery of the plan-related information. 
Table 31 shows the resulting annual 
cost burden of $6,070,000. 
TABLE 31.—INVESTMENT-RELATED INFORMATION, INFORMATION PROVIDED AUTOMATICALLY, COST BURDEN 
Type of plan Number of disclosures 
Percent sent 
by mail 
Number of 
pages 
Paper and 
printing cost 
per page 
Cost burden 
404(c) ................................................................................... 49,212,000 62 3 $0.05 $4,577,000 
Non-404(c) ........................................................................... 16,057,000 62 3 0.05 1,493,000 
Total .............................................................................. 65,269,000 ........................ ........................ ........................ 6,070,000 
Note: The displayed numbers are rounded to the nearest thousand and therefore may not add up to the totals. 
Sub-Category 2: Post-Investment 
Information 
The second sub-category is post- 
investment information. The proposal 
requires that when a plan provides for 
the pass-through of voting, tender and 
similar rights, the fiduciary must 
furnish participants and beneficiaries 
who have invested in a designated 
investment alternative with these 
features any materials about such rights 
that have been provided to the plan. See 
§ 2550.404a–5(d)(3). This requirement is 
similar to the requirement currently 
applicable to section 404(c) plans 
(‘‘pass-through materials’’). 
Distribution: The Department assumes 
that clerical staff will prepare and send 
the required materials. It may take the 
clerical staff on average one and one- 
half minutes to prepare and mail the 
post-investment materials. It is further 
assumed that this disclosure will be sent 
to about 15,153,000 plan participants in 
plans that have assets invested in 
employer securities. This number was 
reduced to reflect that some participants 
already receive this information 
pursuant to the Department’s Qualified 
Default Investment Alternative 
regulation (QDIA)47 and the burden is 
counted under OMB Control Number 
1210–0132. The Department expects 38 
percent of the disclosures will be sent 
electronically resulting in no burden. 
This results in an hour burden of 
approximately 235,000 hours of clerical 
staff time, with an equivalent cost of 
$6,123,000. Table 32 reports the 
estimates of the burden. 
TABLE 32.—INVESTMENT-RELATED INFORMATION, POST-INVESTMENT INFORMATION, DISTRIBUTION 
Type of plan Number of disclosures Clerical hours 
Total clerical 
hours 
Equivalent 
cost—clerical 
404(c) ............................................................................................................... 11,656,000 0.025 181,000 $4,710,000 
Non-404(c) ....................................................................................................... 3,497,000 0.025 54,000 1,413,000 
Total .......................................................................................................... 15,153,000 ........................ 235,000 6,123,000 
Note: The displayed numbers are rounded to the nearest thousand and therefore may not add up to the totals. 
The required post-investment 
information is assumed to be, on 
average, ten pages long, with mailing 
costs of $0.59 per disclosure. As Table 
33 shows, this results in an annual cost 
burden of $10,240,000. 
TABLE 33.—INVESTMENT-RELATED INFORMATION, POST-INVESTMENT INFORMATION, COST BURDEN 
Type of plan Number of disclosures 
Percent sent 
by mail 
Number of 
pages 
Paper and 
printing cost 
per page 
Mailing cost Cost burden 
404(c) ....................................................... 11,656,000 62 10 $0.05 $0.59 $7,877,000 
Non-404(c) ............................................... 3,497,000 62 10 0.05 0.59 2,363,000 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 19:17 Jul 22, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00024 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\23JYP3.SGM 23JYP3pw
al
ke
r o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
71
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
43037 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 142 / Wednesday, July 23, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
TABLE 33.—INVESTMENT-RELATED INFORMATION, POST-INVESTMENT INFORMATION, COST BURDEN—Continued 
Type of plan Number of disclosures 
Percent sent 
by mail 
Number of 
pages 
Paper and 
printing cost 
per page 
Mailing cost Cost burden 
Total .................................................. 15,153,000 ........................ ........................ ........................ ........................ 10,240,000 
Note: The displayed numbers are rounded to the nearest thousand and therefore may not add up to the totals. 
Sub-Category 3: Information To Be 
Provided Upon Request 
The third subcategory is information 
to be provided upon request. 
(§ 2550.404a–5(d)(4)). Participants may 
request the plan to provide 
prospectuses, financial reports, as well 
as statements of valuation and of assets 
held by an investment alternative. 
Preparation: Plans must be prepared 
to provide the required information on 
request. The Department expects all 
plans to receive, on average, one request 
per year for the information. The 
Department estimates that plans will 
need to devote, on average, one clerical 
staff hour to comply with this 
requirement. Paperwork burden for this 
requirement is divided between 
§ 2550.404c–5 (Fiduciary relief for 
investments in qualified default 
investment alternatives), which was 
accounted for previously under OMB 
Control Number 1210–0132 (QDIA 
regulation), and § 2550.404c–1 (ERISA 
section 404(c) plans), which is reflected 
in Table 34 below. 
TABLE 34.—INVESTMENT-RELATED INFORMATION, INFORMATION ON REQUEST, ANNUAL, PREPARATION 
Type of plan Number of disclosures Clerical hours 
Total clerical 
hours 
Equivalent 
cost—clerical 
404(c) ............................................................................................................... 275,000 1 275,000 $7,164,000 
Non-404(c) ....................................................................................................... 0 1 0 0 
Total .......................................................................................................... 275,000 ........................ 275,000 7,164,000 
Note: The displayed numbers are rounded to the nearest thousand and therefore may not add up to the totals. 
Distribution: The Department 
estimates that in total, plans will 
respond to approximately 275,000 
requests for information annually. It is 
assumed that 38 percent of the 
disclosures will be delivered 
electronically. For the remaining 62 
percent of disclosures (170,000 requests 
annually), the Department has assumed 
that these disclosures will be sent by 
mail and estimates that reproduction 
and distribution of these disclosures 
will take 2 minutes of clerical time per 
request. Plans will therefore have an 
additional annual hour burden of 5,700 
hours (170,000 requests notices × 0.033 
hours). The equivalent cost of these 
hours is $148,000. Table 35 contains the 
estimates of the burden. 
TABLE 35.—INVESTMENT-RELATED INFORMATION, INFORMATION ON REQUEST, ANNUAL, DISTRIBUTION 
Type of plan 
Number of 
disclosures by 
mail 
Clerical hours Total clerical hours 
Equivalent 
cost—clerical 
404(c) ............................................................................................................... 170,000 0.033 6,000 $148,000 
Non-404(c) ....................................................................................................... ........................ ........................ ........................ ........................
Total .......................................................................................................... 170,000 ........................ 6,000 148,000 
Note: The displayed numbers are rounded to the nearest thousand and therefore may not add up to the totals. 
As some of these disclosures are 
accounted for under the QDIA 
regulation, the cost burden for the 
remainder is estimated at approximately 
$271,000 based on an average page 
length of 20 pages and mailing costs of 
$0.59 as shown in Table 36, below. 
TABLE 36.—INVESTMENT-RELATED INFORMATION, INFORMATION ON REQUEST, ANNUAL, COST BURDEN 
Type of plan Number of disclosures 
Percent sent 
by mail 
Number of 
pages 
Paper and 
printing cost 
per page 
Mailing cost Cost burden 
404(c) ....................................................... 275,000 62 20 $0.05 $0.59 $271,000 
Non-404(c) ............................................... 0 62 20 0.05 0.59 0 
Total .................................................. 275,000 ........................ ........................ ........................ ........................ 271,000 
Note: The displayed numbers are rounded to the nearest thousand and therefore may not add up to the totals. 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 19:17 Jul 22, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00025 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\23JYP3.SGM 23JYP3pw
al
ke
r o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
71
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
43038 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 142 / Wednesday, July 23, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
Summary 
The Department has estimated the 
hour burden in the first year to be 
2,732,000 hours with an equivalent cost 
of $105,065,000, as shown in Table 37. 
The hour burden in the subsequent 
years is estimated to be 2,551,000 hours 
with an equivalent cost of $92,470,000, 
as shown in Table 38. 
TABLE 37.—HOUR BURDEN FOR FIRST YEAR 
Type of plan Professional hour burden 
Clerical hour 
burden Total hours 
Equivalent 
cost—profes-
sional 
Equivalent 
cost—clerical 
Total equiva-
lent cost 
404(c) ....................................................... 412,000 1,610,000 2,022,000 $32,028,000 $41,970,000 $73,998,000 
Non-404(c) ............................................... 243,000 467,000 710,000 18,891,000 12,177,000 31,068,000 
Total .................................................. 655,000 2,077,000 2,732,000 50,918,000 54,147,000 105,065,000 
Note: The displayed numbers are rounded to the nearest thousand and therefore may not add up to the totals. 
TABLE 38.—HOUR BURDEN FOR YEARS TWO AND THREE 
Type of plan Professional hour burden 
Clerical hour 
burden Total hours 
Equivalent 
cost—profes-
sional 
Equivalent 
cost—clerical 
Total equiva-
lent cost 
404(c) ....................................................... 355,000 1,553,000 1,908,000 $25,593,000 $40,482,000 $66,075,000 
Non-404(c) ............................................... 209,000 433,000 643,000 15,095,000 11,299,000 26,395,000 
Total .................................................. 565,000 1,986,000 2,551,000 40,688,000 51,781,000 92,470,000 
Note: The displayed numbers are rounded to the nearest thousand and therefore may not add up to the totals. 
The Department has estimated the 
cost burden in the first year to be 
$94,112,000; and $76,925,000 in the 
subsequent years. These estimates are 
shown in Table 39. 
TABLE 39.—TOTAL COST BURDEN 
Type of plan 
First year— 
total cost 
burden 
Subsequent 
years—total 
cost burden 
404(c ) ...................................................................................................................................................................... $71,182,000 $58,223,000 
Non-404(c) ............................................................................................................................................................... 22,930,000 18,702,000 
Total .................................................................................................................................................................. 94,112,000 76,925,000 
Note: The displayed numbers are rounded to the nearest thousand and therefore may not add up to the totals. 
Type of Review: Revised collection. 
Agency: Employee Benefits Security 
Administration, Department of Labor. 
Title: Fiduciary Requirements for 
Disclosure in Participant-Directed 
Individual Account Plans 
OMB Number: 1210–0090. 
Affected Public: Business or other for- 
profit; not-for-profit institutions. 
Respondents: 437,000 
Responses: 407,042,000 
Frequency of Response: Annually; 
quarterly. 
Estimated Annual Burden Hours: 
2,732,000 hours in the first year; 
2,551,000 hours in each subsequent 
year. 
Estimated Annual Burden Cost: 
$94,112,000 in the first year; 
$76,925,000 in each subsequent year. 
Congressional Review Act Statement 
This notice of proposed rulemaking is 
subject to the Congressional Review Act 
provisions of the Small Business 
Regulatory Enforcement Fairness Act of 
1996 (5 U.S.C. 801 et seq.) and, if 
finalized, will be transmitted to the 
Congress and the Comptroller General 
for review. 
Unfunded Mandates Reform Act 
Statement 
For purposes of the Unfunded 
Mandates Reform Act of 1995 (Pub. L. 
104–4), as well as Executive Order 
12875, the notice of proposed 
rulemaking does not include any federal 
mandate that will result in expenditures 
by state, local, or tribal governments in 
the aggregate of more than $100 million, 
adjusted for inflation, or increase 
expenditures by the private sector of 
more than $100 million, adjusted for 
inflation. 
Federalism Statement 
Executive Order 13132 (August 4, 
1999) outlines fundamental principles 
of federalism and requires the 
adherence to specific criteria by Federal 
agencies in the process of their 
formulation and implementation of 
policies that have substantial direct 
effects on the States, the relationship 
between the national government and 
the States, or on the distribution of 
power and responsibilities among the 
various levels of government. The 
proposed regulations would not have 
federalism implications because they 
have no substantial direct effect on the 
States, on the relationship between the 
national government and the States, or 
on the distribution of power and 
responsibilities among the various 
levels of government. Section 514 of 
ERISA provides, with certain exceptions 
specifically enumerated that are not 
pertinent here, that the provisions of 
Titles I and IV of ERISA supersede State 
laws that relate to any employee benefit 
plan covered by ERISA. The 
requirements implemented in the 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 19:17 Jul 22, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00026 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\23JYP3.SGM 23JYP3pw
al
ke
r o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
71
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
43039 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 142 / Wednesday, July 23, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
proposed regulations do not alter the 
fundamental provisions of the statute 
with respect to employee benefit plans, 
and as such would have no implications 
for the States or the relationship or 
distribution of power between the 
national government and the States. 
List of Subjects in 29 CFR Part 2550 
Employee benefit plans, Fiduciaries, 
Investments, Pensions, Disclosure, 
Reporting and recordkeeping 
requirements, and Securities. 
For the reasons set forth in the 
preamble, the Department proposes to 
amend Subchapter F, Part 2550 of Title 
29 of the Code of Federal Regulations as 
follows: 
Subchapter F—Fiduciary 
Responsibility Under the Employee 
Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 
PART 2550—RULES AND 
REGULATIONS FOR FIDUCIARY 
RESPONSIBILITY 
1. The authority citation for part 2550 
continues to read as follows: 
Authority: 29 U.S.C. 1135; sec. 657, Pub. 
L. 107–16, 115 Stat.38; and Secretary of 
Labor’s Order No. 1–2003, 68 FR 5374 (Feb. 
3, 2003). Sec. 2550.401b–1 also issued under 
sec. 102, Reorganization Plan No. 4 of 1978, 
43 FR 47713 (Oct. 17, 1978), 3 CFR, 1978 
Comp. 332, effective Dec. 31, 1978, 44 FR 
1065 (Jan. 3, 1978), 3 CFR, 1978 Comp. 332. 
Sec. 2550.401c–1 also issued under 29 U.S.C. 
1101. Sections 2550.404c–1 and 2550.404c– 
5 also issued under 29 U.S.C. 1104. Sec. 
2550.407c–3 also issued under 29 U.S.C. 
1107. Sec. 2550.408b–1 also issued under 29 
U.S.C. 1108(b)(1) and sec. 102, 
Reorganization Plan No. 4 of 1978, 3 CFR, 
1978 Comp. p. 332, effective Dec. 31, 1978, 
44 FR 1065 (Jan. 3, 1978), and 3 CFR, 1978 
Comp. 332. Sec. 2550.412–1 also issued 
under 29 U.S.C. 1112. 
2. Add § 2550.404a–5 to read as 
follows: 
§ 2550.404a–5 Fiduciary requirements 
for disclosure in participant-directed 
individual account plans. 
(a) General. The investment of plan 
assets is a fiduciary act governed by the 
fiduciary standards of section 
404(a)(1)(A) and (B) of the Employee 
Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, 
as amended (ERISA), 29 U.S.C. 1001 et 
seq. (all section references herein are 
references to ERISA unless otherwise 
indicated). Pursuant to section 
404(a)(1)(A) and (B), fiduciaries must 
discharge their duties with respect to 
the plan prudently and solely in the 
interest of participants and 
beneficiaries. Where the documents and 
instruments governing an individual 
account plan, as defined in section 
(3)(34), provide for the allocation of 
investment responsibilities to 
participants or beneficiaries, fiduciaries, 
consistent with section 404(a)(1)(A) and 
(B), must take steps to ensure that such 
participants and beneficiaries, on a 
regular and periodic basis, are made 
aware of their rights and responsibilities 
with respect to the investment of assets 
held in, or contributed to, their accounts 
and are provided sufficient information 
regarding the plan, including fees and 
expenses, and regarding designated 
investment alternatives, including fees 
and expenses attendant thereto, to make 
informed decisions with regard to the 
management of their individual 
accounts. 
(b) Satisfaction of duty to disclose. 
For plan years beginning on or after 
January 1, 2009, the fiduciary (or 
fiduciaries) of an individual account 
plan must comply with the disclosure 
requirements set forth in paragraphs (c) 
and (d) of this section with respect to 
each participant or beneficiary that, 
pursuant to the terms of the plan, has 
the right to direct the investment of 
assets held in, or contributed to, his or 
her individual account. Compliance 
with paragraphs (c) and (d) of this 
section will satisfy the duty to make the 
regular and periodic disclosures 
described in paragraph (a) of this 
section. 
(c) Disclosure of plan-related 
information. A fiduciary (or a person or 
persons designated by the fiduciary to 
act on its behalf) shall provide to each 
participant or beneficiary the plan- 
related information described in 
paragraphs (c)(1) through (3) of this 
section, based on the latest information 
available to the plan. 
(1) General. 
(i) On or before the date of plan 
eligibility and at least annually 
thereafter: 
(A) An explanation of the 
circumstances under which participants 
and beneficiaries may give investment 
instructions; 
(B) An explanation of any specified 
limitations on such instructions under 
the terms of the plan, including any 
restrictions on transfer to or from a 
designated investment alternative; 
(C) A description of or reference to 
plan provisions relating to the exercise 
of voting, tender and similar rights 
appurtenant to an investment in a 
designated investment alternative as 
well as any restrictions on such rights; 
(D) An identification of any 
designated investment alternatives 
offered under the plan; and 
(E) An identification of any 
designated investment managers; and 
(ii) Not later than 30 days after the 
date of adoption of any material change 
to the information described in 
paragraph (c)(1)(i) of this section, each 
participant and beneficiary shall be 
furnished a description of such change. 
(2) Administrative expenses. 
(i) On or before the date of plan 
eligibility and at least annually 
thereafter, an explanation of any fees 
and expenses for plan administrative 
services (e.g., legal, accounting, 
recordkeeping) that, to the extent not 
otherwise included in investment- 
related fees and expenses, may be 
charged to the plan and the basis on 
which such charges will be allocated 
(e.g., pro rata, per capita) to, or affect the 
balance of, each individual account, and 
(ii) At least quarterly, a statement that 
includes: 
(A) The dollar amount actually 
charged during the preceding quarter to 
the participant’s or beneficiary’s 
account for administrative services, and 
(B) A description of the services 
provided to the participant or 
beneficiary for such amount (e.g., 
recordkeeping). 
(3) Individual expenses. 
(i) On or before the date of plan 
eligibility and at least annually 
thereafter, an explanation of any fees 
and expenses that may be charged 
against the individual account of a 
participant or beneficiary for services 
provided on an individual, rather than 
plan, basis (e.g., fees attendant to 
processing plan loans or qualified 
domestic relations orders, fees for 
investment advice or similar services 
charged on an individual basis), and 
(ii) At least quarterly, a statement that 
includes: 
(A) The dollar amount actually 
charged during the preceding quarter to 
the participant’s or beneficiary’s 
account for individual services, and 
(B) A description of the services 
provided to the participant or 
beneficiary for such amount (e.g., fees 
attendant to processing plan loans). 
(d) Disclosure of investment-related 
information. A fiduciary (or a person or 
persons designated by the fiduciary to 
act on its behalf), based on the latest 
information available to the plan, shall: 
(1) Information to be provided 
automatically. Provide to each 
participant or beneficiary, on or before 
the date of plan eligibility and at least 
annually thereafter, the following 
information with respect to each 
designated investment alternative 
offered under the plan— 
(i) Identifying information. Such 
information shall include: 
(A) The name of the designated 
investment alternative; 
(B) An Internet Web site address that 
is sufficiently specific to lead 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 19:17 Jul 22, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00027 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\23JYP3.SGM 23JYP3pw
al
ke
r o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
71
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
43040 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 142 / Wednesday, July 23, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
participants and beneficiaries to 
supplemental information regarding the 
designated investment alternative, 
including the name of the investment’s 
issuer or provider, the investment’s 
principal strategies and attendant risks, 
the assets comprising the investment’s 
portfolio, the investment’s portfolio 
turnover, the investment’s performance 
and related fees and expenses; 
(C) The type or category of the 
investment (e.g., money market fund, 
balanced (stocks and bonds) fund, large- 
cap fund); and, 
(D) The type of management utilized 
by the investment (e.g., actively 
managed, passively managed); 
(ii) Performance data. For designated 
investment alternatives with respect to 
which the return is not fixed, the 
average annual total return (percentage) 
of the investment for the following 
periods, if available: 1-year, 5-year, and 
10-year, measured as of the end of the 
applicable calendar year; as well as a 
statement indicating that an 
investment’s past performance is not 
necessarily an indication of how the 
investment will perform in the future. In 
the case of designated investment 
alternatives with respect to which the 
return is fixed for the term of the 
investment, both the fixed rate of return 
and the term of the investment; 
(iii) Benchmarks. For designated 
investment alternatives with respect to 
which the return is not fixed, the name 
and returns of an appropriate broad- 
based securities market index over the 
1-year, 5-year, and 10-year periods 
comparable to the performance data 
periods provided under paragraph 
(d)(1)(ii) of this section, and which is 
not administered by an affiliate of the 
investment provider, its investment 
adviser, or a principal underwriter, 
unless the index is widely recognized 
and used; 
(iv) Fee and expense information. For 
designated investment alternatives with 
respect to which the return is not fixed: 
(A) The amount and a description of 
each shareholder-type fee (i.e., fees 
charged directly against a participant’s 
or beneficiary’s investment), such as 
sales loads, sales charges, deferred sales 
charges, redemption fees, surrender 
charges, exchange fees, account fees, 
purchase fees, and mortality and 
expense fees; 
(B) The total annual operating 
expenses of the investment expressed as 
a percentage (e.g., expense ratio); and 
(C) A statement indicating that fees 
and expenses are only one of several 
factors that participants and 
beneficiaries should consider when 
making investment decisions. In the 
case of designated investment 
alternatives with respect to which the 
return is fixed for the term of the 
investment, the amount and a 
description of any shareholder-type fees 
that may be applicable to a purchase, 
transfer or withdrawal of the investment 
in whole or in part; 
(v) Disclosure on or before date of 
plan eligibility. The requirement in 
paragraph (d)(1) of this section to 
provide information to a participant on 
or before the date of plan eligibility may 
be satisfied by furnishing to the 
participant the most recent annual 
disclosure furnished to participants and 
beneficiaries pursuant to paragraph 
(d)(1) of this section and any material 
changes to the information furnished to 
participants and beneficiaries pursuant 
to paragraph (c)(1)(ii) of this section. 
(2) Comparative format. Furnish the 
information described in paragraph 
(d)(1) of this section in a chart or similar 
format that is designed to facilitate a 
comparison of such information for each 
designated investment alternative 
available under the plan; as well as: 
(i) a statement indicating the name, 
address, and telephone number of the 
fiduciary (or a person or persons 
designated by the fiduciary to act on its 
behalf) to contact for the provision of 
the information required by paragraph 
(d)(4) of this section, and 
(ii) A statement that more current 
investment-related information (e.g., fee 
and expense and performance 
information) may be available at the 
listed Internet Web site addresses (see 
paragraph (d)(1)(i)(B) of this section). 
Nothing herein, however, shall preclude 
a fiduciary from including additional 
information that the fiduciary 
determines appropriate for such 
comparisons, provided such 
information is not inaccurate or 
misleading; 
(3) Information to be provided 
subsequent to investment. Provide to 
each investing participant or 
beneficiary, subsequent to an 
investment in a designated investment 
alternative, any materials provided to 
the plan relating to the exercise of 
voting, tender and similar rights 
appurtenant to the investment, to the 
extent that such rights are passed 
through to such participant or 
beneficiary under the terms of the plan; 
(4) Information to be provided upon 
request. Provide to each participant or 
beneficiary, either at the times specified 
in paragraph (d)(1), or upon request, the 
following information relating to 
designated investment alternatives— 
(i) Copies of prospectuses (or any 
short-form or summary prospectus, the 
form of which has been approved by the 
Securities and Exchange Commission) 
for the disclosure of information to 
investors by entities registered under 
either the Securities Act of 1933 or the 
Investment Company Act of 1940, or 
similar documents relating to 
designated investment alternatives that 
are provided by entities that are not 
registered under either of these Acts. 
(ii) Copies of any financial statements 
or reports, such as statements of 
additional information and shareholder 
reports, and of any other similar 
materials relating to the plan’s 
designated investment alternatives, to 
the extent such materials are provided 
to the plan; 
(iii) A statement of the value of a 
share or unit of each designated 
investment alternative as well as the 
date of the valuation; and 
(iv) A list of the assets comprising the 
portfolio of each designated investment 
alternative which constitute plan assets 
within the meaning of 29 CFR 2510.3– 
101 and the value of each such asset (or 
the proportion of the investment which 
it comprises); 
(e) Form of disclosure. (1) The 
information required to be disclosed 
pursuant to paragraphs (c)(1), (c)(2)(i), 
and (c)(3)(i) of this section may be 
provided as part of the plan’s summary 
plan description furnished pursuant to 
ERISA section 102 or as part of a 
pension benefit statement furnished 
pursuant to ERISA section 
105(a)(1)(A)(i), if such summary plan 
description or pension benefit statement 
is furnished at a frequency that 
comports with paragraph (c)(1) of this 
section. 
(2) The information required to be 
disclosed pursuant to paragraphs 
(c)(2)(ii) and (c)(3)(ii) of this section may 
be included as part of a pension benefit 
statement furnished pursuant to ERISA 
section 105(a)(1)(A)(i). 
(3) A fiduciary that uses and 
accurately completes the model format 
set forth in the Appendix will be 
deemed to have satisfied the 
requirements of paragraph (d)(2) of this 
section. 
(4) Except with respect to the dollar 
amounts required to be included under 
paragraphs (c)(2)(ii)(A) and (c)(3)(ii)(A) 
of this section, fees and expenses may 
be expressed in terms of a monetary 
amount, formula, percentage of assets, 
or per capita charge. 
(5) The information required to be 
prepared by the fiduciary for disclosure 
under this section shall be written in a 
manner calculated to be understood by 
the average plan participant. 
(f) Selection and monitoring. Nothing 
herein is intended to relieve a fiduciary 
from its duty to prudently select and 
monitor providers of services to the plan 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 19:17 Jul 22, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00028 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\23JYP3.SGM 23JYP3pw
al
ke
r o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
71
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
43041 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 142 / Wednesday, July 23, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
or designated investment alternatives 
offered under the plan. 
(g) Manner of furnishing. Disclosures 
under this section shall be furnished in 
any manner consistent with the 
requirements of 29 CFR 2520.104b–1 of 
this chapter, including paragraph (c) of 
that section relating to the use of 
electronic media. 
(h) Definitions. For purposes of this 
section, the term— 
(1) Designated investment alternative 
means any investment alternative 
designated by the plan into which 
participants and beneficiaries may 
direct the investment of assets held in, 
or contributed to, their individual 
accounts. The term ‘‘designated 
investment alternative’’ shall not 
include ‘‘brokerage windows,’’ ‘‘self- 
directed brokerage accounts,’’ or similar 
plan arrangements that enable 
participants and beneficiaries to select 
investments beyond those designated by 
the plan. 
(2) Average annual total return means 
the average annual profit or loss realized 
by a designated investment alternative 
at the end of a specified period, 
calculated in the same manner as 
average annual total return is calculated 
under Item 21 of Securities and 
Exchange Commission Form N–1A with 
respect to an open-end management 
investment company registered under 
the Investment Company Act of 1940. 
(3) Total annual operating expenses 
means annual operating expenses of the 
designated investment alternative (e.g., 
investment management fees, 
distribution, service, and administrative 
expenses) that reduce the rate of return 
to participants and beneficiaries, 
expressed as a percentage, calculated in 
the same manner as total annual 
operating expenses is calculated under 
Instruction 3 to Item 3 of Securities and 
Exchange Commission Form N–1A with 
respect to an open-end management 
investment company registered under 
the Investment Company Act of 1940. 
(4) At least annually thereafter means 
at least once in any 12-month period, 
without regard to whether the plan 
operates on a calendar or fiscal year 
basis. 
(5) At least quarterly means at least 
once in any 3-month period, without 
regard to whether the plan operates on 
a calendar or fiscal year basis. 
BILLING CODE 4510–29–P 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 19:17 Jul 22, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00029 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\23JYP3.SGM 23JYP3pw
al
ke
r o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
71
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
43042 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 142 / Wednesday, July 23, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 19:17 Jul 22, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00030 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4725 E:\FR\FM\23JYP3.SGM 23JYP3 EP
23
JY
08
.0
01
</
G
PH
>
pw
al
ke
r o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
71
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
43043 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 142 / Wednesday, July 23, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
BILLING CODE 4510–29–C 
3. In § 2550.404c–1 revise (b)(2)(i)(B), 
(c)(1)(ii), and (f)(1), and add (d)(2)(iv) to 
read as follows: 
§ 2550.404c–1 ERISA section 404(c) plans. 
* * * * * 
(b) * * * 
(2) * * * 
(i) * * * 
(B) The participant or beneficiary is 
provided or has the opportunity to 
obtain sufficient information to make 
informed investment decisions with 
regard to investment alternatives 
available under the plan, and incidents 
of ownership appurtenant to such 
investments. For purposes of this 
subparagraph, a participant or 
beneficiary will be considered to have 
sufficient information if the participant 
or beneficiary is provided by an 
identified plan fiduciary (or a person or 
persons designated by the plan fiduciary 
to act on his behalf): 
(1) An explanation that the plan is 
intended to constitute a plan described 
in section 404(c) of the Employee 
Retirement Income Security Act, and 29 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 21:40 Jul 22, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00031 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\23JYP3.SGM 23JYP3 EP
23
JY
08
.0
02
</
G
PH
>
pw
al
ke
r o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
71
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
43044 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 142 / Wednesday, July 23, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
CFR 2550.404c–1, and that the 
fiduciaries of the plan may be relieved 
of liability for any losses which are the 
direct and necessary result of 
investment instructions given by such 
participant or beneficiary; 
(2) Identification of any designated 
investment managers; 
(3) The information required pursuant 
to 29 CFR 2550.404a–5; and 
(4) In the case of plans which offer an 
investment alternative which is 
designed to permit a participant or 
beneficiary to directly or indirectly 
acquire or sell any employer security 
(employer security alternative), a 
description of the procedures 
established to provide for the 
confidentiality of information relating to 
the purchase, holding and sale of 
employer securities, and the exercise of 
voting, tender and similar rights, by 
participants and beneficiaries, and the 
name, address and phone number of the 
plan fiduciary responsible for 
monitoring compliance with the 
procedures (see paragraphs 
(d)(2)(ii)(E)(4)(vii), (viii) and (ix) of this 
section). 
* * * * * 
(c) * * * 
(1) * * * 
(ii) For purposes of sections 404(c)(1) 
and 404(c)(2) of the Act and paragraphs 
(a) and (d) of this section, a participant 
or beneficiary will be deemed to have 
exercised control with respect to voting, 
tender or similar rights appurtenant to 
the participant’s or beneficiary’s 
ownership interest in an investment 
alternative, provided that the 
participant’s or beneficiary’s investment 
in the investment alternative was itself 
the result of an exercise of control; the 
participant or beneficiary was provided 
a reasonable opportunity to give 
instruction with respect to such 
incidents of ownership, including the 
provision of the information described 
in 29 CFR 2550.404a–5(d)(3); and the 
participant or beneficiary has not failed 
to exercise control by reason of the 
circumstances described in paragraph 
(c)(2) of this section with respect to such 
incidents of ownership. 
* * * * * 
(d) * * * 
(2) * * * 
(iv) Paragraph (d)(2)(i) of this section 
does not serve to relieve a fiduciary 
from its duty to prudently select and 
monitor any designated investment 
manager or designated investment 
alternative offered under the plan. 
* * * * * 
(f) * * * 
(1) A plan is an individual account 
plan described in section 3(34) of the 
Act. The plan states that a plan 
participant or beneficiary may direct the 
plan administrator to invest any portion 
of his individual account in a particular 
diversified equity fund managed by an 
entity which is not affiliated with the 
plan sponsor, or any other asset 
administratively feasible for the plan to 
hold. However, the plan provides that 
the plan administrator will not 
implement certain listed instructions for 
which plan fiduciaries would not be 
relieved of liability under section 404(c) 
(see paragraph (d)(2)(ii) of this section). 
Plan participants and beneficiaries are 
permitted to give investment 
instructions during the first week of 
each month with respect to the equity 
fund and at any time with respect to 
other investments. The plan provides 
for the pass-through of voting, tender 
and similar rights incidental to the 
holding in the account of a participant 
or beneficiary of an ownership interest 
in the equity fund or any other 
investment alternative available under 
the plan. The plan administrator of Plan 
A provides each participant and 
beneficiary with the information 
described in paragraph (b)(2)(i)(B) of 
this section upon their entry into the 
plan (including the information that 
must be provided on or before plan 
eligibility pursuant to 29 CFR 
2550.404a–5), and provides updated 
information in the event of any material 
change in the information provided. 
Subsequent to any investment by a 
participant or beneficiary, the plan 
administrator forwards to the investing 
participant or beneficiary any materials 
provided to the plan relating to the 
exercise of voting, tender or similar 
rights attendant to ownership of an 
interest in such investment (see 
paragraph (b)(2)(i)(B)(3) of this section 
and 29 CFR 2550.404a–5(d)(3)). Upon 
request, the plan administrator provides 
each participant or beneficiary with 
copies of any prospectuses (or similar 
documents relating to designated 
investment alternatives that are 
provided by entities that are not 
registered under the Securities Act of 
1933 or the Investment Company Act of 
1940), financial statements and reports, 
and any other materials relating to the 
designated investment alternatives 
available under the plan in accordance 
with 29 CFR 2550.404a–5(d)(4)(i) and 
(ii). Also upon request, the plan 
administrator provides each participant 
and beneficiary with other information 
required by 29 CFR 2550.404a–5(d)(4) 
with respect to the equity fund, which 
is a designated investment alternative, 
including information concerning the 
latest available value of the participant’s 
or beneficiary’s interest in the equity 
fund. Plan A meets the requirements of 
paragraph (b)(2)(i)(B) of this section 
regarding the provision of investment 
information. 
Note: The regulation imposes no additional 
obligation on the administrator to furnish or 
make available materials relating to the 
companies in which the equity fund invests 
(e.g., prospectuses, proxies, etc.). 
* * * * * 
Signed at Washington, DC, this 15th day of 
July 2008. 
Bradford P. Campbell, 
Assistant Secretary, Employee Benefits 
Security Administration, Department of 
Labor. 
[FR Doc. E8–16541 Filed 7–22–08; 8:45 am] 
BILLING CODE 4510–29–P 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 19:17 Jul 22, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00032 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\23JYP3.SGM 23JYP3pw
al
ke
r o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
71
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
