Wednesday, 
January 21, 2009 
Part III 
Department of Labor 
Employee Benefits Security 
Administration 
29 CFR Part 2550 
Investment Advice—Participants and 
Beneficiaries; Final Rule 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 19:51 Jan 16, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00001 Fmt 4717 Sfmt 4717 E:\FR\FM\21JAR3.SGM 21JAR3ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 P
R
O
D1
PC
66
 w
ith
 R
UL
ES
3
3822 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 12 / Wednesday, January 21, 2009 / Rules and Regulations 
1 See also 29 CFR 2510.3–21(c) and 26 CFR 
54.4975–9(c). 
2 See Interpretative Bulletin relating to participant 
investment education, 29 CFR 2509.96–1 
(Interpretive Bulletin 96–1); Advisory Opinion (AO) 
2005–10A (May 11, 2005); AO 2001–09A (December 
14, 2001); and AO 97–15A (May 22, 1997). 
3 Public Law 109–280, 120 Stat. 780 (Aug. 17, 
2006). 
4 Under Reorganization Plan No. 4 of 1978 (43 FR 
47713, Oct. 17, 1978), 5 U.S.C. App. 1, 92 Stat. 
3790, the authority of the Secretary of the Treasury 
to issue rulings under section 4975 of the Code has 
been transferred, with certain exceptions not here 
relevant, to the Secretary of Labor. Therefore, the 
references in this notice to specific sections of 
ERISA should be taken as referring also to the 
corresponding sections of the Code. 
5 71 FR 70429. The Department, on the same date, 
also published an RFI in the Federal Register 
soliciting information to assist the Department in 
determining, as required by PPA section 601(b)(3), 
the feasibility of using computer models in 
connection with individual retirement accounts. 72 
FR 70427. 
6 In this regard, the Department cited the 
following: August 3, 2006 Floor Statement of Senate 
Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee 
Chairman Enzi (who chaired the Conference 
Committee drafting legislation forming the basis of 
H.R. 4) regarding investment advice to participants 
in which he states, ‘‘It was the goal and objective 
of the Members of the Conference to keep this 
advisory opinion [AO 2001–09A, SunAmerica 
Advisory Opinion] intact as well as other pre- 
existing advisory opinions granted by the 
Department. This legislation does not alter the 
current or future status of the plans and their many 
participants operating under these advisory 
opinions. Rather, the legislation builds upon these 
advisory opinions and provides alternative means 
for providing investment advice which is protective 
DEPARTMENT OF LABOR 
Employee Benefits Security 
Administration 
29 CFR Part 2550 
RIN 1210–AB13 
Investment Advice—Participants and 
Beneficiaries 
AGENCY: Employee Benefits Security 
Administration, Labor. 
ACTION: Final rule. 
SUMMARY: This document contains final 
rules under the Employee Retirement 
Income Security Act, and parallel 
provisions in the Internal Revenue Code 
of 1986, relating to the provision of 
investment advice by a fiduciary adviser 
to participants and beneficiaries in 
participant-directed individual account 
plans, such as 401(k) plans, and 
beneficiaries of individual retirement 
accounts (and certain similar plans). 
These rules affect sponsors, fiduciaries, 
participants and beneficiaries of 
participant-directed individual account 
plans, as well as providers of 
investment and investment advice- 
related services to such plans. 
DATES: These final rules are effective on 
March 23, 2009. 
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Fred 
Wong, Office of Regulations and 
Interpretations, Employee Benefits 
Security Administration, (202) 693– 
8500. This is not a toll-free number. 
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 
A. Background 
Section 3(21)(A)(ii) of the Employee 
Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 
(ERISA) and section 4975(e)(3)(B) of the 
Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (Code) 
include within the definition of 
‘‘fiduciary’’ a person that renders 
investment advice for a fee or other 
compensation, direct or indirect, with 
respect to any moneys or other property 
of a plan, or has any authority or 
responsibility to do so.1 The prohibited 
transaction provisions of ERISA and the 
Code prohibit an investment advice 
fiduciary from using the authority, 
control or responsibility that makes it a 
fiduciary to cause itself, or a party in 
which it has an interest that may affect 
its best judgment as a fiduciary, to 
receive additional fees. As a result, in 
the absence of a statutory or 
administrative exemption, fiduciaries 
are prohibited from rendering 
investment advice to plan participants 
regarding investments that result in the 
payment of additional advisory and 
other fees to the fiduciaries or their 
affiliates. Section 4975 of the Code 
applies similarly to the rendering of 
investment advice by a fiduciary to an 
individual retirement account (IRA) 
beneficiary. 
With the growth of participant- 
directed individual account plans, there 
has been an increasing recognition of 
the importance of investment advice to 
participants and beneficiaries in such 
plans. Over the past several years, the 
Department of Labor (Department) has 
issued various forms of guidance 
concerning when a person would be a 
fiduciary by reason of rendering 
investment advice and when the 
provision of investment advice might 
result in prohibited transactions.2 Most 
recently, Congress and the 
Administration, responding to the need 
to afford participants and beneficiaries 
greater access to professional 
investment advice, amended the 
prohibited transaction provisions of 
ERISA and the Code, as part of the 
Pension Protection Act of 2006 (PPA),3 
to permit a broader array of investment 
advice providers to offer their services 
to participants and beneficiaries 
responsible for investment of assets in 
their individual accounts and, 
accordingly, for the adequacy of their 
retirement savings. 
Specifically, section 601 of the PPA 
added a statutory exemption under 
sections 408(b)(14) and 408(g) of ERISA. 
Parallel provisions were added to the 
Code at sections 4975(d)(17) and 
4975(f)(8).4 Section 408(b)(14) sets forth 
the investment advice-related 
transactions that will be exempt from 
the prohibitions of section 406 if the 
requirements of section 408(g) are met. 
The transactions described in section 
408(b)(14) are: The provision of 
investment advice to the participant or 
beneficiary with respect to a security or 
other property available as an 
investment under the plan; the 
acquisition, holding or sale of a security 
or other property available as an 
investment under the plan pursuant to 
the investment advice; and the direct or 
indirect receipt of compensation by a 
fiduciary adviser or affiliate in 
connection with the provision of 
investment advice or the acquisition, 
holding or sale of a security or other 
property available as an investment 
under the plan pursuant to the 
investment advice. 
On December 4, 2006, the Department 
published a Request for Information 
(RFI) in the Federal Register soliciting 
information to assist the Department in 
the development of regulations under 
sections 408(b)(14) and 408(g).5 
Specifically, the Department invited 
interested persons to address the 
qualifications for the ‘‘eligible 
investment expert’’ that is required to 
certify that computer models used in 
connection with the statutory 
exemption meet the requirements of the 
statutory exemption. The Department 
also invited interested persons to 
provide information to assist the 
Department in developing procedures to 
be followed in certifying that a 
computer model meets the requirements 
of the statutory exemption. The 
Department also invited suggestions for 
a model disclosure form for purposes of 
the statutory exemption. In response to 
the RFI, the Department received 24 
letters addressing a variety of issues 
presented by the statutory exemption. 
These comments were taken into 
account in developing the proposed 
regulations described below. 
On February 2, 2007, the Department 
issued Field Assistance Bulletin 2007– 
01 addressing certain issues presented 
by the new statutory exemption. This 
Bulletin affirmed that the enactment of 
sections 408(b)(14) and 408(g) did not 
invalidate or otherwise affect prior 
guidance of the Department relating to 
investment advice and that such 
guidance continues to represent the 
views of the Department.6 The Bulletin 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 19:29 Jan 16, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00002 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\21JAR3.SGM 21JAR3ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 P
R
O
D1
PC
66
 w
ith
 R
UL
ES
3
3823 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 12 / Wednesday, January 21, 2009 / Rules and Regulations 
of the interests of plan participants and IRA 
owners.’’ 152 Cong. Rec. S8,752 (daily ed. Aug. 3, 
2006) (statement of Sen. Enzi). 
7 See Field Assistance Bulletin 2007–1 (Feb. 2, 
2007). 
8 See section 408(g)(10) and Field Assistance 
Bulletin 2007–1 for a discussion of a fiduciary’s 
duty to prudently select and monitor investment 
advisers. 
also confirmed the applicability of the 
principles set forth in section 408(g)(10) 
[Exemption for plan sponsor and certain 
other fiduciaries] to plan sponsors and 
fiduciaries who offered investment 
advice arrangements with respect to 
which relief under the statutory 
exemption is not required. Finally, the 
Bulletin addressed the scope of the fee- 
leveling requirement for purposes of an 
eligible investment advice arrangement 
described in section 408(g)(2)(A)(i). 
On August 22, 2008, the Department 
published in the Federal Register 
proposed regulations that would, upon 
adoption, implement the provisions of 
the statutory exemption for the 
provision of investment advice to 
participants and beneficiaries under 
sections 408(b)(14) and 408(g) of the Act 
and the parallel provisions in the Code 
(73 FR 49896). On the same date, the 
Department also published a proposed 
class exemption that, upon adoption, 
would establish alternative conditions 
for granting prohibited transaction relief 
in connection with the provision of 
investment advice, and thereby promote 
the broad availability of investment 
advice to both participants and 
beneficiaries in individual account 
plans and beneficiaries with individual 
retirement accounts (73 FR 49924). In 
response to these proposals, the 
Department received forty-three 
comment letters. 
On October 21, 2008, the Department 
held a public hearing at which 
interested members of the public were 
afforded an additional opportunity to 
present their views on the proposals. 
Eight organizations testified at the 
hearing. 
Set forth below is an overview of the 
final rules and an overview of the major 
comments received on the proposed 
rules and class exemption. 
B. Overview of Final § 2550.408g–1 and 
Public Comments 
1. General 
As noted above, the Department 
published both a proposed regulation 
and a proposed class exemption 
pertaining to the furnishing of 
investment advice to participants and 
beneficiaries. In an effort to facilitate 
both use of and reference to the relief 
afforded by the statutory exemption and 
the class exemption, the Department has 
included both within a single final rule, 
discussed below. In this regard, a 
number of paragraph, subparagraph and 
other reference changes are reflected in 
the final rule to accommodate the 
merger of the two proposals, as well as 
other changes. The provisions 
applicable to the statutory exemption 
are set forth in paragraph (b) of the final 
rule and the provisions applicable to the 
class exemption are set forth at 
paragraph (d) of the final rule. In 
addition to the structural changes, the 
final rule, while retaining the general 
requirements and substance of the 
proposals, reflects a number of 
clarifying changes made in response to 
suggestions and concerns from 
commenters on the proposals. These 
suggestions and concerns are discussed 
below. 
Paragraph (a)(1) of the final rule 
describes the general scope of the final 
rule, referencing both the statutory 
exemption under sections 408(b)(14) 
and 408(g)(1) of ERISA and sections 
4975(d)(17) and 4975(f)(8) of the Code 
for certain transactions in connection 
with the provision of investment advice, 
as set forth in paragraph (b) of the final 
rule, and the class exemption, issued 
pursuant to the Department’s authority 
under section 408(a) of ERISA and 
section 4975(c)(2) of the Code, for 
certain transactions not otherwise 
covered by the statutory exemption. In 
response to the concerns of some 
commenters that the conditions of the 
final rule might be construed as being 
applicable to all investment advice 
arrangements, without regard to 
whether the provision of advice 
pursuant to such arrangements involves 
prohibited transactions, paragraph (a)(1) 
makes clear that the requirements and 
conditions of the final rule apply solely 
for the relief described in the final rule 
and, accordingly, that no inferences 
should be drawn with respect to the 
requirements applicable to the provision 
of investment advice not addressed by 
the rule. 
Commenters also requested that the 
final rule make clear that nothing in the 
rule establishes an obligation on the part 
of plans or plan sponsors to provide 
investment advice. Other commenters 
requested that the Department reaffirm 
its view that neither the statutory 
exemption under section 408(g)(1) nor 
the regulations issued thereunder 
invalidate or otherwise affect prior 
guidance concerning the circumstances 
under which the provision of 
investment advice would not constitute 
a prohibited transaction. The 
Department addressed these concerns in 
paragraphs (a)(2) and (a)(3), 
respectively. Paragraph (a)(2) provides 
that nothing contained in ERISA section 
408(g)(1), Code section 4975(f)(8), the 
regulation or the class exemption 
imposes an obligation on a plan 
fiduciary or any other party to offer, 
provide or otherwise make available any 
investment advice to a participant or 
beneficiary. Paragraph (a)(3) provides 
that nothing contained in those same 
provisions of ERISA and the Code, the 
regulation or the class exemption 
invalidates or otherwise affects prior 
regulations, exemptions, interpretive or 
other guidance issued by the 
Department pertaining to the provision 
of investment advice and the 
circumstances under which such advice 
may or may not constitute a prohibited 
transaction under section 406 of ERISA 
or section 4975 of the Code.7 
One commenter requested 
confirmation that the provision of 
investment advice pursuant to the final 
rule will not affect the relief accorded 
plan fiduciaries under section 404(c) of 
the Act. It is the view of the Department 
that there is nothing in the Act, Code, 
or this final rule that, in connection 
with the offering or provision of 
investment advice, would itself affect 
the availability of relief to plan sponsors 
or other fiduciaries of the plan (with the 
exception of the fiduciary advisers) 
otherwise available under section 
404(c). The Department notes that, as 
explained in Field Assistance Bulletin 
2007–1, a plan sponsor or other 
fiduciary that prudently selects and 
monitors an investment advice provider 
will not be liable for the advice 
furnished by such provider to the plan’s 
participants and beneficiaries, whether 
or not that advice is provided pursuant 
to the statutory exemption under section 
408(b)(14).8 It is the view of the 
Department that section 404(c) and the 
Department’s regulations thereunder do 
not limit the liability of fiduciary 
advisers that, pursuant to the 
exemptions contained in the final rule, 
specifically assume and acknowledge 
fiduciary responsibility for the 
provision of investment advice, within 
the meaning of section 3(21)(A)(ii) and 
the regulations issued thereunder, and 
related transactions; advice that clearly 
is intended to serve as the primary basis 
for investment decisions by plan 
participants and beneficiaries. Section 
404(c) provides relief for acts which are 
the direct and necessary result of a 
participant’s or beneficiary’s exercise of 
control. The investment advice (and 
related transactions) covered by the 
exemption and furnished to participants 
and beneficiaries would not, in the 
Department’s view, be the direct and 
necessary result of a participant’s or 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 19:29 Jan 16, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00003 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\21JAR3.SGM 21JAR3ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 P
R
O
D1
PC
66
 w
ith
 R
UL
ES
3
3824 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 12 / Wednesday, January 21, 2009 / Rules and Regulations 
9 See ‘‘Fiduciary Requirements for Disclosure in 
Participant-Directed Individual Account Plans,’’ 73 
FR 43013 (July 23, 2008) (proposed rule); 
‘‘Reasonable Contract or Arrangement under 
Section 408(b)(2)—Fee Disclosure; Proposed Rule,’’ 
73 FR 70987 (Dec. 13, 2007); and Notice of adoption 
of revisions to annual return/report forms, 72 FR 
64731, 64788–794, 64824–28 (Nov. 16, 2007) (form 
and instructions for the Schedule C (From 5500), 
‘‘Service Provider Information’’). 
beneficiary’s exercise of control and, 
accordingly, the fiduciary adviser would 
not be relieved of liability for such 
advice. See examples at paragraphs 
(f)(8) and (f)(9) of § 2550.404c–1. 
2. Statutory Exemption 
a. General 
Paragraph (b) of the final rule 
specifically addresses the statutory 
exemption and applicable conditions set 
forth in section 408(g)(1) of the Act. Like 
the proposal, these provisions generally 
track the requirements under section 
408(g)(1) that must be satisfied in order 
for the investment advice-related 
transactions described in section 
408(b)(14) to be exempt from the 
prohibitions of section 406. 
Paragraph (b)(1) provides that for 
purposes of the relief afforded for 
transactions described in section 
408(b)(14) (and section 4975(d)(17) of 
the Code) the investment advice must be 
provided by a fiduciary adviser under 
an ‘‘eligible investment advice 
arrangement.’’ The transactions 
described in section 408(b)(14) include 
the provision of investment advice to a 
participant or beneficiary with respect 
to a security or other property available 
as an investment under the plan; the 
acquisition, holding or sale of a security 
or other property available as an 
investment under the plan pursuant to 
the advice; and the direct or indirect 
receipt of fees or other compensation by 
the fiduciary adviser or an affiliate in 
connection with the provision of the 
advice or in connection with the 
acquisition, holding or sale of the 
security or other property. 
With regard to the scope of relief, one 
commenter requested that the 
Department clarify that transactions 
covered by the regulation and the class 
exemption include extensions of credit 
and similar transactions necessary to the 
execution and settlement of trades of 
securities. It is the view of the 
Department that transactions in 
connection with the provision of 
investment advice described in section 
3(21)(A)(ii) of ERISA include, for 
purposes of the statutory exemption and 
class exemption, otherwise permissible 
transactions necessary for the efficient 
execution and settlement of trades of 
securities, such as extensions of credit 
in connection with settlements. 
One commenter requested that the 
relief afforded by the regulation and 
class exemption be extended to 
investment advice provided to plan 
sponsors generally. The Department 
notes that the transactions described in 
408(b)(14), with respect to which relief 
is given if the requirements of section 
408(g)(1) are satisfied, are specifically 
limited to certain transactions that 
involve the provision of investment 
advice to a participant or beneficiary of 
a plan. The scope of both the regulation 
and the related class exemption, 
therefore, were limited to these 
transactions. While advice provided to 
plan fiduciaries such as plan sponsors 
may well be similar in many respects to 
advice provided to participants and 
beneficiaries, the Department does not 
believe it would be appropriate, as part 
of this final rule, without further notice 
and comment, to extend relief to 
transactions involving investment 
advice provided to plan sponsors. 
Accordingly, the Department has not 
adopted this suggestion. 
One commenter requested that the 
Department confirm that advice to a 
participant or beneficiary concerning 
the selection of an investment manager 
to manage some or all of the 
participant’s or beneficiary’s assets 
constitutes the provision of investment 
advice within the meaning of section 
3(21)(A)(ii) of ERISA for purposes of the 
statutory exemption and the class 
exemption. It has long been the view of 
the Department that the act of making 
individualized recommendations of 
particular investment managers to plan 
fiduciaries may constitute the provision 
of investment advice within the 
meaning of section 3(21)(A). The 
fiduciary nature of that advice does not, 
in the Department’s view, change 
merely because the advice is being given 
to a plan participant or beneficiary. 
Accordingly, it is the view of the 
Department that the recommending of 
investment managers to participants and 
beneficiaries may constitute the 
provision of investment advice for 
purposes of both the statutory and class 
exemption contained in this final rule. 
Paragraph (b)(2) provides that, for 
purposes of section 408(g)(1) of the Act 
and 4975(f)(8) of the Code, an ‘‘eligible 
investment advice arrangement’’ is an 
arrangement that meets the 
requirements of paragraph (b)(3), 
applicable to arrangements that use fee- 
leveling, or paragraph (b)(4), applicable 
to arrangements that use computer 
models, or both. 
b. Arrangements using fee-leveling 
Paragraph (b)(3) sets forth the 
requirements applicable to investment 
advice arrangements that use fee- 
leveling under the statutory exemption. 
Paragraph (b)(3)(i) delineates the 
specific requirements that must be met. 
In this regard, paragraph (b)(3)(i)(A) of 
the final rule, like the proposal, requires 
that any investment advice must be 
based on generally accepted investment 
theories that take into account historic 
returns of different asset classes over 
defined periods of time, noting that 
additional considerations are not 
precluded from being taking into 
account. 
One commenter recommended that 
the investment advice also take into 
account investment management and 
other fees attendant to the 
recommended investment(s). The 
Department agrees that the fees and 
expenses attendant to an investment are 
an important consideration and should 
be factored into individualized 
recommendations. Given the 
Department’s various regulatory 
initiatives directed toward enhancing 
the consideration of investment-related 
fees and expenses by plan fiduciaries 
and plan participants and beneficiaries,9 
the Department believes that it is 
reasonable to expect fiduciary advisers, 
as well as their computer models, to 
take such fees and expenses into 
account in providing investment advice 
to the plan participants and 
beneficiaries. The Department, 
therefore, has added a new provision, at 
paragraph (b)(3)(i)(B), requiring 
arrangements that utilize fee-leveling to 
take into account investment 
management and other fees and 
expenses attendant to the recommended 
investments. Similar changes appear in 
paragraph (b)(4)(i)(B) for arrangements 
that use computer models, and 
paragraph (d)(6)(i)(B), applicable to 
arrangements for providing advice 
under the class exemption. 
Paragraph (b)(3)(i)(C) of the final rule 
requires that arrangements utilizing fee- 
leveling must take into account certain 
personal information furnished by a 
participant or beneficiary. In the 
proposal, this information related to age, 
life expectancy, retirement age, risk 
tolerance, other assets or sources of 
income and investment preferences. The 
Department received a number of 
comments on this provision. Many of 
the commenters requested clarification 
that the delineated factors were not 
mandatory, some of the commenters 
noting that the fiduciary adviser may 
not have the information, participants 
may not be willing to give the 
information or the information they 
furnish may be incomplete. Other 
commenters recommended that the 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 19:29 Jan 16, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00004 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\21JAR3.SGM 21JAR3ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 P
R
O
D1
PC
66
 w
ith
 R
UL
ES
3
3825 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 12 / Wednesday, January 21, 2009 / Rules and Regulations 
10 See AO 97–15A and AO 2005–10A. 
information focus on ‘‘time horizons’’ 
rather than life expectancy or retirement 
age, noting the use of ‘‘time horizons’’ 
by the Financial Industry Regulatory 
Authority (FINRA) in its guidance on 
determining the suitability of a 
recommendation. 
For purposes of the final rule, the 
Department retained the factors 
delineated in the statute, section 
408(g)(3)(B)(ii) of ERISA, as examples of 
the information investment advice 
should be capable of taking into 
account. The Department also has 
included in the final rule, as an 
additional factor, information pertaining 
to the participant’s or beneficiary’s 
current investments in designated 
investment options. The Department 
believes that these factors are so 
fundamental to meaningful investment 
advice, the Department is applying the 
personal information requirement to all 
advice provided under the statutory 
exemption and class exemption. 
However, the Department notes that the 
information is only required to be taken 
into account to the extent that a 
participant or beneficiary actually 
provides such information. There is no 
obligation, therefore, for a fiduciary 
adviser to factor in personal information 
that it does not have or that the 
participant or beneficiary fails or refuses 
to provide. Rather, the fiduciary adviser 
is merely required to request the 
personal information described in the 
final rule, and utilize such information 
only to the extent furnished. The 
Department has modified the text of the 
final rule to provide this clarification. 
The Department also has modified the 
language of the final rule to reference 
‘‘time horizons,’’ and by parenthetical 
citation to life expectancy and 
retirement age as examples of such time 
horizons. Similar changes are reflected 
in paragraph (b)(4)(i)(C), for 
arrangements utilizing computer 
models, and paragraph (d)(6)(i)(C), 
applicable to arrangements for 
providing advice under the class 
exemption. 
Paragraphs (b)(3)(i)(D) and (E) of the 
final rule set forth the limitations on 
fees and compensation at the employee, 
agent and registered representative level 
and the fiduciary adviser level, 
respectively, applicable to arrangements 
utilizing fee-leveling under the statutory 
exemption. These limitations are 
unchanged from the proposal. Paragraph 
(b)(3)(i)(D) provides that any fees or 
other compensation (including salary, 
bonuses, awards, promotions, 
commissions or other things of value) 
received, directly or indirectly, by any 
employee, agent or registered 
representative that provides investment 
advice on behalf of a fiduciary adviser 
cannot vary depending on the basis of 
any investment option selected by a 
participant or beneficiary. Paragraph 
(b)(3)(i)(E) provides that any fees 
(including any commission or other 
compensation) received by the fiduciary 
adviser for investment advice or with 
respect to the sale, holding, or 
acquisition of any security or other 
property for purposes of investment of 
plan assets may not vary depending on 
the basis of any investment option 
selected by a participant or beneficiary. 
While a number of commenters 
supported the Department’s application 
of the fee-leveling requirement, some 
commenters objected to the 
Department’s implementation of the 
statutory provision, arguing that 
Congress, in an effort to eliminate the 
potential for conflicts of interest, 
intended the fee-leveling requirement to 
encompass not only the fiduciary 
adviser but also affiliates of the 
fiduciary adviser. The Department 
disagrees with this interpretation of the 
section 408(g)(2)(A)(i). Shortly after 
enactment of the PPA, the Department 
issued Field Assistance Bulletin 2007– 
1 (February 2, 2007) setting forth its 
legal analysis of the fee-leveling 
requirements in section 408(g)(2)(A)(i) 
of the Act. 
In that Bulletin, the Department noted 
that it is clear from section 
408(g)(2)(A)(i) that only the fees or other 
compensation of the fiduciary adviser 
may not vary. The Department 
explained that, in contrast to other 
provisions of section 408(b)(14) and 
section 408(g), section 408(g)(2)(A)(i) 
references only the fiduciary adviser, 
not the fiduciary adviser or an affiliate. 
Inasmuch as a person, pursuant to 
section 408(g)(11)(A), can be a fiduciary 
adviser only if that person is a fiduciary 
of the plan by virtue of providing 
investment advice, an affiliate of a 
registered investment adviser, a bank or 
similar financial institution, an 
insurance company, or a registered 
broker dealer will be subject to the 
varying fee limitation only if that 
affiliate is providing investment advice 
to plan participants and beneficiaries. 
The Department further explained that, 
consistent with earlier guidance in this 
area, if the fees and compensation 
received by an affiliate of a fiduciary 
that provides investment advice do not 
vary or are offset against those received 
by the fiduciary for the provision of 
investment advice, no prohibited 
transaction would result solely by 
reason of providing investment advice 
and thus there would be no need for a 
prohibited transaction exemption, such 
as provided under sections 408(b)(14) 
and 408(g).10 The Department 
concluded that, for purposes of section 
408(g)(2)(A)(i), Congress could not have 
intended for the requirement that fees 
not vary depending on the basis of any 
investment options selected to extend to 
affiliates of the fiduciary adviser, unless, 
of course, the affiliate is also a provider 
of investment advice to a plan. This 
position continues to reflect the 
Department’s legal analysis of section 
408(g)(2)(A)(i) and, therefore, is 
reflected in the fee-leveling provisions 
of the final regulation. 
With regard to those commenters 
concerned about potential conflicts of 
interest influencing the investment 
advice recommendations, the 
Department believes that, while there 
may always be a few individuals who, 
without regard to limitations imposed 
by law, abuse their position of trust as 
fiduciaries, the safeguards established 
by the regulation, as well as the class 
exemption, will, in the Department’s 
view, remove many of the incentives 
and create strong deterrents for abusive 
behavior. In this regard, we note that, in 
addition to the specific fee-leveling 
limitations, fiduciary advisers utilizing 
investment advice arrangements that 
employ fee-leveling must comply with 
the requirements of paragraphs (b)(5) 
[authorization by plan fiduciary], (b)(6) 
[annual audits], (b)(7) [advance and 
annual disclosure], (b)(8) [other 
conditions], and (e) [maintenance of 
records] of the final rule, each of which 
is discussed in more detail below. 
A number of commenters had 
questions or requested clarification of 
the fee-leveling requirements applicable 
to employees, agents, or registered 
representatives that provide advice on 
behalf of a fiduciary adviser, now set 
forth in paragraph (b)(3)(i)(D) of the 
final rule. One commenter asked for 
examples of things of value that an 
employee, agent or representative might 
receive, directly or indirectly, that 
would violate the rule. Paragraph 
(b)(3)(i)(D), like the proposal, delineates 
a number of types of compensation that, 
if varied based on investment options 
selected by a participant or beneficiary, 
would violate the rule, namely salary, 
bonuses, awards, commissions, or other 
things of value. Things of value would 
include trips, gifts and other things that 
while having a value, are not given in 
the form of cash. 
A number of commenters requested 
confirmation that bonus programs based 
on the overall profitability of the 
fiduciary adviser or its affiliate, or a 
designated business unit within the 
adviser’s business would not violate the 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 19:29 Jan 16, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00005 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\21JAR3.SGM 21JAR3ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 P
R
O
D1
PC
66
 w
ith
 R
UL
ES
3
3826 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 12 / Wednesday, January 21, 2009 / Rules and Regulations 
11 In general, these requirements track the 
requirements set forth in section 408(g)(3)(B) of the 
Act. 12 See section 408(g)(3)(B)(v) of the Act. 
fee-leveling requirement. The 
application of the fee-leveling is 
intended to be very broad in order to 
ensure that objectivity of the investment 
advice recommendations to plan 
participants and beneficiaries is not 
compromised by the advice provider’s 
own financial interest in the outcome. 
Accordingly, almost every form of 
remuneration that takes into account the 
investments selected by participants 
and beneficiaries would likely violate 
the fee-leveling requirement of the final 
rule. On the other hand, it is 
conceivable that a compensation or 
bonus arrangement that is based on the 
overall profitability of an organization 
may be permissible to the extent that it 
can be established that the individual 
account plan and IRA investment advice 
and investment option components 
were excluded from, or constituted a 
negligible portion of, the calculation of 
the organization’s profitability. The 
Department believes, however, that 
whether any particular salary, bonus, 
awards, promotions or commissions 
program meets or fails this fee-leveling 
requirement ultimately depends on the 
details of the program. In this regard, 
the Department notes that the details of 
such programs will be the subject of 
both a review and a report by an 
independent auditor as a condition for 
relief under the statutory and class 
exemption. 
c. Arrangements Using Computer 
Models 
As with the general requirements for 
arrangements using fee-leveling, and 
like the proposal in most respects, the 
final rule requires that arrangements 
utilizing computer models satisfy 
certain basic requirements.11 These 
requirements include the application of 
generally accepted investment theories 
(paragraph (b)(4)(i)(A)), the 
consideration of investment 
management and other fees and 
expenses attendant to recommended 
investments (paragraph (b)(4)(i)(B)), and 
the utilization of certain participant- 
provided information (paragraph 
(b)(4)(i)(C)). The changes to these 
requirements were discussed in 
connection with the fee-leveling 
provisions of the regulation. 
Other conditions imposed on 
computer models require that such 
models utilize objective criteria to 
provide asset allocation portfolios 
(paragraph (b)(4)(i)(D)) and avoid 
recommendations that inappropriately 
favor investments options offered by the 
fiduciary adviser or that may generate 
greater income for the fiduciary adviser 
or those with a material affiliation or 
material contractual relationship with 
the fiduciary adviser (paragraph 
(b)(4)(i)(E)). 
As with the proposal, the language of 
the final rule makes clear that a 
computer model would not fail to meet 
the requirements of paragraph 
(b)(4)(i)(E) merely because the only 
investment options offered under the 
plan are options offered by the fiduciary 
adviser or a person with a material 
affiliation or material contractual 
relationship with the fiduciary adviser. 
The language also makes clear that a 
computer model cannot be designed and 
operated to inappropriately favor those 
investment options that generate the 
most income for the fiduciary adviser or 
a person with a material affiliation or 
material contractual relationship with 
the fiduciary adviser. The final rule 
defines a ‘‘material affiliation’’ and 
‘‘material contractual relationship’’ at 
paragraphs (c)(6) and (c)(7), 
respectively. 
One commenter requested 
clarification that the provisions of 
paragraph (b)(4)(i)(E) would not be 
violated where an IRA beneficiary 
requests investment advice with the 
understanding that the computer model 
will be providing only hold or sell 
recommendations with respect to 
investment options not offered through 
the IRA. While the Department believes 
that computer models should, with few 
exceptions, be required to model all 
investment options available under a 
plan or through an IRA, the Department 
does not believe that it is reasonable to 
expect that all computer models be 
capable of modeling the universe of 
investment options, rather than just 
those investment alternatives designated 
as available investments through the 
plan or IRA. Accordingly, it is the view 
of the Department that a computer 
model would not fail to meet the 
requirements of paragraph (b)(4)(i)(E) 
merely because it limits buy 
recommendations only to those 
investment options that can be bought 
through the plan or IRA, even if the 
model is capable of modeling hold and 
sell recommendations with respect to 
investments not available through the 
plan or IRA, provided, of course, that 
the plan participant or beneficiary or 
IRA beneficiary is fully informed of the 
model’s limitations in advance of the 
recommendations, thereby enabling the 
recipient of advice to assess the 
usefulness of the recommendations. 
This view would also extend to the 
requirements of the class exemption at 
paragraph (d)(3). 
Paragraph (b)(4)(i)(F)(1) of the final 
rule, like the proposal, requires that a 
computer model take into account all 
‘‘designated investment options’’ 
available under the plan without giving 
inappropriate weight to any investment 
option.12 The term ‘‘designated 
investment option’’ is defined in 
paragraph (c)(1) of the final rule to mean 
any investment option designated by the 
plan into which participants and 
beneficiaries may direct the investment 
of assets held in, or contributed to, their 
individual accounts. The term 
‘‘designated investment option’’ does 
not include ‘‘brokerage windows,’’ ‘‘self- 
directed brokerage accounts,’’ or similar 
plan arrangements that enable 
participants and beneficiaries to select 
investments beyond those designated by 
the plan. 
Paragraph (b)(4)(i)(F)(2)(i) also, like 
the proposal, provides that a computer 
model shall not be treated as failing to 
take all designated investment options 
into account merely because it does not 
take into account an investment option 
that constitutes an investment primarily 
in qualifying employer securities. While 
most of the commenters on the proposal 
supported the exclusion of qualifying 
employer securities, some commenters 
requested clarification as to whether the 
computer model nonetheless had to 
factor in the holding of such 
investments by a participant or 
beneficiary, without regard to buy, sell 
or hold recommendations. 
It is the view of the Department that, 
absent a specific request from the 
participant or beneficiary to exclude 
such assets from the modeled 
investment advice, a computer model 
must take into account the fact that the 
participant or beneficiary has such an 
investment when giving advice with 
respect to the participant’s or 
beneficiaries remaining assets or 
investments. If, on the other hand, a 
participant or beneficiary elects not to 
have such investments factored into the 
modeled advice or does not provide 
such information and the computer 
model does not have such information, 
the model would not be required to take 
such assets into account in providing a 
recommendation. This approach, in the 
Department’s view, is consistent with 
the requirement set forth in paragraph 
(b)(4)(i)(C) of the final rule that 
computer models take into account 
other assets and investment preferences 
of the participant or beneficiary. One 
commenter requested that the exclusion 
for qualifying employer securities be 
expanded to apply to other single asset 
funds, such as funds invested in stock 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 19:29 Jan 16, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00006 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\21JAR3.SGM 21JAR3ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 P
R
O
D1
PC
66
 w
ith
 R
UL
ES
3
3827 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 12 / Wednesday, January 21, 2009 / Rules and Regulations 
of prior employers or a spin-off 
company. The commenter did not 
indicate other types of single asset 
funds, or the extent to which they are 
offered as designated investment 
options under plans. The Department 
does not believe it has sufficient 
information at this time to extend 
similar treatment to any such 
investments. 
Other commenters requested that 
computer models not be required to 
include, among other things, options 
from predecessor plans (referred to as 
‘‘legacy options’’), managed accounts, 
target date funds, and in-plan annuity 
options, which they described as 
annuity purchase programs that serve as 
both accumulation and distribution 
options. With respect to legacy options, 
it is the view of the Department that to 
the extent participants continue to have 
an ability to further invest in such 
options, the options must be included 
within the computer model. If, on the 
other hand, participants are merely 
permitted to hold and sell investments 
in such options, it is the view of the 
Department that, as discussed above 
with respect to qualifying employer 
securities, unless a participant 
specifically elects to not have such 
investments taken into account, the 
model should take into account that the 
participant holds such assets. Similar to 
the above, a computer model would not, 
in the view of the Department, fail to 
meet the requirements of paragraph 
(b)(4)(i)(F)(1) merely because it limits 
buy recommendations only to those 
investment options that can be bought 
through the plan, even though the 
model is capable of modeling hold and 
sell recommendations with respect to 
other investments. 
A few commenters noted that certain 
types of investment options, such as 
managed accounts, life cycle-type funds, 
and funds that are designed to manage 
assets taking into account a particular 
risk level for the participant, rely on an 
investment manager to maintain the 
asset allocation appropriate to its 
particular fund, product or service and, 
therefore, that it serves no purpose to 
have such investments included in 
another unrelated overlaying asset 
allocation analysis. The Department 
agrees that where an investment fund, 
product or service is itself designed to 
maintain a particular asset allocation 
taking into account the time horizons 
(retirement age, life expectancy) or risk 
level of a participant, such fund should 
not be required to be included in the 
computer modeled investment advice. 
Similarly, the Department believes that 
where, in connection with an in-plan 
annuity option, with respect to which a 
participant may allocate a portion of his 
or her assets toward the purchase of an 
annuitized retirement benefit and those 
allocated assets are no longer available 
for investment at the time of the advice, 
the participant or beneficiary has, in 
effect, decided to treat those assets as no 
longer available for investment and, 
accordingly, such assets should not, in 
the view of the Department, be required 
to be modeled for purposes of buy, hold 
or sell recommendations. On the other 
hand, when such options are available 
to participants and beneficiaries, the 
Department believes that participants 
and beneficiaries receiving modeled 
recommendations should at the same 
time be furnished a general description 
of these options and how they operate. 
This disclosure will assure that 
participants and beneficiaries have 
information concerning all of their 
investment choices, not merely those 
that can be modeled by a computer. 
This treatment is set forth in paragraphs 
(b)(4)(i)(F)(2)(ii) and (iii). 
Thus, under paragraph 
(b)(4)(i)(F)(2)(ii) of the final rule, a 
computer model will not fail to meet the 
requirements of the regulation merely 
because it does not make 
recommendations relating to the 
acquisition, holding or sale of an 
investment fund, product or service that 
allocates the invested assets of a 
participant or beneficiary to achieve 
varying degrees of long-term 
appreciation and capital preservation 
through equity and fixed income 
exposures, based on a defined time 
horizon (such as retirement age or life 
expectancy) or level of risk of the 
participant or beneficiary (e.g., life 
cycle-type funds). 
Similarly, paragraph (b)(4)(i)(F)(2)(iii) 
provides that a computer model will not 
fail merely because it does not make 
recommendations with respect to an 
annuity option with respect to which a 
participant or beneficiary may allocate 
assets toward the purchase of a stream 
of retirement income payments 
guaranteed by an insurance company. 
As noted above, however, the 
foregoing exceptions from the modeling 
requirement apply only if participants 
and beneficiaries are provided, 
contemporaneous with the provision of 
investment advice generated by the 
computer model, information 
explaining the funds, products or 
services, or in the case of an annuity, 
the option. 
Paragraph (b)(4)(ii) of the final rule, 
like the proposal, requires that, prior to 
utilization of the computer model, the 
fiduciary adviser must obtain a written 
certification that the computer model 
meets the requirements of paragraph 
(b)(4)(i), discussed above. If the model is 
modified in a manner that may affect its 
ability to meet the requirements of 
paragraph (b)(4)(i), the fiduciary adviser, 
prior to utilization of the modified 
model, must obtain a new certification. 
The required certification must be made 
by an ‘‘eligible investment expert,’’ 
within the meaning of paragraph 
(b)(4)(iii) and must be made in 
accordance with the requirements of 
paragraph (b)(4)(iv). 
Paragraph (b)(4)(iii) of the final rule, 
like the proposal, defines an ‘‘eligible 
investment expert’’ to mean a person 
that, through employees or otherwise, 
has the appropriate technical training or 
experience and proficiency to analyze, 
determine and certify, in a manner 
consistent with paragraph (b)(4)(iv), 
whether a computer model meets the 
requirements of paragraph (b)(4)(i); 
except that the term eligible investment 
expert does not include any person that 
has any material affiliation or material 
contractual relationship with the 
fiduciary adviser, with a person with a 
material affiliation or material 
contractual relationship with the 
fiduciary adviser, or with any employee, 
agent, or registered representative of the 
foregoing. 
One commenter requested that the 
Department provide examples of 
adequate credentials for an ‘‘eligible 
investment expert.’’ The Department 
continues to believe that it is very 
difficult to define a specific set of 
academic or other credentials that 
would serve to define the appropriate 
expertise and experience for an eligible 
investment expert. Unfortunately, for 
the same reason it is difficult to define 
specific credentials for an eligible 
investment expert, it is difficult to 
provide examples of the one or a set of 
credentials that in every case would 
qualify an individual to make the 
required certifications. The Department 
also is concerned that, even if an 
example were possible, such an 
example may encourage unnecessary 
and inappropriate reliance on the 
example as a person considered by the 
Department to possess the necessary 
qualifications. For this reason, the 
Department has not provided any 
examples of credentials for eligible 
investment experts. 
One commenter inquired whether the 
eligible investment expert is required to 
be bonded for purposes of section 412 
of ERISA. In the view of the 
Department, an eligible investment 
expert, in performing the computer 
model certification described in the 
final rule, would neither be acting as a 
fiduciary under ERISA, nor be 
‘‘handling’’ plan assets such that the 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 19:29 Jan 16, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00007 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\21JAR3.SGM 21JAR3ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 P
R
O
D1
PC
66
 w
ith
 R
UL
ES
3
3828 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 12 / Wednesday, January 21, 2009 / Rules and Regulations 
13 See 29 CFR 2550.408b–2(e)(3). 
14 See discussion in Field Assistance Bulletin 
2007–01. 
15 The audit provisions are set forth in section 
408(g)(6) of ERISA. 
bonding requirements would be 
applicable to the eligible investment 
expert. 
One commenter requested 
confirmation that a fiduciary adviser’s 
selection and payment of an eligible 
investment expert is not itself a per se 
prohibited transaction. It is the view of 
the Department that, given the structure 
of the statutory exemption under section 
408(g)(1) and the expectation that a 
fiduciary adviser will obtain a 
certification from an eligible investment 
expert, the selection and payment of the 
fiduciary adviser is not a per se conflict, 
provided that the eligible investment 
expert has neither a material affiliation 
or material contractual relationship with 
the fiduciary adviser. Moreover, the 
Department has made clear that the 
selection of an eligible investment 
expert is a fiduciary act governed by 
section 404(a)(1) of the Act. See 
paragraph (b)(4)(v). Similarly, the 
selection and payment of an auditor to 
conduct the audit required under the 
statutory exemption or class exemption 
would not constitute a per se conflict of 
interest. As noted in the preamble to the 
proposal, while the rule gives latitude to 
a fiduciary adviser in selecting an 
eligible investment expert to certify a 
computer model, as the party seeking 
prohibited transaction relief under the 
exemption, the fiduciary adviser has the 
burden of demonstrating that all 
applicable requirements of the 
exemption are satisfied with respect to 
its arrangement. 
Paragraph (b)(4)(iv) of the final rule 
provides that a certification by an 
eligible investment expert shall be in 
writing and contain the following: An 
identification of the methodology or 
methodologies applied in determining 
whether the computer model meets the 
requirements of paragraph (b)(4)(i) of 
the final rule; an explanation of how the 
applied methodology or methodologies 
demonstrated that the computer model 
met the requirements of paragraph 
(b)(4)(i); and a description of any 
limitations that were imposed by any 
person on the eligible investment 
expert’s selection or application of 
methodologies for determining whether 
the computer model meets the 
requirements of paragraph (b)(4)(i). In 
addition the certification is required to 
contain a representation that the 
methodology or methodologies were 
applied by a person or persons with the 
educational background, technical 
training or experience necessary to 
analyze and determine whether the 
computer model meets the requirements 
of paragraph (b)(4)(i); and a statement 
certifying that the eligible investment 
expert has determined that the 
computer model meets the requirements 
of paragraph (b)(4)(i). Finally the 
certification must be signed by the 
eligible investment expert. The 
Department received no comments on 
this provision and, accordingly, has 
adopted the provision as proposed. 
d. Authorization by a Plan Fiduciary 
Paragraph (b)(5) of the final rule, 
consistent with section 408(g)(4) of 
ERISA, the proposed rule and proposed 
class exemption, provides that the 
arrangement pursuant to which 
investment advice is provided to 
participants and beneficiaries must be 
expressly authorized by a plan fiduciary 
(or, in the case of an IRA, the IRA 
beneficiary) other than: The person 
offering the arrangement; any person 
providing designated investment 
options under the plan; or any affiliate 
of either. The final rule, like the 
proposals, further provides that, for 
purposes of such authorization, an IRA 
beneficiary will not be treated as an 
affiliate of a person solely by reason of 
being an employee of such person, 
thereby enabling employees of a 
fiduciary adviser to take advantage of 
investment advice arrangements offered 
by their employer under the exemption. 
A number of commenters requested 
that the authorizing language of both the 
statutory exemption and class 
exemption be modified to permit a 
fiduciary adviser to provide investment 
advice for the adviser’s own plan. The 
Department does not believe it is 
necessary or appropriate to limit a 
fiduciary adviser’s employee’s choice of 
investment advice providers to only 
competitors of the fiduciary adviser. 
Accordingly, the Department has 
modified the authorization provisions of 
the final regulation and class exemption 
to permit a fiduciary adviser to provide 
advice to its own employees (or 
employees of an affiliate) pursuant to an 
arrangement under the final rule, 
provided that the fiduciary adviser or 
affiliate offers the same arrangement to 
participants and beneficiaries of 
unaffiliated plans in the ordinary course 
of its business. (See paragraphs (b)(5)(ii) 
and (d)(5)(ii) of the final rule). The 
Department notes, however, that neither 
the statutory exemption nor the class 
exemption provides relief for the 
selection of the fiduciary adviser or the 
arrangement pursuant to which advice 
will be provided. Accordingly, plan 
fiduciaries must nonetheless be prudent 
in their selection and may not, in 
contravention of section 406(b), use 
their position to benefit themselves. In 
this regard, the Department has 
indicated that if a fiduciary provides 
services to a plan without the receipt of 
compensation or other consideration 
(other than reimbursement of direct 
expenses properly and actually incurred 
in the performance of such services) the 
provision of such services does not, in 
and of itself, constitute an act described 
in section 406(b) of the Act.13 
One commenter requested a 
clarification that, for purposes of the 
authorization provision, a plan sponsor- 
fiduciary would not be treated as the 
person providing a designated 
investment option under the plan with 
respect to an option that is designed to 
invest in qualifying employer securities. 
The Department did not intend, nor 
does it believe Congress intended, to 
exclude employer-plan fiduciaries from 
authorizing investment advice 
arrangements solely because the plan for 
which the arrangement is being 
authorized offers participants the 
opportunity to invest in qualifying 
employer securities. The Department 
has added a provision to both the 
regulation and class exemption for 
purposes of such clarification (see 
paragraphs (b)(5)(iii) and (d)(5)(iii), 
respectively, of the final rule). 
One commenter asked for a 
clarification as to whether an 
authorizing plan fiduciary can rely on 
the representations of a fiduciary 
adviser with respect to whether a 
computer model meets the requirements 
of the regulation. Plan fiduciaries have 
an obligation to prudently select, and 
periodically review that selection, 
fiduciary advisers.14 In connection with 
an otherwise prudent and reasonable 
selection and review process, the 
Department believes that an authorizing 
plan fiduciary, in the absence of any 
information to the contrary, may rely on 
the representations of a fiduciary 
adviser regarding the fiduciary adviser’s 
compliance with the requirements of 
this rule. 
e. Annual Audit 
Paragraph (b)(6) of the final rule sets 
forth the annual audit requirements for 
the statutory exemption.15 Paragraph 
(b)(6)(i), like the proposal, provides that 
the fiduciary adviser shall, at least 
annually, engage an independent 
auditor, who has appropriate technical 
training or experience and proficiency, 
and so represents in writing to the 
fiduciary adviser, to conduct an audit of 
the investment advice arrangements for 
compliance with the requirements of the 
regulation and, within 60 days 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 19:29 Jan 16, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00008 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\21JAR3.SGM 21JAR3ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 P
R
O
D1
PC
66
 w
ith
 R
UL
ES
3
3829 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 12 / Wednesday, January 21, 2009 / Rules and Regulations 
16 15 U.S.C. 7004(d)(1) (2000). 
following completion of the audit, to 
issue a written report to the fiduciary 
adviser and, except with respect to an 
arrangement with an IRA, to each 
fiduciary who authorized the use of the 
investment advice arrangement, setting 
forth the specific findings of the auditor 
regarding compliance of the 
arrangement with the requirements of 
the regulation. 
Given the significant number of 
reports that an auditor would be 
required to send if the written report 
was required to be furnished to all IRA 
beneficiaries, the Department framed an 
alternative requirement for investment 
advice arrangements with IRAs. This 
alternative is set forth in paragraph 
(b)(6)(ii) of the final rule. The final rule, 
like the proposal, provides that, with 
respect to an arrangement with an IRA, 
the fiduciary adviser shall, within 30 
days following receipt of the report from 
the auditor, furnish a copy of the report 
to the IRA beneficiary or make such 
report available on its Web site, 
provided that such beneficiaries are 
provided information, along with other 
required disclosures (see paragraph 
(b)(7) of the final rule), concerning the 
purpose of the report, and how and 
where to locate the report applicable to 
their account. With respect to making 
the report available on a Web site, the 
Department believes that this alternative 
to furnishing reports to IRA 
beneficiaries satisfies the requirement of 
section 104(d)(1) of the Electronic 
Signatures in Global and National 
Commerce Act (E–SIGN) 16 that any 
exemption from the consumer consent 
requirements of section 101(c) of 
E–SIGN must be necessary to eliminate 
a substantial burden on electronic 
commerce and will not increase the 
material risk of harm to consumers. The 
Department solicited comments on this 
finding in the proposal, and received no 
comments in response. 
Obtaining consent from each IRA 
holder or participant before publication 
on the Web site would be a tremendous 
burden on the plan or IRA provider. 
This element, along with the broad 
availability of internet access and the 
lack of any direct consequences to any 
particular participant for a failure to 
review the audit for the participants and 
beneficiaries, supports these findings. 
Paragraph (b)(6)(ii) of the final rule 
also provides, like the proposal, that, 
when the report of the auditor identifies 
noncompliance with the requirements 
of the regulation, the fiduciary adviser 
must send a copy of the report to the 
Department. The final rule, like the 
proposal, requires that the fiduciary 
adviser submit the report to the 
Department within 30 days following 
receipt of the report from the auditor. 
This report will enable the Department 
to monitor compliance with the 
statutory or class exemption. 
For purposes of paragraph (b)(6), an 
auditor is considered independent if it 
does not have a material affiliation or 
material contractual relationship with 
the person offering the investment 
advice arrangement to the plan or any 
designated investment options under 
the plan. See paragraph (b)(6)(iii). The 
terms ‘‘material affiliation’’ and 
‘‘material contractual relationship’’ are 
defined in paragraphs (c)(6) and (7) of 
the final rule, respectively. 
With regard to the scope of the audit, 
paragraph (b)(6)(iv) of the final rule 
provides that the auditor shall review 
sufficient relevant information to 
formulate an opinion as to whether the 
investment advice arrangements, and 
the advice provided pursuant thereto, 
offered by the fiduciary adviser during 
the audit period were in compliance 
with the regulation. Paragraph (b)(6)(iv) 
further provides that it is not intended 
to preclude an auditor from using 
information obtained by sampling, as 
reasonably determined appropriate by 
the auditor, investment advice 
arrangements, and the advice pursuant 
thereto, during the audit period. The 
final rule, like the proposal, does not 
require an audit of every investment 
advice arrangement at the plan or 
fiduciary adviser-level or of all the 
advice that is provided under the 
exemption. In general, the final rule 
appropriately leaves to the auditor the 
determination as to the appropriate 
scope of its review and the extent to 
which it can rely on representative 
samples for determining compliance 
with the exemption. 
While the audit provisions contained 
in the final rule are, with respect to both 
the statutory exemption and the class 
exemption, identical to the proposed 
audit requirements, the final rule does 
contain new provisions making clear 
that, like the selection of an eligible 
investment expert to certify a computer 
model, the selection of the required 
auditor, for purposes of both the 
statutory exemption and the class 
exemption, is a fiduciary act governed 
by section 404(a)(1) of ERISA. See 
paragraphs (b)(6)(v) and (d)(9)(v) of the 
final rule. 
A number of commenters raised 
issues or requested clarifications 
regarding various aspects of the audit 
requirements. 
One commenter requested that the 
Department establish that the first 
annual audit required by the statutory 
exemption would not be required to be 
completed until the end of 2009. 
Inasmuch as the audit and other 
provisions of the regulation relating to 
the statutory exemption closely track 
the provisions of the statutory 
exemption, the Department is not 
persuaded that there is a basis for 
deferring the completion of any 
otherwise required annual audit until 
the end of 2009. However, for purposes 
of any audits required to be completed 
prior to the effective date of the final 
rule, the auditor may take into account 
good faith compliance with the statute 
in the absence of regulatory guidance. 
One commenter requested that the 
Department should lessen the burden on 
small advisers by modifying the audit 
requirement by, for example, requiring 
an audit only every three years, rather 
than annually. It is the view of the 
Department that the audit requirements 
of both the statutory and class 
exemption are critical protections for 
participants and beneficiaries in 
investment advice arrangements with 
respect to which there is a possibility 
that an adviser may act in its own self- 
interest rather than the interest of the 
plan’s participants and beneficiaries. No 
information or data has been furnished 
to the Department that would support a 
finding that this risk to participants and 
beneficiaries is any less from small 
advisers than large adviser. Thus, the 
Department has no basis on which to 
determine what, if any, special relief 
should be afforded small advisers. The 
final rule, therefore, contains no special 
provisions for small advisers. 
Another commenter suggested that 
rather than furnishing copies of the 
audit report to authorizing fiduciaries 
and IRA beneficiaries, fiduciary advisers 
should be required to inform the parties 
of the availability of the reports and 
furnish such reports only in response to 
requests. The Department did not adopt 
this suggestion. The Department 
believes that, as with the audit, the 
reports of the auditor are important and 
should be furnished to each authorizing 
plan fiduciary. On the other hand, the 
Department recognizes that, in the case 
of IRAs, furnishing a report to every IRA 
beneficiary may be unduly burdensome 
and expensive, and, accordingly, 
provided a special rule that permits the 
making available of the report on the 
fiduciary adviser’s Web site. 
One commenter requested that 
fiduciary advisers have an additional 30 
days to furnish the audit report to the 
authorizing plan fiduciaries. Another 
commenter requested that the final rule 
provide 60 days for the furnishing of 
IRA-related audit reports. The 
Department did not adopt these 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 19:29 Jan 16, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00009 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\21JAR3.SGM 21JAR3ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 P
R
O
D1
PC
66
 w
ith
 R
UL
ES
3
3830 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 12 / Wednesday, January 21, 2009 / Rules and Regulations 
suggestions. The Department notes, 
however, that the 60-day period 
referenced in paragraphs (b)(6)(i)(B) and 
(d)(9)(i)(B) of the final rule is the period 
following completion of the audit 
during which the auditor is required to 
furnish its report to the fiduciary 
adviser and, with the exception of an 
arrangement with an IRA, to each 
authorizing fiduciary. The exception for 
arrangements with IRAs serves to 
relieve the auditor from furnishing 
reports to the authorizing IRA 
beneficiaries. Paragraphs (b)(6)(ii)(A) 
and (d)(9)(ii)(A) of the final rule, 
applicable to arrangements with IRAs, 
place the obligation to furnish the 
auditor’s report on the fiduciary adviser 
and, in that regard, require that the 
fiduciary adviser furnish the report or 
make it available on its Web site within 
30 days following receipt of the report 
from the auditor. The Department did 
not receive any information or data that 
would indicate that the aforementioned 
time frames afforded the auditor and the 
fiduciary adviser are inadequate. 
With regard to the qualifications of an 
auditor, one commenter recommended 
that the auditor should be treated as a 
fiduciary. Other commenters requested 
clarification that the audit is not 
required to be conducted by an 
accountant or a lawyer. Another 
commenter requested clarification as to 
the credentials necessary to conduct an 
audit. As with the requirements for an 
‘‘eligible investment expert,’’ the 
Department does not believe that there 
is necessarily one set of credentials, 
such as certified public accountant, 
auditor, or lawyer, that is required or, 
conversely, by themselves qualifies an 
individual to conduct the required 
audits. In addition to any licenses, 
certifications or other evidence of 
professional or technical training, a 
fiduciary adviser will want to consider 
the relevance of that training to the 
required audit, as well as the individual 
or organization’s experience and 
proficiency in conducting similar types 
of audits. In this regard, it is the view 
of the Department that the selection of 
an auditor is a fiduciary act and, 
therefore, must be carried out in a 
manner consistent with the prudence 
requirements of section 404(a)(1), taking 
into account the nature and scope of the 
audit and the expertise and experience 
necessary to conduct such an audit. The 
Department also notes that, in its view, 
the performance of an audit under the 
final rule would not, by itself, cause an 
auditor to be a fiduciary under ERISA. 
A number of comments requested 
clarification of the scope of the audit, as 
now set forth in paragraphs (b)(6)(iv) 
and (d)(9)(iv) of the final rule. In this 
regard, commenters requested 
clarification that the permissible 
sampling of audits would be conducted 
at the fiduciary adviser level and not the 
plan level, such that a sampling of each 
plan’s or IRA’s transactions would not 
have to be audited. One commenter 
requested clarification as to whether the 
audit could be performed by a review of 
the audits conducted by the fiduciary 
adviser’s own personnel. As discussed 
above, the audit provisions of the final 
rule require that the auditor review 
sufficient information to formulate an 
opinion as to whether the investment 
advice arrangements, and the advice 
provided pursuant thereto, are in 
compliance with the final rule. In the 
case of the class exemption, the auditor 
is further required to review compliance 
with the fiduciary adviser’s policies and 
procedures, adopted in accordance with 
paragraph (d)(7), designed to assure 
compliance with the exemption’s 
requirements. Accordingly, the precise 
nature and scope of the audit, as well as 
how it is conducted, is to be determined 
by the auditor. The Department does 
note, however, that nothing in these 
provisions precludes the auditor from 
using sampling, as determined 
reasonably appropriate by the auditor, 
of investment advice arrangements and 
investment advice. 
While the Department believes that 
internal audits conducted by the 
personnel of a fiduciary adviser are 
important to reducing the risks of 
noncompliance with the conditions of 
the final rule, the Department does not 
believe that it would be appropriate for 
an auditor to limit, in any way, the 
scope of its audit based on such audits. 
Moreover, in the view of the 
Department, the fiduciary adviser has a 
fiduciary duty in selecting and 
monitoring an auditor to ensure that the 
required audits are complete and fully 
independent of any audits conducted 
internally by personnel of the fiduciary 
adviser. The Department notes, 
however, that there is nothing in the 
final rule that would preclude the 
independent auditor from working with 
the fiduciary adviser to establish 
policies and procedures designed to 
enhance or ensure compliance with the 
requirements of the statutory or class 
exemption, provided that 
determinations of compliance with the 
statutory and class exemption can be 
made without regard to such services. 
Some commenters asked for a 
clarification of the ‘‘independence’’ 
requirements applicable to the auditor. 
Paragraphs (b)(6)(iii) and (d)(9)(iii) of 
the final rule provide that an auditor is 
considered independent if it does not 
have a material affiliation or material 
contractual relationship with the 
fiduciary adviser or any person offering 
designated investment options. 
One commenter requested 
clarification that independence would 
not be lost merely because the auditor 
performs other services for the fiduciary 
adviser or its affiliates, such as 
performing audits or certifying 
computer models, as an eligible 
investment expert. In defining the term 
‘‘material contractual relationship,’’ the 
Department contemplated that there 
may be instances in which an auditor 
might be performing other services for a 
fiduciary adviser or affiliates. While one 
commenter recommended that the 
definition of material contractual 
relationship be revised to preclude 
receipt of any compensation, the 
Department believes that the 10% test 
set forth in paragraph (c)(7) of the final 
rule, defining ‘‘material contractual 
relationship,’’ is sufficient to minimize 
any influence on the part of the 
fiduciary adviser that would serve to 
compromise the independence of the 
auditor. Accordingly, the Department 
has not changed the final rule in this 
regard. 
A number of commenters expressed 
concern about the requirement, now at 
paragraphs (b)(6)(ii)(B) and (d)(9)(ii)(B) 
of the final rule, that, in the case of 
arrangements involving IRAs, the 
fiduciary adviser must send a copy of 
the auditor’s report to the Department if 
that report identifies instances of 
noncompliance. Some commenters 
recommended that reports only be 
required to be filed with the Department 
when there is ‘‘material’’ 
noncompliance, other commenters 
recommended that fiduciary advisers be 
afforded a period within which to self- 
correct prior to the reporting of 
noncompliance. As explained in the 
preamble to the proposal, this filing 
requirement will enable the Department 
to monitor compliance with the 
exemptions in those instances where 
there is no authorizing ERISA plan 
fiduciary to carry out that function. 
While the Department recognizes that 
not every instance of noncompliance 
would, itself, affect the quality of the 
advice provided, the Department also 
believes that, given the overall 
significance of the audit as a protection 
for participants and beneficiaries, all 
reports that identify noncompliance in 
this area should be furnished to the 
Department for review, thereby, leaving 
to the Department the opportunity to 
evaluate the significance of the 
noncompliance, the function that an 
authorizing plan fiduciary would carry 
out for its plan. Accordingly, the 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 19:29 Jan 16, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00010 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\21JAR3.SGM 21JAR3ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 P
R
O
D1
PC
66
 w
ith
 R
UL
ES
3
3831 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 12 / Wednesday, January 21, 2009 / Rules and Regulations 
17 See paragraph (d)(8)(i)(C) that incorporates in 
the class exemption compliance with the disclosure 
requirements under the statutory exemption 
provisions as set forth in paragraphs (b)(7)(i)(A) 
through (E), (G) and (H). 
Department is adopting the filing 
requirement as proposed. 
f. Disclosure 
The disclosure provisions are set forth 
in paragraph (b)(7) of the final rule as 
they relate to the statutory exemption 
and paragraph (d)(8) as they relate to the 
class exemption. In general, the 
disclosure requirements for both the 
statutory and class exemption are 
identical,17 and the provisions of the 
final rule, like the proposal, track the 
requirements set forth in section 
408(g)(6) of ERISA. 
The final rule, at paragraphs (b)(7)(i) 
and (d)(8)(i), generally requires that the 
fiduciary adviser provide to participants 
and beneficiaries, prior to the initial 
provision of investment advice with 
regard to any security or other property 
offered as an investment option, a 
written notification describing: The role 
of any party that has a material 
affiliation or material contractual 
relationship with the fiduciary adviser 
in the development of, in the case of the 
statutory exemption, the investment 
advice program or, in the case of the 
class exemption, if applicable, the 
computer model or materials described 
in paragraph (d)(3)(i) or (ii) of the final 
rule, and in the selection of investment 
options available under the plan; the 
past performance and historical rates of 
return of the designated investment 
options available under the plan, to the 
extent that such information is not 
otherwise provided; all fees or other 
compensation relating to the advice that 
the fiduciary adviser or any affiliate 
thereof is to receive (including 
compensation provided by any third 
party) in connection with the provision 
of the advice or in connection with the 
sale, acquisition, or holding of the 
security or other property pursuant to 
such advice; and any material affiliation 
or material contractual relationship of 
the fiduciary adviser or affiliates thereof 
in the security or other property. 
The notification to participants and 
beneficiaries also is required to explain: 
The manner, and under what 
circumstances, any participant or 
beneficiary information provided under 
the arrangement will be used or 
disclosed; the types of services provided 
by the fiduciary adviser in connection 
with the provision of investment advice 
by the fiduciary adviser, including, with 
respect to an arrangement utilizing a 
computer model, any limitations on the 
ability of the model to take into account 
an investment primarily in qualifying 
employer securities; that the adviser is 
acting as a fiduciary of the plan in 
connection with the provision of the 
advice; and that a recipient of the advice 
may separately arrange for the provision 
of advice by another adviser that could 
have no material affiliation with and 
receive no fees or other compensation in 
connection with the security or other 
property. 
Paragraphs (b)(7)(ii)(A) and 
(d)(8)(ii)(A) of the final rule require that 
the notification furnished to 
participants and beneficiaries must be 
written in a clear and conspicuous 
manner and in a manner calculated to 
be understood by the average plan 
participant and must be sufficiently 
accurate and comprehensive to 
reasonably apprise such participants 
and beneficiaries of the information 
required to be provided in the 
notification. 
Paragraphs (b)(7)(ii)(B) and 
(d)(8)(ii)(B) of the final rule reference 
the availability of a model disclosure 
form in the appendix to the final rule. 
As with the proposals, the model 
disclosure form may be used for 
purposes of satisfying the requirements 
set forth in paragraphs (b)(7)(i)(C) and 
(d)(8)(i), as well as the requirements of 
paragraphs (b)(7)(ii)(A) and (d)(8)(ii)(A) 
of the final rule. The final rule, like the 
proposals, makes clear, however, that 
the use of the model disclosure form is 
not mandatory. In response to several 
comments addressing the general 
readability of the model form, the 
Department has made minor changes to 
the form’s organization and language. 
Other commenters also made specific 
suggestions regarding the content of the 
model disclosure form. Four 
commenters made suggestions relating 
to the disclosure of fiduciary adviser 
cross-selling practices, such as fees 
received by an adviser in connection 
with rollovers to IRAs. As discussed 
below, given the potential for abuse in 
this area, the text of the final rule has 
been modified to require the disclosure 
of all fees or other compensation that a 
fiduciary adviser or any affiliate might 
receive in connection with any rollover 
or other distribution of plan assets or 
the investment of distributed assets. 
Language has been added to the model 
form to reflect this disclosure 
requirement. 
Commenters presented a number of 
issues concerning the timing and 
content of the proposed disclosure 
requirements. With regard to the timing 
of the required disclosures, some 
commenters suggested that the 
notifications be provided whenever 
advice is rendered; other commenters 
argued that the annual disclosures 
should be required only when there are 
material changes to the information 
furnished in advance of the advice. 
Other commenters recommended that 
required notifications be furnished 
quarterly. The Department did not adopt 
these recommendations. The 
Department believes that the statutory 
disclosure framework, reflected in both 
the proposal and final rule, strikes the 
appropriate balance in terms of ensuring 
participants and beneficiaries have the 
information to assess the potential for 
conflicts of interest and compensation 
of the fiduciary adviser. In this regard, 
the final rule, like the proposal, requires 
notifications to be furnished in advance 
of the advice, and annually thereafter, 
except that material changes to such 
information are required to be furnished 
at a time reasonably contemporaneous 
with the change in the information. 
Commenters also raised issues 
concerning the content of the required 
notifications. One commenter 
recommended that the Department 
clarify that the required disclosure of 
fees and compensation was not limited 
to designated investment options, but 
included fees and compensation 
received in connection with 
investments made through open 
brokerage windows and directed 
brokerage accounts. The disclosure 
obligation set forth in paragraph 
(b)(7)(i)(C)(2) of the final rule is very 
broad and includes any fees and other 
compensation that the fiduciary adviser 
or affiliate might receive in connection 
with the sale, acquisition, or holding of 
any security or other property pursuant 
to the investment advice. There is 
nothing in this provision which limits 
or is intended to limit the required 
disclosures to compensation and fees in 
connection with designated investment 
options. It is clear, therefore, that any 
compensation and fees to be received in 
connection with investments through an 
open brokerage window or directed 
brokerage account must be included in 
the required disclosures. 
Some commenters suggested that the 
required disclosure be required to 
contain information pertaining to 
compensation and fees in connection 
with rollovers or other distributions or 
the investment of assets in connection 
with a rollover or other distribution. 
Given the potential for abuse in this 
area, the Department agrees that such 
information should be furnished to 
participants and beneficiaries. In this 
regard, the final rule contains a specific 
provision that serves to require the 
disclosure of all fees or other 
compensation that a fiduciary adviser or 
any affiliate might receive in connection 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 19:29 Jan 16, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00011 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\21JAR3.SGM 21JAR3ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 P
R
O
D1
PC
66
 w
ith
 R
UL
ES
3
3832 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 12 / Wednesday, January 21, 2009 / Rules and Regulations 
18 See AO 2005–23A (Dec. 7, 2005). 
with any rollover or other distribution 
of plan assets or the investment of 
distributed assets in any security or 
other property pursuant to the 
investment advice. See paragraph 
(b)(7)(i)(C)(3) of the final rule, and 
paragraph (d)(8)(i)(C) of the final rule, 
which applies several disclosures 
required for the statutory exemption to 
the class exemption. 
With regard to the practice of ‘‘cross- 
selling,’’ i.e., using existing clients, plan 
participants and beneficiaries in this 
case, to market additional services or 
products, the Department notes that, 
while advising a participant or 
beneficiary to take an otherwise 
permissible plan distribution would not 
normally constitute ‘‘investment 
advice’’ within the meaning of 29 CFR 
2510.3–21(c), the Department has taken 
a different position with respect to such 
activities when the person making such 
recommendations is already a plan 
fiduciary, as would be the case with a 
fiduciary adviser.18 When a person is 
already acting in a fiduciary capacity 
with respect to the plan, the Department 
has indicated that recommendations 
relating to the taking of a distribution or 
the investment of amounts withdrawn 
from the plan would constitute the 
exercise of discretionary authority 
respecting management of the plan and, 
therefore must be undertaken prudently 
and solely in the interest of the 
participant or beneficiary, consistent 
with section 404(a)(1). The Department 
further notes that if, for example, a 
fiduciary exercises control over plan 
assets to cause a participant or 
beneficiary to take a distribution and 
then to invest the proceeds in an IRA 
account managed by the fiduciary, the 
fiduciary may be using plan assets in his 
or her own interest, in violation of 
ERISA section 406(b)(1). The prohibited 
transaction relief offered by the 
statutory and class exemption, which 
apply to transactions related to the 
provision of investment advice to plan 
participants or beneficiaries, would not 
cover such a violation. Moreover, the 
Department is unable to conclude that 
the mere disclosure of fees or other 
compensation received in connection 
with such a distribution and 
investment, by itself, would be 
sufficient to avoid a violation of section 
406(b)(1). Because a fiduciary adviser, 
in making recommendations related to 
the taking of a distribution or the 
investment of amounts so withdrawn 
from the plan, may violate ERISA 
section 404(a)(1) and/or 406(b)(1), 
authorizing plan fiduciaries, in carrying 
out their duties under section 404(a)(1) 
in selecting and periodically reviewing 
the adviser, may need to understand the 
extent to which such recommendations 
will be made. 
A commenter also suggested that the 
Department require disclosure of 
information about the profitability of 
various plan investment options to the 
fiduciary adviser. In addressing the 
need for disclosure regarding plan 
investments being recommended by a 
fiduciary adviser under the statutory 
exemption, Congress appears to have 
concluded that the interests of 
participants and beneficiaries would be 
adequately protected, in the context of 
the exemption’s other conditions, by 
information on all fees or other 
compensation that the fiduciary adviser 
or any affiliate is to receive. The 
conditions of the exemption, in general, 
focus on fees and compensation 
received in connection with 
investments recommended rather than 
profitability of those investments. 
Disclosures with respect to profitability 
of investments options may require 
significantly more information and 
effort to prepare than disclosures of fees 
and compensation, without adding 
significant benefits. The Department 
does not believe it would be 
appropriate, as part of this final rule, 
without further notice and comment, to 
include such a disclosure obligation. 
Accordingly, the Department has not 
adopted this suggestion. 
A number of commenters requested 
that the Department confirm that to the 
extent that the required disclosures are 
contained in disclosure materials 
required to be prepared under securities 
and other laws, such materials may be 
used for purposes of the exemptions. It 
is the view of the Department that 
nothing in the final rule forecloses the 
use of other materials for making the 
disclosures required by the final rule, so 
long as the understandability and clarity 
of the disclosures is not compromised 
by virtue of their inclusion in such other 
materials and the requirements of 
paragraphs (b)(7)(ii)(A) and (d)(8)(ii)(A) 
are satisfied. 
The proposed regulation and class 
exemption provided that the required 
notifications may, in accordance with 
29 CFR 2520.104b–1, be furnished in 
either written or electronic form. 
Several commenters requested that the 
Department provide greater flexibility 
for notices by electronic means, noting 
that the safe harbor for electronic 
distributions, at § 2520.104b–1(c), is not 
workable. The Department currently is 
reviewing its rules relating to the use of 
electronic media for disclosures under 
title I of ERISA. The Department notes 
that, pending the issuance of further 
guidance, its current rule, at 29 CFR 
2520.104b–1(c), is a safe harbor and, 
accordingly, represents merely one 
permissible means by which documents 
under title I of ERISA may be furnished 
to participants and beneficiaries 
electronically. Nothing in that rule, 
therefore, forecloses other means by 
which documents may, consistent with 
ERISA and the E–SIGN Act, be 
furnished to participants and 
beneficiaries electronically. 
Paragraphs (b)(7)(iv) and (d)(8)(iv) of 
the final rule set forth miscellaneous 
recordkeeping and furnishing 
responsibilities of the fiduciary adviser 
under the statutory and class 
exemption. Specifically, these 
paragraphs require that, at all times 
during the provision of advisory 
services to the participant or beneficiary 
pursuant to the arrangement, the 
fiduciary adviser must: maintain the 
information required to be disclosed to 
participants and beneficiaries in 
accurate form; provide, without charge, 
accurate, up-to-date disclosures to the 
recipient of the advice no less 
frequently than annually; provide, 
without charge, accurate information to 
the recipient of the advice upon request 
of the recipient; and provide, without 
charge, to the recipient of the advice any 
material change to the required 
information at a time reasonably 
contemporaneous to the change in 
information. These provisions are being 
adopted in the final rule without 
substantive change from the proposal. 
g. Other Conditions 
Paragraphs (b)(8) and (d)(10) of the 
final rule, like the proposals, 
incorporate a series of miscellaneous, 
although important, conditions set forth 
in section 408(g)(7) of ERISA. These 
requirements are as follows: the 
fiduciary adviser must provide 
appropriate disclosure, in connection 
with the sale, acquisition, or holding of 
the security or other property, in 
accordance with all applicable 
securities laws; any sale, acquisition, or 
holding of a security or other property 
occurs solely at the direction of the 
recipient of the advice; the 
compensation received by the fiduciary 
adviser and affiliates thereof in 
connection with the sale, acquisition, or 
holding of the security or other property 
is reasonable; and the terms of the sale, 
acquisition, or holding of the security or 
other property are at least as favorable 
to the plan as an arm’s length 
transaction would be. 
The Department received a number of 
comments requesting clarification of the 
requirement that sales, acquisitions, or 
the holding of securities or other 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 19:29 Jan 16, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00012 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\21JAR3.SGM 21JAR3ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 P
R
O
D1
PC
66
 w
ith
 R
UL
ES
3
3833 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 12 / Wednesday, January 21, 2009 / Rules and Regulations 
19 Technical Explanation of H.R. 5, The ‘‘Pension 
Protection Act of 2006’’, as passed by the House on 
July 28, 2006, and as considered by the Senate on 
August 3, 2006, prepared by the Staff of the Joint 
Committee on Taxation, August 3, 2006, JCX 38–06. 
property occurs solely at the direction of 
the recipient of the advice. In particular, 
commenters requested that the 
Department confirm that the ‘‘solely at 
the direction’’ requirement is not 
violated solely by virtue of a participant 
or beneficiary providing advance 
authorization for a fiduciary adviser to 
periodically take steps to rebalance the 
portfolio of the participant or 
beneficiary. One commenter requested 
clarification that the ‘‘solely at the 
direction’’ requirement would not be 
violated where, pursuant to an 
agreement with the participant or 
beneficiary, investment advice 
recommendations will be acted upon by 
the fiduciary adviser unless the 
participant or beneficiary objects with 
the allotted period of time, typically 30 
days. 
In general, it is the view of the 
Department that a pre-authorization for 
a fiduciary adviser to maintain a 
particular asset allocation structure for a 
participant’s portfolio by periodic 
rebalancing of investments would not 
violate the ‘‘solely at the direction’’ 
requirements of the final rule, provided 
that such maintenance does not involve 
the exercise of discretion on the part of 
the fiduciary adviser, that is, when a 
participant is informed of and approves, 
at the time of the authorization, the 
specific circumstances under which a 
rebalancing of his or her portfolio will 
take place and the particular 
investments that will be utilized for 
such rebalancing. If, on the other hand, 
the particular investments that might be 
utilized for purposes of rebalancing a 
participant’s account are not known and 
the fiduciary adviser is given the 
discretion to select the required 
investments, it is the view of the 
Department that the participant must be 
afforded advance notice of the fiduciary 
adviser’s intended investments and a 
reasonable opportunity, at least 30 days, 
to object to the investments in order to 
comply with the ‘‘solely at the 
direction’’ requirements of the final 
rule. With respect to a recommendation 
involving a different asset allocation 
structure, the Department believes that 
the participant or beneficiary must make 
an affirmative direction for its 
implementation. 
3. Definitions 
Paragraph (c) sets forth definitions 
applicable to both the statutory 
exemption and class exemption 
contained in the final rule. Paragraph 
(c)(1) defines the term ‘‘designated 
investment option.’’ Paragraph (c)(2) 
defines the term ‘‘fiduciary adviser.’’ 
Paragraph (c)(3) defines the term 
‘‘registered representative.’’ Paragraph 
(c)(4) defines the terms ‘‘individual 
retirement account’’ or ‘‘IRA’’ for 
purposes of the final rule. Paragraph 
(c)(5) defines the term ‘‘affiliate.’’ And, 
paragraphs (c)(6) and (c)(7) define the 
terms ‘‘material affiliation’’ and 
‘‘material contractual relationship,’’ 
respectively. Lastly, paragraph (c)(8) 
defines the term ‘‘control.’’ With the 
exception of a clarification in the 
definition of ‘‘material contractual 
relationship’’ in paragraph (c)(7), the 
definitions were adopted without 
change from the proposals. 
One commenter requested that the 
Department clarify that the term 
‘‘agent’’, as that term is used in the 
definition of ‘‘fiduciary adviser’’ (see 
paragraph (c)(2)(i)(F) of the final rule), is 
not limited to insurance agents. Another 
commenter requested that the 
Department clarify that ‘‘agents’’ must 
be registered under the Investment 
Advisers Act of 1940, unless otherwise 
exempt from registration. It is the view 
of the Department that the term ‘‘agent’’ 
as used in the fiduciary adviser 
definition is not limited to insurance 
agents or necessarily those registered 
under the Investment Advisers Act, but 
rather encompasses persons acting on 
behalf of a fiduciary adviser, applying 
agency law principles. The Department 
notes that the definition, consistent with 
the statutory definition, requires that 
any such agent satisfy the requirements 
of applicable insurance, banking and 
securities laws relating to the provision 
of advice. 
One commenter recommended a 
separate provision for investment 
adviser representatives. It was not clear 
how such a separate definition would 
substantively change the application of 
the fiduciary adviser definition, at 
paragraph (c)(2); accordingly, the 
Department did not adopt this 
suggestion. 
One comment recommended that the 
Department adopt the definition of 
‘‘affiliate’’ as set forth in 29 CFR 2510.3– 
21, rather than the definition contained 
in the proposed rule. Section 
408(g)(11)(C) of ERISA provides that an 
‘‘affiliate’’ of another entity means an 
affiliated person of the entity as defined 
in section 2(a)(3) of the Investment 
Company Act of 1940. The Department, 
therefore, adopted, as discussed in the 
preamble to the proposal, the 
Investment Company Act definition for 
purposes of both the proposal and this 
final rule, not the definition set forth in 
§ 2510.3–21. 
Finally, in order to clarify that the 
10% gross revenue test, applied for 
purposes of determining whether 
persons have a ‘‘material contractual 
relationship’’ under the final rule, is not 
limited to amounts paid pursuant to 
contracts or arrangements that have 
been reduced to writing, the Department 
has deleted the word ‘‘written’’ from the 
definition contained in paragraph (c)(7). 
4. Class exemption 
A number of the issues pertaining to 
the conditions applicable to the class 
exemption were raised and addressed in 
the above discussion of the rules 
implementing the statutory exemption. 
The following overview, therefore, will 
focus on those provisions and 
comments unique to the class 
exemption and not previously 
addressed. 
a. Authority and Findings 
A number of commenters questioned 
the Department’s authority to grant the 
proposed class exemption arguing, in 
effect, that the proposed class 
exemption is inconsistent with 
Congressional intent, suggesting that 
enactment of the statutory exemption 
for investment advice precluded or 
otherwise limited the Department’s 
authority to grant an administrative 
exemption under section 408(a). The 
Department has carefully considered 
this issue and in so considering has 
been unable to find anything in ERISA, 
the PPA, the Technical Explanation of 
the PPA prepared by the staff of the 
Joint Committee on Taxation,19 or the 
case law that would serve to limit or 
otherwise restrict the Department’s 
ability to grant, in accordance with its 
authority in section 408(a), an 
administrative exemption relating to the 
provision of investment advice. 
In fact, the Department has very broad 
authority under section 408(a) to grant 
conditional or unconditional 
exemptions for any fiduciary or 
transaction or class of fiduciaries or 
transactions, from all or part of the 
restrictions imposed by sections 406 
and 407(a), provided that the Secretary 
finds that such exemption is 
administratively feasible, in the 
interests of the plan and its participants 
and beneficiaries, and protective of the 
rights of participants and beneficiaries. 
The Department views the class 
exemption as necessary to provide more 
comprehensive relief for fiduciary 
investment advice and to address 
certain aspects of the statutory 
exemption that were unclear or that did 
not extend relief to certain 
arrangements. For example, the flush 
language in section 408(g)(3)(D) of 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 19:29 Jan 16, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00013 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\21JAR3.SGM 21JAR3ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 P
R
O
D1
PC
66
 w
ith
 R
UL
ES
3
3834 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 12 / Wednesday, January 21, 2009 / Rules and Regulations 
ERISA specifically permits participants 
to request individualized advice after 
receipt of computer model-based advice, 
but does not indicate whether any 
prohibited transaction relief would 
apply. In addition, although the 
Department concluded that computer 
model-based advice was feasible for 
IRAs to the extent that the advice takes 
into account generally recognized asset 
classes, some IRAs do not limit 
investment choices in this fashion. The 
class exemption therefore provides 
substitute relief for advisers that may 
not be able to take full advantage of 
computer model-based advice as to 
some IRAs. 
Taking into account the intent of the 
Congress and the administration to 
dramatically expand the availability of 
affordable, quality investment advice for 
millions of America’s workers 
participating in participant-directed 
individual account plans and IRAs, the 
Department concluded that the best 
approach to addressing the ambiguities 
and issues presented by the PPA and 
statutory exemption was to exercise its 
authority under section 408(a) of ERISA, 
building on the carefully crafted 
safeguards of the statutory exemption 
established by the Congress, safeguards 
that the Congress itself determined to be 
administratively feasible, in the 
interests of the plan and its participants 
and beneficiaries, and protective of the 
rights of participants and beneficiaries. 
A few commenters questioned 
whether the Department could make the 
findings required by section 408(a) with 
respect to the class exemption. As noted 
above, section 408(a) conditions 
exemptive relief on a finding by the 
Department that the exemption is 
administratively feasible, in the 
interests of the plan and its participants 
and beneficiaries, and protective of the 
rights of participants and beneficiaries. 
With regard to the class exemption 
contained in this document, the 
Department finds that the exemption is 
administratively feasible with respect to 
both compliance by fiduciary advisers 
electing to provide investment advice to 
participants and beneficiaries and 
enforcement by the Department. The 
Department finds that the exemption is 
in the interest of plans and their 
participants and beneficiaries because 
the availability of the exemption will 
significantly expand the opportunities 
for millions of participants and 
beneficiaries in participant-directed 
individual account plans and IRAs to 
obtain affordable, quality investment 
advice that might otherwise not be 
available to them. The Department 
further finds that the exemption is 
protective of the rights of participants 
and beneficiaries because of the 
conditions contained in the exemption 
intended to mitigate conflicts of interest 
that might otherwise affect the quality of 
investment advice. As noted above, the 
conditions of the class exemption build 
on the protections Congress determined 
to be administratively feasible, in the 
interest of plans and their participants 
and beneficiaries, and protective of the 
rights of those participants and 
beneficiaries for purposes of the 
statutory exemption set forth in section 
408(g). The specifics of these conditions 
are discussed below, if not previously 
addressed in connection with the 
statutory exemption provisions. 
b. General 
The final class exemption, like the 
statutory exemption described in 
paragraph (b) of the final rule, provides 
relief from otherwise prohibited 
transactions relating to the provision of 
investment advice to a plan participant 
or beneficiary or IRA beneficiary; the 
acquisition, holding or sale of a security 
or other property pursuant to the 
investment advice; and the direct or 
indirect receipt of compensation by a 
fiduciary adviser or affiliate in 
connection with the provision of 
investment advice or the acquisition, 
holding or sale of a security or other 
property pursuant to the investment 
advice. 
Unlike the statutory exemption, 
however, the final class exemption, like 
the proposed class exemption, provides 
relief for investment advice provided to 
individuals following the furnishing of 
recommendations generated by a 
computer model or, in instances where 
computer modeling under the statutory 
exemption is not feasible, the furnishing 
of investment education material. As 
explained in the preamble to the 
proposal, the computer generated advice 
recommendations and investment 
education materials are intended to 
provide individual account plan 
participants and beneficiaries and IRA 
beneficiaries with a context for 
assessing and evaluating the 
individualized investment advice 
contemplated by the class exemption. 
Also, unlike the statutory exemption, 
the final class exemption, like the 
proposal, applies the fee-leveling limits 
solely to the compensation received by 
the employee, agent or registered 
representative providing the advice on 
behalf of the fiduciary adviser, as 
distinguished from compensation 
received by the fiduciary adviser on 
whose behalf the employee, agent or 
registered representative is providing 
such advice. 
In general, the class exemption is 
intended to complement the adoption of 
regulations implementing the statutory 
exemption by furthering the availability 
of individualized investment advice to 
both participants and beneficiaries in 
participant-directed individual account 
plans and IRA beneficiaries under 
circumstances not clearly encompassed 
by the statutory exemption or 
implementing regulations, as described 
below. 
c. Scope of Exemption 
Paragraph (d)(1) of the final rule sets 
forth the scope of the class exemption. 
Specifically paragraph (d)(1)(i) provides 
that, with respect to the provision of 
advice to participants and beneficiaries 
of individual account plans, the 
restrictions of sections 406(a) and 406(b) 
of ERISA and the sanctions resulting 
from the application of section 4975 of 
the Code, by reason of section 
4975(c)(1)(A) through (F) of the Code, 
shall not apply to the provision of 
investment advice described in section 
3(21)(A)(ii) of the Act by a fiduciary 
adviser to a participant or beneficiary of 
an individual account plan that permits 
such participant or beneficiary to direct 
the investment of their individual 
accounts; the acquisition, holding, or 
sale of a security or other property 
pursuant to the investment advice; and, 
except as otherwise provided in the 
exemption, the direct or indirect receipt 
of fees or other compensation by the 
fiduciary adviser (or any employee, 
agent, registered representative or 
affiliate thereof) in connection with the 
provision of the advice or in connection 
with an acquisition, holding, or sale of 
a security or other property pursuant to 
the investment advice. Paragraph 
(d)(1)(ii) of the final rule provides the 
same relief with respect to the sanctions 
resulting from the application of section 
4975 of the Code, by reason of section 
4975(c)(1)(A) through (F) of the Code, 
for investment advice to beneficiaries of 
IRAs. 
d. Conditions for Relief 
Paragraph (d)(2) of the final rule 
provides that the relief described in 
paragraph (d)(1) is available if a 
fiduciary adviser provides advice in 
accordance with paragraph (d)(3), 
relating to the use of computer models 
and investment education materials, or 
paragraph (d)(4), relating to the use of 
fee-level arrangements, or both. In 
addition the fiduciary adviser must 
satisfy the conditions described in 
paragraphs: (d)(5), requiring 
authorization by a plan fiduciary or IRA 
beneficiary; (d)(6), relating to the basis 
for advice; (d)(7), requiring policies and 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 19:29 Jan 16, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00014 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\21JAR3.SGM 21JAR3ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 P
R
O
D1
PC
66
 w
ith
 R
UL
ES
3
3835 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 12 / Wednesday, January 21, 2009 / Rules and Regulations 
procedures; (d)(8), requiring disclosure 
of specified information; (d)(9), 
requiring an annual audit; and (d)(10), 
specifying other miscellaneous 
conditions. With the exception of 
paragraph (d)(7), relating to the 
adoption of policies and procedures, the 
aforementioned requirements are 
modeled after, and were discussed in 
conjunction with, the conditions of the 
statutory exemption and, accordingly, 
will not again be described or reviewed 
in this section. 
e. Post-computer Model—Investment 
Education Advice 
Paragraph (d)(3) of the final rule, like 
the provision of the proposed class 
exemption, requires that, in advance of 
a participant or beneficiary being 
provided individualized investment 
advice, the participant or beneficiary 
must be furnished investment 
recommendations generated by either a 
computer model that meets the 
requirements of the statutory exemption 
or a computer model developed by a 
person independent of the fiduciary 
adviser. The proposal contained an 
exception to the general computer 
modeling requirement for IRAs with 
respect to which types or number of 
investment choices reasonably 
precludes the use of a computer model 
that meets certain requirements of the 
regulations under the statutory 
exemption. 
The Department received a number of 
comments on this condition of the 
proposal. One commenter requested that 
the Department clarify whether a 
fiduciary adviser providing 
individualized advice to a participant 
can utilize the recommendations 
generated by the computer model of 
another fiduciary adviser. For example, 
according to this commenter, a plan 
recordkeeper might offer participants 
access to a proprietary computer model 
that complies with the statutory 
exemption, and the plan sponsor might 
also provide access through a second 
advice provider. The commenter asked 
whether the second advice provider 
could, for purposes of the class 
exemption, rely on the computer model 
advice furnished to a participant by the 
plan recordkeeper. The Department 
does not believe one fiduciary adviser 
would necessarily be precluded from 
using another fiduciary adviser’s 
computer modeled recommendations 
for a particular participant, provided 
that the requirements of exemption for 
both the computer model and 
individualized advice are otherwise 
satisfied and the individualized advice 
is reasonably contemporaneous with the 
computer modeled advice. 
One commenter suggested that, given 
the other safeguards contained in the 
exemption, the requirement for 
computer modeled advice in advance of 
individualized advice should be 
eliminated, noting that the computer 
modeled advice will only confuse 
participants and limit the advisers. The 
Department disagrees. The Department 
continues to believe that the furnishing 
of computer modeled investment 
recommendations is an important 
protection and tool for participants in 
assessing and evaluating the 
individualized recommendations of the 
fiduciary adviser. The computer 
modeled advice provides participants 
and beneficiaries a means by which they 
can assess and question, in advance of 
an investment decision, the extent to 
which the recommendations of the 
fiduciary adviser deviate from modeled 
advice. For this reason, the Department 
did not adopt the commenter’s 
suggestion. 
One commenter recommended that 
post-model/education advice be subject 
to a fee-leveling requirement. The 
Department did not adopt this 
suggestion. First, the Department 
believes that the class exemption 
contains sufficient safeguards without a 
fee-leveling requirement to protect 
participants and beneficiaries against 
biased, inappropriate investment 
advice. Second, given such safeguards, 
the Department does not believe it is 
appropriate to favor one business model 
for providing investment advice over 
another business model, i.e., those 
fiduciary advisers that use fee-leveling 
over those that do not, particularly 
when doing so may only serve to limit 
the availability of investment advice to 
participants and beneficiaries. 
Several commenters argued that the 
exception from the class exemption’s 
computer modeling requirement that 
was provided to certain IRAs (i.e., 
where the types or number of 
investment choices reasonably 
precludes use of computer model 
meeting the requirements of the 
statutory exemption) be extended to 
brokerage windows and similar 
arrangements with respect to which the 
computer modeling of investment 
recommendations is not feasible and 
that, without such an exception, plan 
participants and beneficiaries utilizing 
such windows or accounts may not have 
access to the investment advice they 
need. The Department is persuaded that 
brokerage windows and similar 
arrangements that permit participants to 
invest beyond a plan’s designated 
investment options present the same 
computer modeling difficulties that are 
encountered by IRAs that impose few 
restrictions on a beneficiary’s 
investment choices. However, with 
regard to plans that offer participants 
and beneficiaries both designated 
investment options and a brokerage 
window or similar arrangement, the 
Department believes participants and 
beneficiaries electing to utilize such 
arrangements would, in addition to 
investment education materials, also 
benefit from receiving computer 
modeled investment recommendations 
with respect to the plan’s designated 
investment options in advance of being 
provided individualized investment 
advice. As with those participants and 
beneficiaries whose investment options, 
either by plan design or choice, are 
limited to designated investment 
options, the Department believes that 
computer modeled investment 
recommendations will help participants 
and beneficiaries considering the use of 
a brokerage window or similar 
arrangement assess the investment 
choices available through both the 
brokerage window and the plan, as well 
as the individualized investment 
recommendations and strategies of the 
fiduciary adviser. The exception 
contained in the final class exemption, 
at paragraph (d)(3)(ii)(A) of the final 
rule, reflects this position. 
Specifically, paragraph (d)(3)(ii)(A) 
provides that, in the case of a plan that 
offers a ‘‘brokerage window’’, ‘‘self- 
directed brokerage account’’ or similar 
arrangement that enables participants 
and beneficiaries to select investments 
beyond those designated by the plan, if 
any, before providing investment advice 
with respect to any investment utilizing 
such arrangement, the participant or 
beneficiary shall be furnished the 
investment education material 
described in paragraph (d)(3)(ii)(B) and, 
if the plan offers designated investment 
options, the participant or beneficiary 
also shall be furnished the 
recommendations generated by a 
computer model, as required by 
paragraph (d)(3)(i), with regard to such 
options. 
Some commenters, while supporting 
the exception from computer modeling 
for IRAs, requested that the Department 
provide further guidance concerning 
when the types or number of investment 
choices would reasonably preclude the 
use of a computer model to generate 
investment recommendations. The 
Department believes that there are a 
variety of factors that may serve to 
reasonably preclude use of a computer 
model for generating recommendations 
with respect to the investments 
available under an IRA, including the 
number of investment options offered, 
the type of investment options (such as 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 19:29 Jan 16, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00015 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\21JAR3.SGM 21JAR3ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 P
R
O
D1
PC
66
 w
ith
 R
UL
ES
3
3836 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 12 / Wednesday, January 21, 2009 / Rules and Regulations 
investments in individual securities), 
and the relative costs of developing and 
maintaining such computer models and 
benefits of offering such model- 
generated advice services to IRA 
beneficiaries. The Department believes 
this will be an evolving, rather than 
static, standard. As computer modeling 
of investment advice develops, the 
Department anticipates that the 
feasibility of developing models to take 
into account a wider variety of 
investment choices also will change. 
The Department has retained the IRA 
exception without change from the 
proposal. See paragraph (d)(3)(ii)(B) of 
the final rule. 
The investment education material 
required to be furnished under the final 
rule is identical to that described in the 
proposal. Specifically, paragraph 
(d)(3)(ii)(B) of the final rule requires that 
participants and beneficiaries be 
furnished with material, such as graphs, 
pie charts, case studies, worksheets, or 
interactive software or similar programs, 
that reflect or produce asset allocation 
models taking into account the age (or 
time horizon) and risk profile of the 
beneficiary, to the extent known. As 
with the proposal, the final rule makes 
clear that nothing precludes the 
furnishing of material, in addition to the 
foregoing, reflecting asset allocation 
portfolios of hypothetical individuals 
with different time horizons and risk 
profiles. 
Also like the proposal, the final rule 
also requires that: (A) Models must be 
based on generally accepted investment 
theories that take into account the 
historic returns of different asset classes 
(e.g., equities, bonds, or cash) over 
defined periods of time; (B) such models 
must operate in a manner that is not 
biased in favor of investments offered by 
the fiduciary adviser or a person with a 
material affiliation or material 
contractual relationship with the 
fiduciary adviser; and (C) all material 
facts and assumptions on which such 
models are based (e.g., retirement ages, 
life expectancies, income levels, 
financial resources, replacement income 
ratios, inflation rates, and rates of 
return) accompany the models. 
The proposal further required that the 
provided individualized, rather than 
computer modeled, investment advice 
(post-model/investment education 
advice) not recommend investment 
options that may generate for the 
fiduciary adviser, or certain other 
persons, greater income than other 
options of the same asset class, unless 
the fiduciary adviser prudently 
concludes that the recommendation is 
in the best interest of the participant or 
beneficiary and explains the basis for 
that conclusion to the participant or 
beneficiary. The proposal further 
required that the advice provider 
document the basis of any advice given 
to the participant or beneficiary within 
30 days following the provision of the 
advice. 
One commenter objected to the 
requirement that the furnished advice 
be documented, arguing that the 
advisers are required to comply with 
both ERISA prudence standards and 
FINRA suitability standards and that the 
documentation requirement does not 
add any additional protection. Another 
commenter argued that such 
explanations were not sufficiently 
protective of participants and 
beneficiaries. The Department disagrees 
with these comments. One of the many 
protections encompassed in the class 
exemption is the audit requirement. The 
Department expects that a critical part 
of the audit will involve a review of the 
explanations required to be documented 
by the fiduciary adviser. Without such 
documentation, auditors would have no 
basis for assessing compliance with a 
number of the conditions of the class 
exemption, including those set forth in 
paragraphs (d)(3)(ii)(A) and (B) and 
(d)(6) of the final rule. 
One comment misconstrued the 
requirement, reading the proposal as not 
requiring the fiduciary adviser to 
provide an explanation regarding 
investments that might generate higher 
fees until 30 days after the provision of 
the advice. Under the proposal, the 
explanation was required to be provided 
in advance of the advice, but that 
explanation was not required to be 
documented for the fiduciary adviser’s 
records, as well as for the required 
audit, until 30 days after the provision 
of the advice. The Department believes 
that it may not always be practical for 
a fiduciary adviser to document the 
advice they provide contemporaneously 
with the provision of that advice and, 
therefore, provided a limited period 
within which such advice must be 
documented. 
In an effort to address both ambiguity 
and confusion with respect to the 
aforementioned requirement, the 
Department has combined and 
simplified the requirement for purposes 
of the final class exemption. Further, 
because the Department believes that 
this requirement, in its revised form, 
would offer additional protections to 
participants and beneficiaries without 
being unnecessarily burdensome on 
fiduciary advisers, the Department is 
making it a general requirement of the 
final class exemption. In this regard, 
paragraph (d)(6)(ii) of the final rule 
provides that, in connection with the 
provision of any investment advice 
covered by the class exemption, the 
fiduciary adviser must conclude that the 
advice to be provided is prudent and in 
the best interest of the participant or 
beneficiary, and explain to the 
participant or beneficiary the basis for 
the conclusion, including, if applicable, 
why and how the advice deviates from 
or relates to the computer modeled 
recommendations or investment 
education materials furnished in 
satisfaction of paragraph (d)(3)(i) or (ii), 
and why the advice includes an 
option(s) with higher fees than other 
options in the same asset class(es) 
available under the plan. Further under 
paragraph (d)(6)(ii), not later than 30 
days following such explanation, the 
employee, agent or registered 
representative providing the advice on 
behalf of the fiduciary adviser must 
document the explanation. The final 
rule, like the proposal, also requires this 
documentation to be retained in 
accordance with the record retention 
requirements of paragraph (e) of the 
final rule. See paragraph (d)(6)(ii)(C) of 
the final rule. 
f. Use of Fee-Leveling 
Paragraph (d)(4) of the final rule 
addresses the fee-leveling requirement 
of the class exemption. As proposed, the 
class exemption applied the fee-leveling 
requirement only to the individuals who 
provide the investment advice on behalf 
of the fiduciary adviser, namely, 
employees, agents, and registered 
representatives. This is in contrast to the 
fee-leveling requirement under the 
statutory exemption, as described above 
with respect to paragraph (b) of the final 
rule, which applied the fee-leveling 
requirement at both the entity (fiduciary 
adviser)-level and the individual 
(employee, agent, registered 
representative)-level. In this regard, the 
Department was persuaded that the 
additional safeguards provided for in 
the class exemption were sufficient to 
permit the application of the fee- 
leveling requirement at the individual- 
level, rather than fiduciary adviser- 
entity level, without compromising the 
availability of informed, unbiased, and 
objective investment advice for 
participants and beneficiaries. As 
explained in the discussion relating to 
the fee-leveling provisions of the 
statutory exemption, some commenters 
objected to the limited scope of the fee- 
leveling requirement and other 
commenters requested that the breadth 
of the fee-leveling requirement be 
narrowed. The Department continues to 
believe it reached the appropriate 
balance of protections and flexibility in 
the proposal and, accordingly is 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 19:29 Jan 16, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00016 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\21JAR3.SGM 21JAR3ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 P
R
O
D1
PC
66
 w
ith
 R
UL
ES
3
3837 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 12 / Wednesday, January 21, 2009 / Rules and Regulations 
adopting the fee-leveling framework of 
the proposed class exemption without 
modification in the final rule. 
g. Policies and Procedures 
The proposed exemption contained a 
requirement that the fiduciary adviser 
adopt and follow written policies and 
procedures that are designed to assure 
compliance with the conditions of the 
exemption. As explained in the 
preamble to the proposal, the 
Department believes that the 
maintenance of such policies and 
procedures will help ensure compliance 
with the exemption, as well as support 
a finding that, for purposes of section 
408(a)(1), the exemption is 
administratively feasible. The 
Department has not changed its view in 
this regard and, in the absence of any 
comments objecting to this provision of 
the proposal, is adopting this 
requirement without change in the final 
rule. See paragraph (d)(7). The 
Department also notes that the auditor 
engaged to conduct an audit pursuant to 
paragraph (d)(9) of the final rule, 
discussed earlier, is required, as part of 
that audit, to review a fiduciary 
adviser’s compliance with its policies 
and procedures. 
5. Retention of Records 
Both the proposed regulation 
implementing the statutory exemption 
and the proposed class exemption had 
record retention requirements, with 
respect to which there were no 
comments. Paragraph (e) of the final 
rule sets forth the record retention 
requirements now applicable to both 
investment advice arrangements relying 
on the statutory exemption, as set forth 
in paragraph (b), and investment advice 
provided pursuant to the class 
exemption, as set forth in paragraph (d), 
of the final rule. Paragraph (e) provides 
that the fiduciary adviser must 
maintain, for a period of not less than 
6 years after the provision of investment 
advice under the section any records 
necessary for determining whether the 
applicable requirements of the final rule 
have been met, noting that a transaction 
prohibited under section 406 of ERISA 
shall not be considered to have occurred 
solely because the records are lost or 
destroyed prior to the end of the 6-year 
period due to circumstances beyond the 
control of the fiduciary adviser. 
6. Noncompliance 
The proposed class exemption 
specifically addressed the effects of 
noncompliance with the exemption. In 
this regard, the proposal explained that 
the class exemption would not apply to 
any covered transaction in connection 
with the provision of investment advice 
to an individual participant or 
beneficiary with respect to which the 
conditions of the exemption have not 
been satisfied. The proposal also 
indicated that, in the case of a pattern 
or practice of noncompliance with any 
of the conditions, the exemption would 
not apply to any transaction in 
connection with the provision of 
investment advice provided by the 
fiduciary adviser during the period over 
which the pattern or practice extended. 
Several commenters objected to the 
‘‘pattern or practice’’ provision, arguing 
that because non-compliant advice is 
already subject to an excise tax under 
the Code, extending the penalty to all 
advice provided during a period, 
without regard to it being compliant 
advice, is unnecessary and punitive. 
Commenters also argued that the 
concept of a ‘‘pattern or practice’’ was 
unclear. Some commenters suggested 
the penalty should be prospective only, 
while others argued there should be a de 
minimus rule or period for correcting 
such noncompliance before losing the 
relief of the exemption for compliant 
advice. On the other side, one 
commenter argued that increased 
penalties for noncompliance would 
make the exemption more protective. 
The Department believes that one of 
the most significant deterrents to 
noncompliance with the conditions of 
the statutory and class exemption is the 
potentially significant excise taxes 
applicable to transactions that fail to 
satisfy the conditions of the exemptions. 
The Department believes that the 
‘‘pattern or practice’’ provision creates 
additional incentives on the part of 
fiduciary advisers taking advantage of 
the exemptive relief to be vigilant in 
designing and following policies, 
procedures and practices that will 
assure compliance. The Department, 
therefore, has retained this provision in 
the final rule. Unlike the proposal, 
however, the provision now applies to 
both relief under the statutory 
exemption and the class exemption. As 
revised, paragraph (f) of the final rule 
provides that: (1) The relief from the 
prohibited transaction provisions of 
section 406 of ERISA and the sanctions 
resulting from the application of section 
4975 of the Code described in 
paragraphs (b) and (d) of the final rule 
shall not apply to any transaction 
described in such paragraphs in 
connection with the provision of 
investment advice to an individual 
participant or beneficiary with respect 
to which the applicable conditions of 
the final rule have not been satisfied; 
and (2), in the case of a pattern or 
practice of noncompliance with any of 
the applicable conditions of the final 
rule, the relief described in paragraph 
(b) or (d) shall not apply to any 
transaction in connection with the 
provision of investment advice provided 
by the fiduciary adviser during the 
period over which the pattern or 
practice extended. 
With respect to what the Department 
might view as a ‘‘pattern or practice’’ of 
noncompliance with the exemptions, 
the Department believes that it is 
important to identify both individual 
violations and patterns of such 
violations. Isolated, unrelated, or 
accidental occurrences would not 
themselves constitute a pattern or 
practice. However, intentional, regular, 
deliberate practices involving more than 
isolated events or individuals, or 
institutionalized practices will almost 
always constitute a pattern or practice. 
In determining whether a pattern or 
practice exists, the Department will 
consider whether the noncompliance 
appears to be part of either written or 
unwritten policies or established 
practices, whether there is evidence of 
similar noncompliance with respect to 
more than one plan or arrangement, and 
whether the noncompliance is within a 
fiduciary adviser’s control. 
7. Effective Date 
The Department proposed that the 
regulation would be effective 60 days 
after the date of publication of the final 
rule and that the class exemption would 
be effective 90 days after the date of 
publication of the final exemption. One 
commenter suggested that the 60 day 
effective date would not constitute 
sufficient time to comply with the final 
rule. One commenter suggested that the 
final rule should be effective no earlier 
than the later of July 1, 2009, or 180 
days after publication of the final rule. 
Another commenter requested that rule 
be made effective upon publication. 
Given the importance of investment 
advice to participants and beneficiaries 
generally and given that the exemptions 
contained in this final rule will expand 
the opportunity for participant and 
beneficiaries to obtain affordable, 
quality investment advice, the 
Department believes that the final rule 
should be effective on the earliest 
possible date. Accordingly, the final 
rule contained in this document will be 
effective 60 days after the date of 
publication in the Federal Register and 
will apply to transactions described in 
paragraphs (b) and (d) of the final rule 
occurring on or after that date. 
8. General Information 
The attention of interested persons is 
directed to the following: 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 19:29 Jan 16, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00017 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\21JAR3.SGM 21JAR3ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 P
R
O
D1
PC
66
 w
ith
 R
UL
ES
3
3838 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 12 / Wednesday, January 21, 2009 / Rules and Regulations 
(1) The fact that a transaction is the 
subject of an exemption under section 
408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) 
of the Code does not relieve a fiduciary 
or other party in interest or disqualified 
person from other provisions of the Act 
and the Code, including any prohibited 
transaction provisions to which the 
exemption does not apply and the 
general fiduciary responsibility 
provisions of section 404 of the Act. 
Section 404 requires, among other 
things, that a fiduciary discharge its 
duties with respect to the plan 
prudently and solely in the interests of 
the plan’s participants and beneficiaries. 
A transaction’s qualification for an 
exemption also does not affect the 
requirement of section 401(a) of the 
Code that the plan must operate for the 
exclusive benefit of the employees of 
the employer maintaining the plan and 
their beneficiaries; 
(2) The exemptions contained herein 
are supplemental to, and not in 
derogation of, any other provisions of 
the Act and the Code, including 
statutory or administrative exemptions 
and transitional rules; and 
(3) In accordance with section 408(a) 
of ERISA and section 4975(c)(2) of the 
Code, and based on the entire record, 
the Department finds that, as discussed 
above, the class exemption contained in 
this document is administratively 
feasible, in the interests of the plan(s) 
and IRAs and of its participants and 
beneficiaries, and protective of the 
rights of the participants and 
beneficiaries of the plan and IRAs. 
C. Overview of Final § 2550.408g–2 
Section 408(g)(11)(A) of ERISA 
provides that, with respect to an 
arrangement that relies on use of a 
computer model to qualify as an 
‘‘eligible investment advice 
arrangement’’ under the statutory 
exemption, a person who develops the 
computer model, or markets the 
investment advice program or computer 
model, shall be treated as a fiduciary of 
a plan by reason of the provision of 
investment advice referred to in ERISA 
section 3(21)(A)(ii) to the plan 
participant or beneficiary, and shall be 
treated as a ‘‘fiduciary adviser’’ for 
purposes of ERISA sections 408(b)(14) 
and 408(g), except that the Secretary of 
Labor may prescribe rules under which 
only one fiduciary adviser may elect to 
be treated as a fiduciary with respect to 
the plan. Section 4975(f)(8)(J)(i) of the 
Code contains a parallel provision to 
ERISA section 408(g)(11)(A) that applies 
for purposes of Code sections 
4975(d)(17) and 4975(f)(8). 
In conjunction with the proposed 
regulation implementing the statutory 
exemption for investment advice, the 
Department also proposed a rule, 
§ 2550.408g–2, governing the 
requirements for electing to be treated as 
a fiduciary and fiduciary adviser by 
reason of developing or marketing a 
computer model or an investment 
advice program used in an eligible 
investment advice arrangement. Section 
2550.408g–2 sets forth requirements that 
must be satisfied in order for one such 
fiduciary adviser to elect to be treated as 
a fiduciary under such an eligible 
investment advice arrangement. See 
paragraph (a) of § 2550.408g–2. 
Paragraph (b)(1) of § 2550.408g–2 
provides that, if an election meets the 
requirements of paragraph (b)(2) of the 
proposal, then the person identified in 
the election shall be the sole fiduciary 
adviser treated as a fiduciary by reason 
of developing or marketing a computer 
model, or marketing an investment 
advice program, used in an eligible 
investment advice arrangement. 
Paragraph (b)(2) requires that the 
election be in writing and that the 
writing: identify the arrangement, and 
person offering the arrangement, with 
respect to which the election is to be 
effective; and identify the person who is 
the fiduciary adviser, the person who 
develops the computer model or 
markets the computer model or 
investment advice program with respect 
to the arrangement, and the person who 
elects to be treated as the only fiduciary, 
and fiduciary adviser, by reason of 
developing such computer model or 
marketing such computer model or 
investment advice program. Paragraph 
(b)(2) of § 2550.408g–2 also requires that 
the election be signed by the person 
acknowledging that it elects to be 
treated as the only fiduciary and 
fiduciary adviser; that a copy of the 
election be furnished to the plan 
fiduciary who authorized use of the 
arrangement; and that the writing be 
retained in accordance with the record 
retention requirements of § 2550.408g– 
1(e). 
The Department received no 
substantive comments on this regulation 
and, therefore, is adopting the 
regulation substantially as proposed. 
This regulation, like § 2550.408g–1, will 
be effective 60 days after the date of 
publication of the final rule in the 
Federal Register. 
D. Regulatory Impact Analysis 
1. Summary 
In the regulatory impact analysis 
(RIA) for the proposed regulation and 
class exemption (hereafter, ‘‘the 
proposals’’), the Department noted that, 
historically, many participants and 
beneficiaries in participant-directed 
defined contribution plans and 
beneficiaries of individual retirement 
accounts (IRAs) (collectively hereafter, 
‘‘participants’’) have made investment 
mistakes. The Department anticipates 
that full implementation of the PPA 
under this final regulation, together 
with this class exemption (hereafter, the 
‘‘final rule’’), by extending quality, 
expert investment advice to a greater 
number of participants will improve 
investment decisions and results. This 
improvement in investment results 
reflects reductions in investment errors, 
including poor trading strategies and 
inadequate diversification. The 
Department further anticipates that the 
increased investment advice resulting 
from the final rule also will reduce 
participants’ investment related 
expenses, further improving their 
overall investment results, and will 
improve the welfare of participants by 
better aligning participant investments 
and their risk tolerances. 
The provisions of the final rule are 
designed to promote the availability of 
affordable, quality investment advice. 
2. Public Comments 
The Department received several 
comments on the regulatory impact 
analysis of the proposals. The following 
is a summary of the major comments 
and the Department’s response thereto. 
a. Trading Strategies 
A number of commenters objected to 
the Department’s contention that 
participants’ active attempts to ‘‘time 
the market’’ constitute inferior trading 
strategies that result in losses. 
According to these commenters, the 
term ‘‘market timing’’ ‘‘no longer 
defines investment strategies providing 
investors with enhanced risk-adjusted 
returns’’ and professionals are proficient 
in actively managing clients’ portfolios. 
The commenters further asserted that 
the Department should not favor one 
investment strategy over another. 
The Department continues to believe 
that automatic rebalancing is likely to be 
superior on average to participants’ own 
efforts (without benefit of expert advice) 
to time the market (meaning to 
reallocate assets in anticipation of future 
market movements). However, this says 
nothing about the relative merits of 
active professional account 
management. The Department is 
unaware of any studies that measure the 
performance of managed accounts 
relative to that of target date funds or 
other automatic rebalancing 
arrangements, and proffers no view as to 
whether one strategy is superior to 
another. 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 19:29 Jan 16, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00018 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\21JAR3.SGM 21JAR3ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 P
R
O
D1
PC
66
 w
ith
 R
UL
ES
3
3839 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 12 / Wednesday, January 21, 2009 / Rules and Regulations 
20 ‘‘Level’’ in this context means invariant with 
respect to associated investment decisions. 
21 Since promulgating the proposals the 
Department has considered additional evidence 
Continued 
b. Permissible Arrangements 
The Department included in its 
analysis of the proposals a table 
summarizing how compensation of 
fiduciary advisers can vary in advice 
arrangements operating under the 
following three scenarios: Absent any 
exemptive relief, pursuant to the PPA 
statutory exemption, and pursuant to 
the proposed class exemption. As 
requested in comments, the Department 
advises that the table was not intended 
to exhaustively list all permissible 
advice arrangements. Some 
arrangements might operate pursuant to 
other exemptive relief. Participants and 
plans continue to have the option of 
obtaining advice under arrangements 
that were permitted prior to enactment 
of the PPA and promulgation of this 
final rule. Furthermore, the Department 
does not favor any particular 
permissible arrangement over any other. 
c. Preferences for Computer Models v. 
Contact With Advisers 
In response to commenters, the 
Department is modifying its assertion 
that some participants are dissatisfied 
with advice from computer models. 
Rather, the cited authorities indicate 
that plan sponsors rate arrangements 
that include contact with advisers as 
more effective than those that rely 
exclusively on computer models, and 
provide some evidence that more 
participants make use of the former than 
the latter. 
d. Revenue Sources and Active 
Marketing 
In its analysis of the proposals the 
Department suggested that advisers with 
revenue sources other than level 20 fees 
paid directly by participants, plans or 
sponsors might market their advisory 
services more actively to certain 
participant market segments than 
independent advisers do. Some 
commenters disputed this suggestion. 
These commenters pointed out that 
independent advisers may receive 
alternative revenue sources such as 
revenue sharing and may not rely 
exclusively on level fees, and 
emphasized that plan sponsors mediate 
adviser efforts to market to participants. 
First, the Department clarifies that in 
this context ‘‘independence’’ was meant 
to reference exclusive reliance on level 
fees rather than a lack of affiliation. 
Second, the Department notes that other 
commenters strongly suggested that 
alternative sources of compensation for 
investment advisory services may 
facilitate sales of such services where 
exclusive reliance on level fees would 
not—particularly sales of adviser 
consultations (as distinct from computer 
models alone) to small account holders. 
Therefore, the Department continues to 
believe that some advisers with such 
alternative sources of compensation for 
investment advice services will be more 
inclined than independent advisers to 
market such services to some 
participant market segments. Finally, 
the Department notes that active 
marketing could target plan sponsors as 
well as plan participants and IRA 
beneficiaries. 
e. Audit Requirement 
In response to comments, the 
Department notes that its assumption 
that audits would be outsourced to an 
independent legal professional was 
intended only as a proxy to estimate the 
cost of compliance with the audit 
requirement. In fact, as discussed earlier 
in the preamble, the Department is not 
persuaded that there is necessarily one 
set of credentials, such as experience as 
certified public account or auditor or 
lawyer, that, in and of itself, qualifies an 
individual or organization to conduct 
the audits required by the statutory and 
class exemptions. Likewise, the 
Department’s assumptions regarding the 
sample of transactions to be audited 
were adopted for purposes of cost 
estimation and should not be construed 
as guidance as to how sampling should 
be conducted. Having said that, the 
assumptions are consistent with 
compliant sampling at the level of the 
financial institution acting as the 
fiduciary adviser. 
f. Advice Quality 
The Department’s RIA of the 
proposals devoted considerable 
attention to the question of whether 
adviser conflicts might taint advice. As 
detailed there, there is evidence to 
suggest that conflicted advisers 
sometimes reap profit at investors’ 
expense. The proposals’ conditions 
were intended to prevent conflicts from 
tainting advice. Accordingly, the RIA 
assumed that advice arrangements 
operating pursuant to the proposals 
would be as effective as arrangements 
operating without need for exemptive 
relief, notwithstanding the conflicts that 
are attendant to the former. 
As noted earlier in this preamble, 
some commenters maintained that the 
proposals’ conditions, together with the 
threat of substantial excise tax penalties 
for noncompliance, are sufficiently 
protective and that consequently advice 
provided pursuant to the proposals will 
be of high quality and reflect the 
participants’ best interests. The 
Department can be confident that advice 
arrangements operating pursuant to the 
proposals will satisfy the applicable 
conditions because advisers are 
scrupulous about compliance, the 
commenters said. Some of these 
commenters suggested that some of the 
conditions were more stringent than 
necessary and should be relaxed. For 
example, some commenters objected to 
the proposed condition denying 
exemptive relief to all transactions 
under an arrangement where there is a 
pattern or practice of failures to satisfy 
applicable conditions. Relief should be 
denied only to particular transactions 
for which conditions were not satisfied, 
the commenters said. Some commenters 
argued that the proposals’ limits on 
compensation that can be paid under 
level fee arrangements should be 
relaxed to permit certain types of 
performance based rewards, bonuses 
and promotions. 
Also as noted earlier in this preamble, 
other commenters questioned the 
Department’s assumption that advice 
arrangements operating pursuant to the 
proposals would be as effective as 
arrangements operating without need 
for exemptive relief, predicting that the 
former will too often be tainted by 
attendant conflicts. Most of these 
commenters expressed deepest concern 
with the proposed class exemption, 
arguing that the fiduciary adviser and 
the person providing the advice may be 
conflicted. Some commenters also 
expressed concern with the proposed 
regulation’s interpretation of the 
statutory exemption, arguing that the 
fiduciary advisers’ affiliates may be 
conflicted. These commenters 
maintained that the proposals’ 
conditions are not sufficiently 
protective. Persons providing advice on 
behalf of fiduciary adviser entities 
cannot be fully insulated from conflicts 
affecting the entities or their affiliates, 
the commenters said, and the proposals’ 
procedural safeguards, including 
disclosure and independent audits, 
together with available enforcement 
mechanisms, are not sufficient to ensure 
compliance with the proposals’ 
substantive conditions, such as 
unbiasedness and adherence to 
investment theories. Some commenters 
cautioned that investors are vulnerable 
to manipulation. 
The Department continues to believe, 
as it did in connection with the 
proposals, that, in the absence of 
adequate protections, an adviser’s 
conflicts may result in biased advice.21 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 19:29 Jan 16, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00019 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\21JAR3.SGM 21JAR3ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 P
R
O
D1
PC
66
 w
ith
 R
UL
ES
3
3840 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 12 / Wednesday, January 21, 2009 / Rules and Regulations 
suggesting that adviser conflicts can taint advice. 
See, e.g., U.S. SEC, Protecting Senior Investors: 
Report of Examinations of Securities Firms 
Providing ‘‘Free Lunch’’ Sales Seminar (Sept. 2007). 
22 Under Code section 4975, fiduciaries 
participating in prohibited transactions may be 
subject to an excise tax of 15 percent of the amount 
involved for each year in the taxable period, in 
addition to which an excise tax of 100 percent of 
the amount involved may be added depending on 
whether the prohibited transactions are timely 
corrected. 23 See 73 FR 43013 (July 23, 2008). 
24 See e.g., James J. Choi et al., Why Does the Law 
of One Price Fail? An Experiment on Index Mutual 
Funds, National Bureau of Economic Research 
Working Paper W12261 (May 2006); Jeff Dominitz 
et al., How Do Mutual Funds Fees Affect Investor 
Choices? Evidence from Survey Experiments (May 
2008) (unpublished, on file with the Department) 
(Dominitz); and John Turner & Sophie Korczyk, 
Pension Participant Knowledge About Plan Fees, 
AARP Pub ID: DD–105 (Nov. 2004). Commenters 
pointed out that net flows are concentrated in 
mutual funds with low expenses. However it is 
unclear whether this reflects investor fee sensitivity 
or brand name recognition and successful 
marketing by large, established funds whose low 
fees are attributable to economies of scale. 
25 Sebastian Mu¨ller & Martin Weber, Financial 
Literacy and Mutual Fund Investments: Who Buys 
Actively Managed Funds?, Social Science Research 
Network Abstract 1093305 (Feb. 14, 2008) found 
that more financially literate investors pay lower 
front-end loads but similar management fees, and 
suggest that investors who know about management 
fees appear not to care about them. Dominitz finds 
that financially literate individuals are better able 
to estimate fees, and better estimates are associated 
with more optimal investment choices. Brad M. 
Barber et al., Out of Sight, Out of Mind, The Effects 
of Expenses on Mutual Fund Flows, Journal of 
Business, Volume 79, Number 6, 2095–2119 (2005) 
found that repeat investors are more sensitive to 
load fees than expense ratios, but commenters point 
out that this finding may be an artifact of industry 
load setting practices. 
26 Mark Grinblatt et al., Are Mutual Fund Fees 
Competitive? What IQ-Related Behavior Tells Us, 
Social Science Research Network Abstract 1087120 
(Nov. 2007) found that investors with different IQs 
pay similar fees, which ‘‘suggests that fees are set 
competitively.’’ 
However, the Department also believes 
that the safeguards included in this final 
rule, together with associated 
enforcement mechanisms including the 
potentially significant excise taxes 22 for 
noncompliance and for patterns and 
practice of noncompliance, effectively 
minimize the possibility that fiduciary 
advisers will act on their conflicts. 
Provisions expected to deter 
noncompliance include the annual 
audit requirement, disclosure of 
noncompliant activities identified in the 
course of an audit to authorizing plan 
fiduciaries and, in the case of IRAs, to 
the Department, and the pattern or 
practice provision. 
Because the conditions and 
enforcement mechanisms constitute 
adequate safeguards, the Department 
believes that any impact of conflicts on 
advice provided pursuant to the 
statutory and class exemptions will be 
minimal. The Department stands by its 
assumption that advice arrangements 
operating pursuant to the final rule will 
be as effective as arrangements 
operating without need for exemptive 
relief. 
g. Effect on Expenses 
Two distinct types of inefficiency can 
result in higher than optimal consumer 
expenditures for a particular type of 
good. The first is prices that are higher 
than would be efficient. Efficient 
markets require vigorous competition. 
Sellers with market power can 
command inefficiently high prices, 
thereby capturing consumer surplus and 
imposing a ‘‘dead weight loss’’ of 
welfare on society. Efficient markets 
also require perfect information and 
rational, utility maximizing consumers. 
Imperfect information, search costs and 
consumers’ behavioral biases likewise 
can allow some sellers to command 
inefficiently high prices. The 
Department accordingly has considered 
whether such conditions might exist in 
the market for investment products and 
services bought by or on behalf of 
participants. 
The second type of inefficiency is 
suboptimal consumer choices among 
available products. Even if goods are 
priced competitively, welfare will be 
lost if consumers make poor purchasing 
decisions. Imperfect information, search 
costs and behavioral biases can 
compromise purchasing decisions, and 
the Department has considered whether 
participants’ purchases of investment 
products and services might be so 
compromised. 
In its RIA of the proposals, the 
Department estimated that fees and 
expenses paid by unadvised 
participants are higher than necessary 
by 11.3 basis points on average. Some 
commenters on the proposals, as well as 
some commenters on the Department’s 
proposed regulation governing 
disclosure to participant-directed 
defined contribution (DC) plan 
participants,23 disputed this estimate. 
The commenters pointed to evidence 
that the pricing of investment products 
and related services is competitive and 
efficient, and contended that there is no 
credible evidence to the contrary. 
The commenters raised several 
specific challenges to the Department’s 
analysis. First, they contended that the 
Department’s estimate relies 
inappropriately on dispersion in mutual 
fund expenses as evidence that such 
expenses are sometimes higher than 
necessary and as a basis for estimating 
the degree to which this is so. 
Dispersion in expenses reflects 
differences among the investment 
products or the services bundled with 
them, the commenters said, and 
therefore such dispersion is consistent 
with competitive, efficient pricing. 
Second, the commenters argued that the 
analysis draws incorrect inferences 
about fees and expenses in DC plans. 
The analysis overlooks the role of DC 
plan fiduciaries in choosing reasonably 
priced investments and relies too much 
on research that examined retail rather 
than DC plan experience, they said. 
Third, the commenters highlighted what 
they say are technical flaws in some of 
the research that the Department had 
cited as supporting the conclusion that 
fees and expenses are sometimes higher 
than necessary, and they took issue with 
the Department’s interpretation of some 
of the research. 
In response to these commenters, the 
Department undertook to refine and 
strengthen its analysis. First, the 
Department agrees that the RIA of the 
proposals relied too heavily on mere 
dispersion of fees and expenses as a 
basis for estimating whether and to what 
degree they might be higher than 
necessary. The estimate that they are on 
average 11.3 basis points higher than 
necessary lacks adequate basis and 
should be disregarded. Second, the 
Department agrees that fees and 
expenses paid by DC plan participants 
can differ from those paid by retail 
investors. Any evidence of higher than 
necessary expenses in the retail sector 
might suggest similar circumstances in 
DC plans, but would not demonstrate it. 
Third, the Department reviewed 
available research literature in light of 
the commenters, and refined its analysis 
and conclusions accordingly, as 
summarized immediately below. 
(i) Expense sensitivity—Surveys and 
studies strongly suggest gaps in 
awareness of and sensitivity to 
expenses.24 Other studies consider 
whether investors with different levels 
of sophistication make different 
decisions about fees. If more 
sophisticated investors are more 
sensitive to fees, less sophisticated ones 
might be paying more than would be 
optimal. Alternatively, they might be 
paying more in order to obtain 
sophisticated help. Much literature 
suggests a negative relationship between 
sophistication and expenses paid,25 but 
some does not.26 Overall this literature 
leaves open the question of whether 
investment prices are sometimes 
inefficiently high, but suggests that even 
if prices are efficient investors may 
make poor purchasing decisions. The 
Department believes that many 
individual investors, including both DC 
plan participants and IRA beneficiaries, 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 19:29 Jan 16, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00020 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\21JAR3.SGM 21JAR3ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 P
R
O
D1
PC
66
 w
ith
 R
UL
ES
3
3841 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 12 / Wednesday, January 21, 2009 / Rules and Regulations 
27 John P. Freeman & Stewart L. Brown, Mutual 
Fund Advisory Fees: The Cost of Conflicts of 
Interest, The Journal of Corporate Law, Volume 26, 
609–673 (Spring 2001), found that the price paid by 
mutual funds for equity fund management is higher 
than that paid by pension funds. Based on this and 
other evidence they argue that mutual fund fees are 
often excessive. John C. Coates & R. Glenn Hubbard, 
Competition in the Mutual Fund Industry: Evidence 
and Implications for Policy, Social Science 
Research Network Abstract 1005426 (Aug. 2007), 
challenged Freeman and Brown’s methods and 
conclusions, arguing that these differences in prices 
are attributable to differences in services for which 
Freeman and Brown did not account. They offer 
evidence that fees are competitive. Alicia H. 
Munnell et al., Investment Returns: Defined 
Benefits vs. 401(k) Plans, Center for Retirement 
Research Issue Brief Number 52 (Sept. 2006), found 
higher returns in defined benefit (DB) plans than in 
DC plans and offered that ‘‘part of the explanation 
may rest with higher fees’’ that are paid by DC plan 
participants. Rob Bauer & Rik G.P. Frehen, The 
Performance of U.S. Pension Funds, Social Science 
Research Network Abstract 965388 (Jan. 2008), 
found that DC and DB plans both perform close to 
benchmarks while mutual funds underperform, and 
point to hidden costs in mutual funds as the most 
likely reason. Diane Del Guercio & Paula A. Tkac, 
The Determinants of the Flow of Funds of Managed 
Portfolios: Mutual Funds vs. Pension Funds, The 
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 
Volume 37, Number 4, 523–557 (Dec. 2002), found 
that ‘‘in contrast to mutual fund investors, pension 
clients punish poorly performing managers by 
withdrawing assets under management and do not 
flock disproportionately to recent winners.’’ 
28 Guo Ying Luo, Mutual Fund Fee-Setting, 
Market Structure and Mark-Ups, Economica, 
Volume 69, Number 274, 245–271 (May 2002), 
exploited differences in market concentration 
across different narrow mutual funds categories, 
and found that mark-ups average 30 percent of fees 
across all categories of no load funds and more than 
70 percent across load funds (assuming a 5-year 
holding period). 
29 The literature also attributed much expense 
dispersion to differences in the cost of managing 
different types of funds. For example, active equity 
management is more expensive than passive and 
management of foreign or small cap equity funds is 
more expensive than management of large cap 
domestic equity funds. Investors therefore might 
optimally diversify across funds with different 
levels of investment management expense. Some 
studies questioned whether active management 
delivers observable financial benefits 
commensurate to the associate expense. For 
example, Kenneth R. French, The Cost of Active 
Investing, Social Science Research Network 
Abstract 1105775 (Apr. 2008), found that investors 
spend 0.67 percent of aggregate U.S. stock market 
value each year searching for superior return, and 
characterized this as society’s cost of price 
discovery. 
30 Both of these hypotheses are also consistent 
with literature finding a negative link between 
sophistication and expenses. 
31 The following is a sampling of findings and 
interpretations reported in various studies that the 
Department reviewed. The Department observes 
that some of these studies have been published in 
peer-reviewed journals, while others have not. 
Some are working papers subject to later revision. 
Some research is visibly supported by industry or 
other interests, and some may be independent. Very 
little of this research separately examines DC plan 
investing. Nearly all of it examines mutual fund 
markets to the exclusion of certain competing 
insurance company or bank products. Some of it 
examines foreign experience. The Department 
believes it must be cautious in drawing inferences 
from this research as to whether investment prices 
paid by participants are efficient. 
Daniel B. Bergstresser et al., Assessing the Costs 
and Benefits of Brokers in the Mutual Fund 
Industry, Social Science Research Network Abstract 
616981 (Sept. 2007), found that investors who pay 
to purchase funds via intermediaries realize inferior 
returns, and said this result is consistent with either 
intangible benefits for investors or inefficiently high 
prices due to conflicts. 
Ralph Bluethgen et al., Financial Advice and 
Individual Investors’ Portfolios, Social Science 
Research Network Abstract 968197 (Mar. 2008), 
found that advisers (who are mostly compensated 
by commission) improve diversification and 
allocation across classes while increasing fees and 
turnover. They said these findings are consistent 
with ‘‘honest advice.’’ 
Mercer Bullard et al., Investor Timing and Fund 
Distribution Channels, Social Science Research 
Network Abstract 1070545 (Dec. 2007), found that 
investors who transact through conflicted advisers 
incur timing underperformance. 
Susan Christoffersen et al., The Economics of 
Mutual-Fund Brokerage: Evidence from the Cross 
Section of Investment Channels, Science Research 
Network Abstract 687522 (Dec. 2005), identified 
some financial benefits reaped by investors who 
pay to invest through intermediaries. 
Sean Collins, Fees and Expenses of Mutual 
Funds, 2006, Investment Company Institute 
Research Fundamentals, Volume 16, Number 2 
(June 2007), reported that mutual fund fees and 
expenses are declining. 
Sean Collins, Are S&P 500 Index Mutual Funds 
Commodities?, Investment Company Institute 
Perspective, Volume 11, Number 3 (Aug. 2005), 
argued that S&P 500 index funds are not uniform 
commodities. For example, they are distributed in 
different ways. He found that 91 percent of the 
variation in these funds’ expense ratios can be 
explained by a combination of fund asset size, 
investor account size, fee waivers and separate fees, 
and investor advice that is bundled into expense 
ratios. He argued that these funds competitively 
pass economies of scale along to investors, and 
reported that assets and flows are concentrated in 
low-cost funds. 
Henrik Cronqvist, Advertising and Portfolio 
Choice, Social Science Research Network Abstract 
920693 (July 26, 2006), found that fund advertising 
steered investors toward ‘‘portfolios with higher 
fees, more risk, more active management, more ‘hot’ 
sectors, and more home bias.’’ He suggested that 
‘‘with the use of advertising, funds can differentiate 
themselves and therefore charge investors higher 
fees than the lowest-cost supplier in the industry.’’ 
Daniel N. Deli, Mutual Fund Advisory Contracts: 
An Empirical Investigation, The Journal of Finance, 
Volume 57, Number 1, 109–133 (Feb. 2002), found 
that differences in investment advisers’ marginal 
compensation reflected differences in their 
marginal product, difficulty in measuring adviser 
performance, control environments, and scale 
economies. Based on this finding, he suggested that 
investment prices are efficient and recommended 
caution in any regulatory effort to influence such 
prices. 
Edwin J. Elton et al., Are Investors Rational? 
Choices Among Index Funds, The Journal of 
Finance, Volume 59, Number 1, 261–288 (Feb. 
2004), found that flows into high-expense (and 
therefore predictably low performance) S&P 500 
index mutual funds were higher than would be 
expected in an efficient market. They concluded 
that, because investors are not perfectly informed 
and rational, inferior products can prosper. 
Commenters, however, contended that, because the 
authors scaled flows by fund size and smaller funds 
have higher expenses, these findings exaggerated 
the degree to which flows are directed to high- 
expense funds. 
Javier Gil-Bazo & Pablo Ruiz-Verdu´, Yet Another 
Puzzle? Relation Between Price and Performance in 
the Mutual Fund Industry, Social Science Research 
Network Abstract 947448 (March 2007), found that 
‘‘funds with worse before-fee performance charge 
higher fees.’’ They hypothesized that lower- 
performing funds lose sophisticated investors to 
higher performing funds, then are left with 
relatively unsophisticated investors who are not as 
responsive to price. 
Continued 
historically have not factored expenses 
optimally into their investment choices. 
(ii) Sector differences—Some studies 
lend insight to the question of whether 
investment prices are efficient by 
comparing prices paid or performance 
in different market segments.27 The 
Department believes that taken together, 
this literature suggests that there are 
unexplained differences in prices and 
performance across sectors but fails to 
demonstrate conclusively whether such 
differences are systematically 
attributable to inefficiently high 
investment prices. 
(iii) Market power—At least one study 
suggests that mutual funds may wield 
market power to mark up prices to 
inefficient levels.28 
(iv) What expenses buy—A number of 
studies considered the degree to which 
expense dispersion is a function of 
product features and bundled services, 
and if it is, whether that dispersion is 
justified by differences in observable 
attendant financial benefits such as 
performance. Some of this literature also 
considered the degree to which 
investors choose investments where 
expenses are so justified. In the 
Department’s view this literature taken 
together suggests that a substantial 
portion of expense dispersion is 
attributable to distribution expenses, 
including compensation of 
intermediaries and advertising.29 It casts 
doubt on whether such expenses are 
duly offset by observable financial 
benefits. Most studies are consistent 
with the possibility that such expenses 
are at least partly offset by unobserved 
benefits such as reduced search costs 
and other support for novice and 
unsophisticated investors, but most are 
also consistent with the possibility that 
some expenses are not so offset and that 
investors, especially unsophisticated 
ones, sometimes pay inefficiently high 
prices.30 The authors of some studies 
expressly interpreted their failure to 
identify offsetting financial benefits as 
evidence that prices are inefficiently 
high. Some suggested that conflicted 
intermediaries may serve their own and 
fund managers’ interests, thereby 
generating inefficiently high profits for 
either or both. Others disagreed, 
believing that investors efficiently 
derive a combination of financial and 
intangible benefits for their expense 
dollars.31 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 19:29 Jan 16, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00021 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\21JAR3.SGM 21JAR3ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 P
R
O
D1
PC
66
 w
ith
 R
UL
ES
3
3842 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 12 / Wednesday, January 21, 2009 / Rules and Regulations 
John A. Haslem et al., Performance and 
Characteristics of Actively Managed Retail Equity 
Mutual Funds with Diverse Expense Ratios, 
Financial Services Review, Volume 17, Number 1, 
49–68 (2008), found that funds with lower expenses 
have superior returns. John A. Haslem et al., 
Identification and Performance of Equity Mutual 
Funds with High Management Fees and Expense 
Ratios, Journal of Investing, Volume 16, Number 2 
(2007), found that certain performance measures 
vary negatively with fees and, on that basis, 
suggested that mutual funds do not compete 
strongly on price and that expenses are too high. 
Sarah Holden & Michael Hadley, The Economics 
of Providing 401(k) Plans: Services, Fees and 
Expenses 2006, Investment Company Institute 
Research Fundamentals, Volume 16, Number 4 
(Sept. 2007), reported that 401(k) mutual fund 
investors tended to pay lower than average 
expenses and that 401(k) assets were concentrated 
in low-cost funds. 
Ali Hortacsu & Chad Syverson, Product 
Differentiation, Search Costs, and Competition in 
the Mutual Fund Industry: A Case Study of S&P 500 
Index Funds, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 403 
(May 2004), documented dispersion in S&P 500 
Index Fund expense ratios, and reported that low- 
cost funds had a dominant, but falling, market 
share. They concluded that an influx of novice 
investors who must defray search costs explained 
dispersion in expenses and flows to high-expense 
funds. 
Todd Houge & Jay W. Wellman, The Use and 
Abuse of Mutual Fund Expenses, Social Science 
Research Network Abstract 880463 (Jan. 2006), 
found that load funds charge higher 12b-1 and 
management fees. They attributed this to abusive 
market segmentation that extracted excessive fees 
from unsophisticated investors. 
Giuliano Iannotta & Marco Navone, Search Costs 
and Mutual Fund Fee Dispersion, Social Science 
Research Network Abstract 1231843 (Aug. 2008), 
analyzed the effect of search costs on mutual fund 
fees with data on broad U.S. domestic equity funds. 
They estimated the portion of the expense ratio that 
was not justified by the quality of service provided, 
by the cost structure of the investment company, or 
by the specificities of the clientele served by the 
fund and found that its dispersion was lower for 
highly visible funds and for funds that invested 
heavily in marketing. In the case of the U.S. mutual 
fund market, they argued, the dispersion of this 
residual demonstrated the extent to which some 
firms can charge a ‘‘non-marginal’’ (that is higher 
than competitive) price. 
Marc M. Kramer, The Influence of Financial 
Advice on Individual Investor Portfolio 
Performance, Social Science Research Network 
Abstract 1144702 (Mar. 2008), found that advised 
investors took less risk and thereby reaped lower 
returns. Risk-adjusted performance was similar. 
Adjusting further for investor characteristics, 
advised investors performed slightly worse. 
Erik R. Sirri & Peter Tufano, Costly Search and 
Mutual Fund Flows, The Journal of Finance, 
Volume 53, Number 5, 1589–1622 (Oct. 1998), 
found that investors were ‘‘fee sensitive in that 
lower-fee funds and funds that reduce fees grow 
faster.’’ Investors’ fee sensitivity was not symmetric, 
however. 
Edward Tower & Wei Zheng, Ranking Mutual 
Fund Families: Minimum Expenses and Maximum 
Loads as Markers for Moral Turpitude, Social 
Science Research Network Abstract 1265103 (Sept. 
2008), found a negative relationship between 
expense ratios and gross performance. The Division 
of Investment Management: Report on Mutual Fund 
Fees and Expenses, U.S. Securities and Exchange 
Commission (Dec. 2000), at http://www.sec.gov/ 
news/studies/feestudy.htm, described mutual fund 
fees and expenses and identified major factors that 
influenced fee levels but did not assess whether 
prices were efficient. 
Xinge Zhao, The Role of Brokers and Financial 
Advisors Behind Investment Into Load Funds, 
China Europe International Business School 
Working Paper (Dec. 2005), at http:// 
www.ceibs.edu/faculty/zxinge/brokerrole-zhao.pdf, 
found that funds with higher loads received higher 
flows, and suggested that conflicted intermediaries 
enriched themselves at investors’ expense. 
32 It is possible that the converse could sometimes 
occur: participants might fail to buy efficiently 
priced products and services whose marginal cost 
lags the associated marginal benefit to them. In that 
case advice, by correcting this error, might lead to 
higher expenses, but would still improve welfare. 
Because research suggests that participants are 
insensitive to fees rather than excessively sensitive 
to them, the Department believes that this converse 
situation is likely to be rare. 
In light of this literature and public 
commenters, the Department believes 
that the available research provides an 
insufficient basis to confidently 
determine whether or to what degree 
participants pay inefficiently high 
investment prices. Market conditions 
that may lead to inefficiently high 
prices—namely imperfect information, 
search costs and investor behavioral 
biases—certainly exist in the retail IRA 
market and likely exist to some degree 
in particular segments of the DC plan 
market. The Department believes there 
is a strong possibility that at least some 
participants, especially IRA 
beneficiaries, pay inefficiently high 
investment prices. If so, the Department 
would expect these actions to reduce 
that inefficiency. This would increase 
participants’ welfare by transferring 
surplus from producers of investment 
products and services to them and by 
reducing dead weight loss. The 
Department additionally believes that 
even where investment prices are 
efficient, participants often make bad 
investment decisions with respect to 
expenses—that is, they buy investment 
products and services whose marginal 
cost exceed the associated marginal 
benefit to them.32 
The Department expects these actions 
to reduce such investment errors, 
improving participant and societal 
welfare. However, the Department has 
no basis on which to quantify such 
errors or improvements. 
3. Impact Assessment 
Although the Department anticipates 
that these actions will increase the 
availability of investment advice to DC 
plan participants and the use of advice 
by IRA beneficiaries, the Department is 
uncertain how changing market 
conditions might affect the incidence 
and magnitude of investment errors, as 
well as the availability, use, and effect 
of investment advice. Recent 
developments in financial markets and 
in the market for financial products and 
services underscore this uncertainty. 
However, given that the costs of this 
regulation are due to the cost of 
providing (or paying for) investment 
advice, it will be incurred only to the 
extent that participants seek advice and 
anticipate improved returns on their 
investments. Thus, the Department 
remains confident that these actions 
will yield positive net benefits though 
we are uncertain of the magnitude. The 
Department believes that the approach 
used in the analysis for the proposed 
rule could reflect the long-term effects 
of these actions and can be viewed as a 
reasonable upper bound. The 
Department’s assumptions are 
summarized in Tables 1, 2, and 3. 
TABLE 1—AVAILABILITY OF ADVICE TO 
DC PLAN PARTICIPANTS 
Policy context 
Any advice 
(computer 
or live) 
Live adviser 
Pre-PPA ............ 40% 20% 
PPA ................... 50 25 
Class exemption 60 35 
Note: There are approximately 66 million 
DC participants. 
TABLE 2—NUMBER OF ENTITIES 
Pre PPA PPA CE 
DC: 
Plans offering (000s) .................................................................................................................................... 209.46 261.82 314.19 
Participants offered (MM) ............................................................................................................................. 26.44 33.05 39.66 
Participants using (MM) ................................................................................................................................ 6.61 8.26 10.25 
IRA: 
IRAs using (MM) ........................................................................................................................................... 16.81 25.47 33.97 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 19:29 Jan 16, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00022 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\21JAR3.SGM 21JAR3ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 P
R
O
D1
PC
66
 w
ith
 R
UL
ES
3
3843 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 12 / Wednesday, January 21, 2009 / Rules and Regulations 
TABLE 3—USE OF ADVICE BY DC PLAN AND IRA PARTICIPANTS 
Policy context 
Share of participants 
advised 
Dollars advised ($ trillions) 
DC plans 
IRA DC plans IRAs Combined 
Where 
offered Overall 
Pre-PPA ........................................................................... 25% 10% 33% $0.30 $1.40 $1.70 
PPA .................................................................................. 25 13 50 0.30 2.10 2.50 
Class exemption .............................................................. 26 16 67 0.40 2.80 3.20 
Note: There are approximately 66 million DC participants and approximately 51 million IRA beneficiaries. 
As in its RIA of the proposals, the 
Department assumes here that advised 
participants make investment errors at 
one-half the rate of unadvised 
participants. The remaining errors 
reflect participant failures to follow 
advice, together with possible flaws in 
some advice. Advice arrangements 
operating without need for exemptive 
relief, pursuant to the PPA statutory 
exemption, and pursuant to the class 
exemption are equally effective on 
average, the Department assumes. 
The Department expects the PPA as 
implemented by this regulation, 
together with this class exemption, to 
reduce investment errors to the benefit 
of participants. The Department’s 
estimates of investment errors and 
reductions from investment advice are 
summarized in Table 4. 
TABLE 4—LONG TERM INVESTMENT ERRORS AND IMPACT OF ADVICE 
[$ billions, annual] 
Policy context Remaining errors 
Errors eliminated by 
advice 
Incremental Cumulative 
No advice ................................................................................................................................................. $115 $0 $0 
Pre-PPA advice only ................................................................................................................................ 101 14 14 
PPA .......................................................................................................................................................... 95 7 20 
Class exemption ...................................................................................................................................... 88 7 27 
In the RIA of the proposals, the 
Department estimated costs of 
$1.8 billion for advice arrangements 
operating under the PPA statutory 
exemption and $2.3 billion for advice 
arrangements under the class 
exemption. As the requirement to 
document and keep records on the basis 
of advice provided under the class 
exemption was broadened, costs of 
about $610 million were added to the 
costs of the class exemption, leading to 
a new estimate of $2.9 billion. The 
current cost estimates are summarized 
in Table 5. 
TABLE 5—COST OF ADVICE 
Pre-PPA PPA Class exemption 
Incremental 
Advice cost ($ billions) ..................................................................................................................... $3.80 $1.80 $2.90 
Advice cost rate (bps, average) .............................................................................................................. 23 23 37 
Cumulative (combined with policies to the left) 
Advice cost ($ billions) ..................................................................................................................... $3.80 $5.60 $8.50 
Advice cost rate (bps, average) ....................................................................................................... 23 23 26 
4. Alternatives 
In formulating this final rule, the 
Department considered several 
alternative approaches, which it 
detailed in its RIA of the proposals. The 
Department in these final actions did 
not adopt any of the alternatives 
discussed in its RIA of the proposals, 
having received no sufficiently 
persuasive comments suggesting that it 
should. Some public commenters on the 
proposals suggested alternatives the 
Department had not yet considered. The 
furthest reaching commenters, 
expressing concern that conflicts 
permitted under the proposals would 
taint advice, suggested that the 
Department should either withdraw the 
proposals or modify them to require 
stricter and/or broader fee leveling. As 
detailed above, the Department believes 
these actions’ conditions are sufficiently 
protective to safeguard the quality of 
advice. Accordingly, the Department 
did not pursue these alternatives. Other 
commenters suggested more 
incremental revisions to the proposals. 
The Department’s decisions whether to 
adopt these suggestions are discussed 
earlier in this preamble. 
5. Uncertainty 
As previously stated, the Department 
is uncertain how changing market 
conditions might affect the incidence 
and magnitude of investment errors, as 
well as the availability, use, and effect 
of investment advice. Recent 
developments in financial markets and 
in the market for financial products and 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 19:29 Jan 16, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00023 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\21JAR3.SGM 21JAR3ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 P
R
O
D1
PC
66
 w
ith
 R
UL
ES
3
3844 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 12 / Wednesday, January 21, 2009 / Rules and Regulations 
services underscore this uncertainty. On 
one hand, falling account balances 
might reduce the magnitude of both 
investment errors and potential gains 
from corrective advice. On the other 
hand, volatility and losses in financial 
markets might amplify these, and might 
increase plan sponsors’ propensity to 
make advice available and participants’ 
propensity to seek and follow advice. At 
the same time, restructuring and 
consolidation among suppliers of 
financial products and services might 
alter the cost and availability of advice. 
The Department intends its quantitative 
estimates to reflect the long-term effects 
that will encompass a variety of market 
circumstances. The literature and 
experience underlying the Department’s 
estimates reflect a variety of historical 
market contexts and conditions. 
However, given the uncertainty, we now 
present the estimate as a plausible 
upper bound for the possible effects. 
Regardless, the Department remains 
highly confident in its conclusion 
expressed in its RIA of the proposals 
that investment errors are common and 
often large, producing large avoidable 
losses (including foregone earnings) in 
the long run for participants. It likewise 
remains confident that participants can 
reduce errors substantially by obtaining 
and following good advice. Public 
comments on the proposals reinforce 
these conclusions. 
The Department also remains 
confident that these actions, by relaxing 
rules governing arrangements under 
which advice can be delivered, will 
promote wider use of advice. However, 
the Department is uncertain to what 
extent advice will reach participants 
and to what extent advice that does 
reach them will reduce errors. To 
illustrate that uncertainty, the 
Department conducted sensitivity tests 
of how its estimates of the reduction in 
investment errors attributable to the 
PPA and this class exemption would 
change in response to alternative 
assumptions regarding the availability, 
use, and quality of advice. Table 6 
summarizes the results of these tests. 
TABLE 6—UNCERTAINTY IN ESTIMATE OF INVESTMENT ERROR REDUCTION 
[$ billions annually] 
Scenarios Impact of PPA 
Impact of 
class 
exemption 
Impact of all 
advice 
Remaining 
errors 
Advice eliminates: 
75% of errors ............................................................................................................ $10 $10 $43 $80 
50% of errors ............................................................................................................ 7 7 27 88 
25% of errors ............................................................................................................ 3 3 13 96 
After PPA/class exemption, advice reaches: 
15%/21% of DC and 60%/80% of IRA ..................................................................... 11 8 33 82 
13%/16% of DC and 50%/67% of IRA ..................................................................... 7 7 27 88 
11%/13% of DC and 40%/50% of IRA ..................................................................... 3 4 20 95 
The Department remains uncertain 
whether the magnitude and incidence of 
investment errors and the potential for 
correction of such errors in the context 
of IRAs might differ from that in the 
context of ERISA-covered DC plans. If a 
DC plan’s menu of investment options 
is efficient then the incidence and/or 
magnitude of errors might be smaller 
than in the IRA context. If it is 
inefficient then errors might be more 
numerous and/or larger, but the 
potential for correcting them might be 
constrained. Commenters that address 
this issue mostly suggest that menus are 
efficient. 
The Department remains uncertain 
about the mix of advice and other 
support arrangements that will compose 
the market, and about the relative 
effectiveness of alternative investment 
advice arrangements or other means of 
supporting participants’ investment 
decisions. As discussed above, 
comments on these questions are mixed 
and provide no basis for the Department 
to revise its baseline assumption that all 
arrangements will be equally effective. 
The Department is uncertain about 
the potential magnitude of any 
transitional costs associated with this 
final rule. These might include costs 
associated with efforts of prospective 
fiduciary advisers to adapt their 
business practices to the applicable 
conditions. They might also include 
transaction costs associated with initial 
implementation of investment 
recommendations by newly advised 
participants. The Department’s concern 
over this uncertainty is modest because 
commenters on the proposals emphasize 
the industry’s willingness to comply 
with these actions’ conditions and the 
benefits to investors of implementing 
sound recommendations. 
Another source of uncertainty 
involves potential indirect downstream 
effects of this final rule. Investment 
advice may sometimes come packaged 
with broader financial advice, which 
may include advice on how much to 
contribute to a DC plan. The Department 
has no basis to estimate the incidence of 
such broad advice or its effects, but 
notes that those effects could be large. 
The opening of large new markets to a 
variety of investment advice 
arrangements to which they were 
heretofore closed may affect the 
evolution of investment advice products 
and services and related technologies 
and their distribution channels and 
respective market shares. Other possible 
indirect effects that the Department 
lacks bases to estimate include financial 
market impacts of changes in investor 
behavior and related macroeconomic 
effects. 
However, given that the costs of this 
regulation are due to the cost of 
providing (or paying for) investment 
advice, it will be incurred only to the 
extent that participants seek advice and 
anticipate improved returns on their 
investments. Thus, the Department 
remains confident that these actions 
will yield positive net benefits though 
we are uncertain of the magnitude. 
E. Executive Order 12866 
Under Executive Order 12866, the 
Department must determine whether a 
regulatory action is significant and 
therefore subject to the requirements of 
the Executive Order and review by the 
Office of Management and Budget 
(OMB). This action, comprising this 
final rule, is economically significant 
under section 3(f)(1) of the Executive 
Order because it is likely to have an 
effect on the economy of $100 million 
or more in any one year. Accordingly, 
the Department undertook the foregoing 
analysis of the action’s impact. On that 
basis the Department believes that the 
action’s benefits justify its costs. 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 19:29 Jan 16, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00024 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\21JAR3.SGM 21JAR3ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 P
R
O
D1
PC
66
 w
ith
 R
UL
ES
3
3845 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 12 / Wednesday, January 21, 2009 / Rules and Regulations 
33 Changes made to the disclosure requirements 
in the final rule are specifically identified below. 
In addition to the disclosure requirements 
contained in the NPRM, the final statutory and class 
exemption provide that, if a computer model does 
not make recommendations with respect to 
investment options that constitute certain 
investment funds, products, or services, the 
fiduciary adviser must provide the participant or 
beneficiary with information explaining such funds, 
products, or services when the investment advice 
generated by the computer model is presented. For 
purposes of this analysis, the Department assumes 
that this information is readily available to the 
fiduciary advisor and will not necessarily have to 
be given to the participant in paper form. Therefore, 
no additional paperwork burden was added. The 
numbers presented also reflect a very minor update 
of the number of DC plan participants utilizing 
advice. 
F. Regulatory Flexibility Act 
In the notice of proposed rulemaking, 
the Department certified that the 
proposed regulation, if adopted, would 
not have a significant economic impact 
on a substantial number of small 
entities. For purposes of the analysis, 
the Department proposed to continue its 
usual practice of considering a small 
entity to be an employee benefit plan 
with fewer than 100 participants. The 
Department consulted with the Small 
Business Administration Office of 
Advocacy concerning use of this 
participant count standard for 
Regulatory Flexibility Act purposes and 
requested public commenters on this 
issue. The Department did not receive 
any comments that address its use of the 
participant count standard and 
continues to consider a small entity to 
be an employee benefit plan with fewer 
than 100 participants. 
The Department received a comment 
from a small investment advisory firm 
that provides investment management 
services to IRA beneficiaries. The 
commenter expressed concern that it 
will incur substantial cost to comply 
with the PPA’s statutory exemption in 
order to continue providing investment 
advisory services for its IRA clients. The 
Department observes, however, that 
investment advice arrangements that 
were permissible before enactment of 
the PPA remain permissible without 
respect to whether they satisfy the 
conditions of the PPA’s statutory 
exemption. Therefore the Department 
does not detect in this comment 
evidence of a substantial impact on a 
small entity. 
Another commenter stated that small 
plan sponsors will bear an additional 
fiduciary burden under the statutory 
exemption, because it allows them to 
enter into investment advice 
arrangements with conflicted fiduciary 
advisers. Therefore, the commenter 
opined, the Department should have 
completed an Initial Regulatory 
Flexibility Analysis when proposing the 
regulation. The Department notes, 
however, that the permissibility of such 
arrangements is established by statute 
and not by this implementing 
regulation. The Department also notes 
that small plan sponsors remain free to 
enter into advice arrangements that are 
free from conflicts. Therefore the 
Department does not detect in this 
comment evidence of a substantial 
impact on a significant number of small 
entities. 
In light of the foregoing, the 
Department hereby certifies that the 
final rule will not have a significant 
impact on a substantial number of small 
entities. 
G. Congressional Review Act 
This final rule is subject to the 
Congressional Review Act provisions of 
the Small Business Regulatory 
Enforcement Fairness Act of 1996 (5 
U.S.C. 801 et seq.) and will be 
transmitted to the Congress and the 
Comptroller General for review. 
H. Unfunded Mandates Reform Act 
For purposes of the Unfunded 
Mandates Reform Act of 1995 (Pub. L. 
104–4), as well as Executive Order 
12875, the final rule does not include 
any federal mandate that will result in 
expenditures by state, local, or tribal 
governments in the aggregate of more 
than $100 million, adjusted for 
inflation, or increase expenditures by 
the private sector of more than $100 
million, adjusted for inflation. 
I. Federalism Statement 
Executive Order 13132 (August 4, 
1999) outlines fundamental principles 
of federalism and requires the 
adherence to specific criteria by federal 
agencies in the process of their 
formulation and implementation of 
policies that have substantial direct 
effects on the States, the relationship 
between the national government and 
the States, or on the distribution of 
power and responsibilities among the 
various levels of government. This final 
rule does not have federalism 
implications because it has no 
substantial direct effect on the States, on 
the relationship between the national 
government and the States, or on the 
distribution of power and 
responsibilities among the various 
levels of government. Section 514 of 
ERISA provides, with certain exceptions 
specifically enumerated, that the 
provisions of Titles I and IV of ERISA 
supersede any and all laws of the States 
as they relate to any employee benefit 
plan covered under ERISA. The 
requirements implemented in the rule 
do not alter the fundamental provisions 
of the statute with respect to employee 
benefit plans, and as such would have 
no implications for the States or the 
relationship or distribution of power 
between the national government and 
the States. 
J. Paperwork Reduction Act 
In accordance with the requirements 
of the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 
(PRA) (44 U.S.C. 3506(c)(2)), the notice 
of proposed rulemaking (NPRM) 
solicited commenters on the 
information collections included 
therein. The Department also submitted 
an information collection request (ICR) 
to OMB in accordance with 44 U.S.C. 
3507(d), contemporaneously with the 
publication of the NPRM, for OMB’s 
review. No public comments were 
received that specifically addressed the 
paperwork burden analysis of the 
information collections. 
The Department submitted an ICR to 
OMB for its request of a new 
information collection. OMB approved 
the ICR on January 9, 2009, under OMB 
Control Number 1210–0134, which will 
expire on January 31, 2012. 
In order to use the statutory 
exemption and/or the class exemption 
to provide investment advice to 
participants and beneficiaries in 
participant-directed DC plans and 
beneficiaries of IRAs (collectively 
hereafter, ‘‘participants’’), investment 
advisory firms are required to make 
disclosures to participants and hire an 
independent auditor to conduct a 
compliance audit and issue an audit 
report every year. Investment advice 
firms following the conditions of the 
exemption based on disclosure of 
computer model-generated investment 
advice are required to obtain 
certification of the model from an 
eligible investment expert. The class 
exemption conditions its relief on 
establishing written policies and 
procedures, and both exemptions 
impose recordkeeping requirements. 
These paperwork requirements are 
designed to safeguard the interests of 
participants in connection with 
investment advice covered by the 
exemptions. 
The calculation of the estimated hour 
and cost burden of the ICRs under the 
statutory and class exemption were 
discussed in detail in the NPRM and are 
summarized below.33 
1. Final Statutory Exemption Hour and 
Cost Burden 
The Department estimates that the 
third-party disclosures, computer model 
certification, and audit requirements for 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 19:29 Jan 16, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00025 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\21JAR3.SGM 21JAR3ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 P
R
O
D1
PC
66
 w
ith
 R
UL
ES
3
3846 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 12 / Wednesday, January 21, 2009 / Rules and Regulations 
the final statutory exemption will 
require approximately 4.0 million 
burden hours with an equivalent cost of 
approximately $416.8 million and a cost 
burden of approximately $579.4 million 
in the first year. In each subsequent year 
the total labor burden hours are 
estimated to be approximately 2.1 
million hours with an equivalent cost of 
approximately $215.6 million and the 
cost burden is estimated at 
approximately $430.1 million per year. 
2. Final Class Exemption Hour and Cost 
Burden 
The Department estimates that the 
third-party disclosures, the written 
policies and procedures, and the 
recordkeeping and audit requirements 
for the final class exemption will 
require a total of approximately 12.1 
million burden hours with an 
equivalent cost of approximately $991.3 
million and a total cost burden of 
approximately $63.2 million in the first 
year. In each subsequent year, the total 
burden hours are estimated at 
approximately 11.4 million hours with 
an equivalent cost of approximately 
$905.6 million and a total cost burden 
of approximately $63.2 million per year. 
These numbers include an additional 
7.7 million burden hours ($610 million 
in equivalent costs) in all years due to 
the extension in the final class 
exemption of the requirement that 
fiduciary advisers in arrangements using 
fee-leveling conclude that the provided 
advice is in the best interest of the 
participant or beneficiary, explain the 
basis of this conclusion, document the 
explanation within 30 days, and retain 
the documentation. Under the proposed 
class exemption, this requirement only 
applied to arrangements involving post- 
computer model or post-investment 
education investment advice. 
3. Overall Exemption Hour and Cost 
Burden 
The Department estimates that the 
third-party disclosures, the computer 
model certification, the written policies 
and procedures, and the recordkeeping 
and audit requirements for the statutory 
and class exemptions require 
approximately 16.1 million burden 
hours with an equivalent cost of 
approximately $1.41 billion and a cost 
burden of approximately $642.6 million 
in the first year. The labor burden hours 
in each subsequent year are 
approximately 13.5 million hours with 
an equivalent cost of approximately 
$1.12 billion and the cost burden in 
each subsequent year is approximately 
$493.3 million per year. These 
paperwork burden estimates are 
summarized as follows: 
Type of Review: New collection 
(Request for new OMB Control 
Number). 
Agency: Employee Benefits Security 
Administration, Department of Labor. 
Titles: (1) Proposed Class Exemption 
for the Provision of Investment Advice 
to Participants and Beneficiaries of Self- 
Directed Individual Account Plans and 
IRAs, and (2) Proposed Investment 
Advice Regulation. 
OMB Control Number: 1210–NEW. 
Affected Public: Business or other for- 
profit. 
Estimated Number of Respondents: 
16,000. 
Estimated Number of Annual 
Responses: 20,789,000. 
Frequency of Response: Initially, 
Annually, Upon Request, when a 
material change. 
Estimated Total Annual Burden 
Hours: 16,126,000 hours in the first 
year; 13,504,000 hours in each 
subsequent year. 
Estimated Total Annual Burden Cost: 
$642,552,000 for the first year; 
$493,253,000 for each subsequent year. 
List of Subjects in 29 CFR Part 2550 
Employee benefit plans, Exemptions, 
Fiduciaries, Investments, Pensions, 
Prohibited transactions, Reporting and 
recordkeeping requirements, and 
Securities. 
■ For the reasons set forth in the 
preamble, the Department amends 
Chapter XXV, subchapter F, part 2550 of 
Title 29 of the Code of Federal 
Regulations as follows: 
SUBCHAPTER F—FIDUCIARY 
RESPONSIBILITY UNDER THE EMPLOYEE 
RETIREMENT INCOME SECURITY ACT OF 
1974 
PART 2550—RULES AND 
REGULATIONS FOR FIDUCIARY 
RESPONSIBILITY 
■ 1. The authority citation for part 2550 
is revised to read as follows: 
Authority: 29 U.S.C. 1135; and Secretary of 
Labor’s Order No. 1–2003, 68 FR 5374 (Feb. 
3, 2003). Sec. 2550.401b–1 also issued under 
sec. 102, Reorganization Plan No. 4 of 1978, 
43 FR 47713 (Oct. 17, 1978), 3 CFR, 1978 
Comp. 332, effective Dec. 31, 1978, 44 FR 
1065 (Jan. 3, 1978), 3 CFR, 1978 Comp. 332. 
Sec. 2550.401c–1 also issued under 29 U.S.C. 
1101. Sections 2550.404c–1 and 2550.404c– 
5 also issued under 29 U.S.C. 1104. Sec. 
2550.407c–3 also issued under 29 U.S.C. 
1107. Sec. 2550.404a–2 also issued under 26 
U.S.C. 401 note (sec. 657, Pub. L. 107–16, 115 
Stat. 38). Sec. 2550.408b–1 also issued under 
29 U.S.C. 1108(b)(1) and sec. 102, 
Reorganization Plan No. 4 of 1978, 3 CFR, 
1978 Comp. p. 332, effective Dec. 31, 1978, 
44 FR 1065 (Jan. 3, 1978), and 3 CFR, 1978 
Comp. 332. Sec. 2550.408b–19 also issued 
under sec. 611, Public Law 109–280, 120 
Stat. 780, 972, and sec. 102, Reorganization 
Plan No. 4 of 1978, 3 CFR, 1978 Comp. p. 
332, effective Dec. 31, 1978, 44 FR 1065 (Jan. 
3, 1978), and 3 CFR, 1978 Comp. 332. Sec. 
2550.408g–1 also issued under sec. 102, 
Reorganization Plan No. 4 of 1978, 3 CFR, 
1978 Comp. p. 332, effective Dec. 31, 1978, 
44 FR 1065 (Jan. 3, 1978), and 3 CFR, 1978 
Comp. 332. Sec. 2550.408g–2 also issued 
under 29 U.S.C. 1108(g) and sec. 102, 
Reorganization Plan No. 4 of 1978, 3 CFR, 
1978 Comp. p. 332, effective Dec. 31, 1978, 
44 FR 1065 (Jan. 3, 1978), and 3 CFR, 1978 
Comp. 332. Sec. 2550.412–1 also issued 
under 29 U.S.C. 1112. 
■ 2. Add § 2550.408g–1 to read as 
follows: 
§ 2550.408g–1 Investment advice— 
participants and beneficiaries. 
(a) In general. (1) This section 
provides relief from the prohibitions of 
section 406 of the Employee Retirement 
Income Security Act of 1974, as 
amended (ERISA or the Act), and 
section 4975 of the Internal Revenue 
Code of 1986, as amended (the Code), 
for certain transactions in connection 
with the provision of investment advice 
to participants and beneficiaries. This 
section, at paragraph (b), implements 
the statutory exemption set forth at 
sections 408(b)(14) and 408(g)(1) of 
ERISA and sections 4975(d)(17) and 
4975(f)(8) of the Code. This section, at 
paragraph (d), prescribes, pursuant to 
section 408(a) of ERISA and section 
4975(c)(2) of the Code, a class 
exemption for certain transactions not 
otherwise covered by the statutory 
exemption. The requirements and 
conditions set forth in this section apply 
solely for the relief described in 
paragraphs (b) and (d) of this section 
and, accordingly, no inferences should 
be drawn with respect to requirements 
applicable to the provision of 
investment advice not addressed by this 
section. 
(2) Nothing contained in ERISA 
section 408(g)(1), Code section 
4975(f)(8), this regulation or the class 
exemption contained herein imposes an 
obligation on a plan fiduciary or any 
other party to offer, provide or 
otherwise make available any 
investment advice to a participant or 
beneficiary. 
(3) Nothing contained in ERISA 
section 408(g)(1), Code section 
4975(f)(8), this regulation or the class 
exemption contained herein invalidates 
or otherwise affects prior regulations, 
exemptions, interpretive or other 
guidance issued by the Department of 
Labor pertaining to the provision of 
investment advice and the 
circumstances under which such advice 
may or may not constitute a prohibited 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 19:29 Jan 16, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00026 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\21JAR3.SGM 21JAR3ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 P
R
O
D1
PC
66
 w
ith
 R
UL
ES
3
3847 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 12 / Wednesday, January 21, 2009 / Rules and Regulations 
transaction under section 406 of ERISA 
or section 4975 of the Code. 
(b) Statutory exemption. (1) General. 
Sections 408(b)(14) and 408(g)(1) of 
ERISA provide an exemption from the 
prohibitions of section 406 of ERISA for 
transactions described in section 
408(b)(14) of ERISA in connection with 
the provision of investment advice to a 
participant or a beneficiary if the 
investment advice is provided by a 
fiduciary adviser under an ‘‘eligible 
investment advice arrangement.’’ 
Sections 4975(d)(17) and (f)(8) of the 
Code contain parallel provisions to 
ERISA sections 408(b)(14) and (g)(1). 
(2) Eligible investment advice. For 
purposes of section 408(g)(1) of ERISA 
and section 4975(f)(8) of the Code, an 
‘‘eligible investment advice 
arrangement’’ means an arrangement 
that meets either the requirements of 
paragraph (b)(3) of this section or 
paragraph (b)(4) of this section, or both. 
(3) Arrangements that use fee- 
leveling. For purposes of this section, an 
arrangement is an eligible investment 
advice arrangement if— 
(i)(A) Any investment advice is based 
on generally accepted investment 
theories that take into account the 
historic returns of different asset classes 
over defined periods of time, although 
nothing herein shall preclude any 
investment advice from being based on 
generally accepted investment theories 
that take into account additional 
considerations; 
(B) Any investment advice takes into 
account investment management and 
other fees and expenses attendant to the 
recommended investments; 
(C) Any investment advice takes into 
account, to the extent furnished by a 
plan, participant or beneficiary, 
information relating to age, time 
horizons (e.g., life expectancy, 
retirement age), risk tolerance, current 
investments in designated investment 
options, other assets or sources of 
income, and investment preferences of 
the participant or beneficiary. A 
fiduciary adviser shall request such 
information, but nothing in this 
paragraph (b)(3)(i)(C) shall require that 
any investment advice take into account 
information requested, but not 
furnished by a participant or 
beneficiary, nor preclude requesting and 
taking into account additional 
information that a plan or participant or 
beneficiary may provide; 
(D) Any fees or other compensation 
(including salary, bonuses, awards, 
promotions, commissions or other 
things of value) received, directly or 
indirectly, by any employee, agent or 
registered representative that provides 
investment advice on behalf of a 
fiduciary adviser does not vary 
depending on the basis of any 
investment option selected by a 
participant or beneficiary; 
(E) Any fees (including any 
commission or other compensation) 
received by the fiduciary adviser for 
investment advice or with respect to the 
sale, holding, or acquisition of any 
security or other property for purposes 
of investment of plan assets do not vary 
depending on the basis of any 
investment option selected by a 
participant or beneficiary; and 
(ii) The requirements of paragraphs 
(b)(5), (6), (7), and (8) and paragraph (e) 
of this section are met. 
(4) Arrangements that use computer 
models. For purposes of this section, an 
arrangement is an eligible investment 
advice arrangement if the only 
investment advice provided under the 
arrangement is advice that is generated 
by a computer model described in 
paragraphs (b)(4)(i) and (ii) of this 
section under an investment advice 
program and with respect to which the 
requirements of paragraphs (b)(5), (6), 
(7), and (8) and paragraph (e) are met. 
(i) A computer model shall be 
designed and operated to— 
(A) Apply generally accepted 
investment theories that take into 
account the historic returns of different 
asset classes over defined periods of 
time, although nothing herein shall 
preclude a computer model from 
applying generally accepted investment 
theories that take into account 
additional considerations; 
(B) Take into account investment 
management and other fees and 
expenses attendant to the recommended 
investments; 
(C) Request from a participant or 
beneficiary and, to the extent furnished, 
utilize information relating to age, time 
horizons (e.g., life expectancy, 
retirement age), risk tolerance, current 
investments in designated investment 
options, other assets or sources of 
income, and investment preferences; 
provided, however, that nothing herein 
shall preclude a computer model from 
requesting and taking into account 
additional information that a plan or a 
participant or beneficiary may provide; 
(D) Utilize appropriate objective 
criteria to provide asset allocation 
portfolios comprised of investment 
options available under the plan; 
(E) Avoid investment 
recommendations that: 
(1) Inappropriately favor investment 
options offered by the fiduciary adviser 
or a person with a material affiliation or 
material contractual relationship with 
the fiduciary adviser over other 
investment options, if any, available 
under the plan; or 
(2) Inappropriately favor investment 
options that may generate greater 
income for the fiduciary adviser or a 
person with a material affiliation or 
material contractual relationship with 
the fiduciary adviser; and 
(F)(1) Except as provided in clause (2) 
of this paragraph (F), take into account 
all designated investment options, 
within the meaning of paragraph (c)(1) 
of this section, available under the plan 
without giving inappropriate weight to 
any investment option. 
(2) A computer model shall not be 
treated as failing to meet the 
requirements of this paragraph merely 
because it does not make 
recommendations relating to the 
acquisition, holding or sale of an 
investment option that: 
(i) Constitutes an investment 
primarily in qualifying employer 
securities; 
(ii) Constitutes an investment fund, 
product or service that allocates the 
invested assets of a participant or 
beneficiary to achieve varying degrees of 
long-term appreciation and capital 
preservation through equity and fixed 
income exposures, based on a defined 
time horizon (such as retirement age or 
life expectancy) or level of risk of the 
participant or beneficiary, provided 
that, contemporaneous with the 
provision of investment advice 
generated by the computer model, the 
participant or beneficiary is also 
furnished a general description of such 
funds, products or services and how 
they operate; or 
(iii) Constitutes an annuity option 
with respect to which a participant or 
beneficiary may allocate assets toward 
the purchase of a stream of retirement 
income payments guaranteed by an 
insurance company, provided that, 
contemporaneous with the provision of 
investment advice generated by the 
computer model, the participant or 
beneficiary is also furnished a general 
description of such options and how 
they operate. 
(ii) Prior to utilization of the computer 
model, the fiduciary adviser shall obtain 
a written certification, meeting the 
requirements of paragraph (b)(4)(iv) of 
this section, from an eligible investment 
expert, within the meaning of paragraph 
(b)(4)(iii) of this section, that the 
computer model meets the requirements 
of paragraph (b)(4)(i) of this section. If, 
following certification, a computer 
model is modified in a manner that may 
affect its ability to meet the 
requirements of paragraph (b)(4)(i), the 
fiduciary adviser shall, prior to 
utilization of the modified model, 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 19:29 Jan 16, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00027 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\21JAR3.SGM 21JAR3ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 P
R
O
D1
PC
66
 w
ith
 R
UL
ES
3
3848 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 12 / Wednesday, January 21, 2009 / Rules and Regulations 
obtain a new certification from an 
eligible investment expert that the 
computer model, as modified, meets the 
requirements of paragraph (b)(4)(i). 
(iii) The term ‘‘eligible investment 
expert’’ means a person that, through 
employees or otherwise, has the 
appropriate technical training or 
experience and proficiency to analyze, 
determine and certify, in a manner 
consistent with paragraph (b)(4)(iv) of 
this section, whether a computer model 
meets the requirements of paragraph 
(b)(4)(i) of this section; except that the 
term ‘‘eligible investment expert’’ does 
not include any person that has any 
material affiliation or material 
contractual relationship with the 
fiduciary adviser, with a person with a 
material affiliation or material 
contractual relationship with the 
fiduciary adviser, or with any employee, 
agent, or registered representative of the 
foregoing. 
(iv) A certification by an eligible 
investment expert shall— 
(A) Be in writing; 
(B) Contain— 
(1) An identification of the 
methodology or methodologies applied 
in determining whether the computer 
model meets the requirements of 
paragraph (b)(4)(i) of this section; 
(2) An explanation of how the applied 
methodology or methodologies 
demonstrated that the computer model 
met the requirements of paragraph 
(b)(4)(i) of this section; 
(3) A description of any limitations 
that were imposed by any person on the 
eligible investment expert’s selection or 
application of methodologies for 
determining whether the computer 
model meets the requirements of 
paragraph (b)(4)(i) of this section; 
(4) A representation that the 
methodology or methodologies were 
applied by a person or persons with the 
educational background, technical 
training or experience necessary to 
analyze and determine whether the 
computer model meets the requirements 
of paragraph (b)(4)(i); and 
(5) A statement certifying that the 
eligible investment expert has 
determined that the computer model 
meets the requirements of paragraph 
(b)(4)(i) of this section; and 
(C) Be signed by the eligible 
investment expert. 
(v) The selection of an eligible 
investment expert as required by this 
section is a fiduciary act governed by 
section 404(a)(1) of ERISA. 
(5) Arrangement must be authorized 
by a plan fiduciary. (i) Except as 
provided in paragraph (b)(5)(ii), the 
arrangement pursuant to which 
investment advice is provided to 
participants and beneficiaries pursuant 
to this section must be expressly 
authorized by a plan fiduciary (or, in the 
case of an Individual Retirement 
Account (IRA), the IRA beneficiary) 
other than: The person offering the 
arrangement; any person providing 
designated investment options under 
the plan; or any affiliate of either. 
Provided, however, that for purposes of 
the preceding, in the case of an IRA, an 
IRA beneficiary will not be treated as an 
affiliate of a person solely by reason of 
being an employee of such person. 
(ii) In the case of an arrangement 
pursuant to which investment advice is 
provided to participants and 
beneficiaries of a plan sponsored by the 
person offering the arrangement or a 
plan sponsored by an affiliate of such 
person, the authorization described in 
paragraph (b)(5)(i) may be provided by 
the plan sponsor of such plan, provided 
that the person or affiliate offers the 
same arrangement to participants and 
beneficiaries of unaffiliated plans in the 
ordinary course of its business. 
(iii) For purposes of the authorization 
described in paragraph (b)(5)(i), a plan 
sponsor shall not be treated as a person 
providing a designated investment 
option under the plan merely because 
one of the designated investment 
options of the plan is an option that 
permits investment in securities of the 
plan sponsor or an affiliate. 
(6) Annual audit. (i) The fiduciary 
adviser shall, at least annually, engage 
an independent auditor, who has 
appropriate technical training or 
experience and proficiency, and so 
represents in writing to the fiduciary 
adviser, to: 
(A) Conduct an audit of the 
investment advice arrangements for 
compliance with the requirements of 
this section; and 
(B) Within 60 days following 
completion of the audit, issue a written 
report to the fiduciary adviser and, 
except with respect to an arrangement 
with an IRA, to each fiduciary who 
authorized the use of the investment 
advice arrangement, in accordance with 
paragraph (b)(5) of this section, setting 
forth the specific findings of the auditor 
regarding compliance of the 
arrangement with the requirements of 
this section. 
(ii) With respect to an arrangement 
with an IRA, the fiduciary adviser: 
(A) Within 30 days following receipt 
of the report from the auditor, as 
described in paragraph (b)(6)(i)(B) of 
this section, shall furnish a copy of the 
report to the IRA beneficiary or make 
such report available on its Web site, 
provided that such beneficiaries are 
provided information, with the 
information required to be disclosed 
pursuant to paragraph (b)(7) of this 
section, concerning the purpose of the 
report, and how and where to locate the 
report applicable to their account; and 
(B) In the event that the report of the 
auditor identifies noncompliance with 
the requirements of this section, within 
30 days following receipt of the report 
from the auditor, shall send a copy of 
the report to the Department of Labor at 
the following address: Investment 
Advice Exemption Notification— 
Statutory, U.S. Department of Labor, 
Employee Benefits Security 
Administration, Room N–1513, 200 
Constitution Ave., NW., Washington, 
DC 20210. 
(iii) For purposes of this paragraph 
(b)(6), an auditor is considered 
independent if it does not have a 
material affiliation or material 
contractual relationship with the person 
offering the investment advice 
arrangement to the plan or with any 
designated investment options under 
the plan. 
(iv) For purposes of this paragraph 
(b)(6), the auditor shall review sufficient 
relevant information to formulate an 
opinion as to whether the investment 
advice arrangements, and the advice 
provided pursuant thereto, offered by 
the fiduciary adviser during the audit 
period were in compliance with this 
section. Nothing in this paragraph shall 
preclude an auditor from using 
information obtained by sampling, as 
reasonably determined appropriate by 
the auditor, investment advice 
arrangements, and the advice pursuant 
thereto, during the audit period. 
(v) The selection of an auditor for 
purposes of this paragraph (b)(6) is a 
fiduciary act governed by section 
404(a)(1) of ERISA. 
(7) Disclosure. (i) The fiduciary 
adviser must provide, without charge, to 
a participant or a beneficiary before the 
initial provision of investment advice 
with regard to any security or other 
property offered as an investment 
option, a written notification of: 
(A) The role of any party that has a 
material affiliation or material 
contractual relationship with the 
fiduciary adviser in the development of 
the investment advice program, and in 
the selection of investment options 
available under the plan; 
(B) The past performance and 
historical rates of return of the 
designated investment options available 
under the plan, to the extent that such 
information is not otherwise provided; 
(C) All fees or other compensation 
that the fiduciary adviser or any affiliate 
thereof is to receive (including 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 19:29 Jan 16, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00028 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\21JAR3.SGM 21JAR3ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 P
R
O
D1
PC
66
 w
ith
 R
UL
ES
3
3849 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 12 / Wednesday, January 21, 2009 / Rules and Regulations 
compensation provided by any third 
party) in connection with— 
(1) The provision of the advice; 
(2) The sale, acquisition, or holding of 
any security or other property pursuant 
to such advice; or 
(3) Any rollover or other distribution 
of plan assets or the investment of 
distributed assets in any security or 
other property pursuant to such advice; 
(D) Any material affiliation or 
material contractual relationship of the 
fiduciary adviser or affiliates thereof in 
the security or other property; 
(E) The manner, and under what 
circumstances, any participant or 
beneficiary information provided under 
the arrangement will be used or 
disclosed; 
(F) The types of services provided by 
the fiduciary adviser in connection with 
the provision of investment advice by 
the fiduciary adviser, including, with 
respect to a computer model 
arrangement referred to in paragraph 
(b)(4) of this section, any limitations on 
the ability of a computer model to take 
into account an investment primarily in 
qualifying employer securities; 
(G) The adviser is acting as a fiduciary 
of the plan in connection with the 
provision of the advice; and 
(H) That a recipient of the advice may 
separately arrange for the provision of 
advice by another adviser that could 
have no material affiliation with and 
receive no fees or other compensation in 
connection with the security or other 
property. 
(ii)(A) The notification required under 
paragraph (b)(7)(i) of this section must 
be written in a clear and conspicuous 
manner and in a manner calculated to 
be understood by the average plan 
participant and must be sufficiently 
accurate and comprehensive to 
reasonably apprise such participants 
and beneficiaries of the information 
required to be provided in the 
notification. 
(B) The appendix to this section 
contains a model disclosure form that 
may be used to provide notification of 
the information described in paragraph 
(b)(7)(i)(C) of this section. Use of the 
model form is not mandatory. However, 
use of an appropriately completed 
model disclosure form will be deemed 
to satisfy the requirements of paragraphs 
(b)(7)(i) and (ii) of this section with 
respect to such information. 
(iii) The notification required under 
paragraph (b)(7)(i) of this section may, 
in accordance with 29 CFR 2520.104b- 
1, be provided in written or electronic 
form. 
(iv) With respect to the information 
required to be disclosed pursuant to 
paragraph (b)(7)(i) of this section, the 
fiduciary adviser shall, at all times 
during the provision of advisory 
services to the participant or beneficiary 
pursuant to the arrangement,— 
(A) Maintain accurate, up-to-date 
information in a form that is consistent 
with paragraph (b)(7)(ii) of this section, 
(B) Provide, without charge, accurate, 
up-to-date information to the recipient 
of the advice no less frequently than 
annually, 
(C) Provide, without charge, accurate 
information to the recipient of the 
advice upon request of the recipient, 
and 
(D) Provide, without charge, to the 
recipient of the advice any material 
change to the information described in 
paragraph (b)(7)(i) at a time reasonably 
contemporaneous to the change in 
information. 
(8) Other Conditions. The 
requirements of this paragraph are met 
if- 
(i) The fiduciary adviser provides 
appropriate disclosure, in connection 
with the sale, acquisition, or holding of 
the security or other property, in 
accordance with all applicable 
securities laws, 
(ii) Any sale, acquisition, or holding 
of a security or other property occurs 
solely at the direction of the recipient of 
the advice, 
(iii) The compensation received by 
the fiduciary adviser and affiliates 
thereof in connection with the sale, 
acquisition, or holding of the security or 
other property is reasonable, and 
(iv) The terms of the sale, acquisition, 
or holding of the security or other 
property are at least as favorable to the 
plan as an arm’s length transaction 
would be. 
(c) Definitions. For purposes of this 
section: 
(1) The term ‘‘designated investment 
option’’ means any investment option 
designated by the plan into which 
participants and beneficiaries may 
direct the investment of assets held in, 
or contributed to, their individual 
accounts. The term ‘‘designated 
investment option’’ shall not include 
‘‘brokerage windows,’’ ‘‘self-directed 
brokerage accounts,’’ or similar plan 
arrangements that enable participants 
and beneficiaries to select investments 
beyond those designated by the plan. 
(2)(i) The term ‘‘fiduciary adviser’’ 
means, with respect to a plan, a person 
who is a fiduciary of the plan by reason 
of the provision of investment advice 
referred to in section 3(21)(A)(ii) of 
ERISA by the person to the participant 
or beneficiary of the plan and who is— 
(A) Registered as an investment 
adviser under the Investment Advisers 
Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80b–1 et seq. ) 
or under the laws of the State in which 
the fiduciary maintains its principal 
office and place of business, 
(B) A bank or similar financial 
institution referred to in section 
408(b)(4) of ERISA or a savings 
association (as defined in section 3(b)(1) 
of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 
U.S.C. 1813(b)(1)), but only if the advice 
is provided through a trust department 
of the bank or similar financial 
institution or savings association which 
is subject to periodic examination and 
review by Federal or State banking 
authorities, 
(C) An insurance company qualified 
to do business under the laws of a State, 
(D) A person registered as a broker or 
dealer under the Securities Exchange 
Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 78a et seq.), 
(E) An affiliate of a person described 
in any of clauses (A) through (D), or 
(F) An employee, agent, or registered 
representative of a person described in 
paragraphs (c)(2)(i)(A) through (E) of 
this section who satisfies the 
requirements of applicable insurance, 
banking, and securities laws relating to 
the provision of advice. 
(ii) Except as provided under 29 CFR 
2550.408g–2, a fiduciary adviser 
includes any person who develops the 
computer model, or markets the 
computer model or investment advice 
program, utilized in satisfaction of 
paragraph (b)(4) of this section. 
(3) A ‘‘registered representative’’ of 
another entity means a person described 
in section 3(a)(18) of the Securities 
Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C. 
78c(a)(18)) (substituting the entity for 
the broker or dealer referred to in such 
section) or a person described in section 
202(a)(17) of the Investment Advisers 
Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. 80b-2(a)(17)) 
(substituting the entity for the 
investment adviser referred to in such 
section). 
(4) ‘‘Individual Retirement Account’’ 
or ‘‘IRA’’ means— 
(i) An individual retirement account 
described in section 408(a) of the Code; 
(ii) An individual retirement annuity 
described in section 408(b) of the Code; 
(iii) An Archer MSA described in 
section 220(d) of the Code; 
(iv) A health savings account 
described in section 223(d) of the Code; 
(v) A Coverdell education savings 
account described in section 530 of the 
Code; or 
(vi) A trust, plan, account, or annuity 
which, at any time, has been determined 
by the Secretary of the Treasury to be 
described in any of paragraphs (c)(4)(i) 
through (v) of this section. 
(5) An ‘‘affiliate’’ of another person 
means— 
(i) Any person directly or indirectly 
owning, controlling, or holding with 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 19:29 Jan 16, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00029 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\21JAR3.SGM 21JAR3ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 P
R
O
D1
PC
66
 w
ith
 R
UL
ES
3
3850 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 12 / Wednesday, January 21, 2009 / Rules and Regulations 
power to vote, 5 percent or more of the 
outstanding voting securities of such 
other person; 
(ii) Any person 5 percent or more of 
whose outstanding voting securities are 
directly or indirectly owned, controlled, 
or held with power to vote, by such 
other person; 
(iii) Any person directly or indirectly 
controlling, controlled by, or under 
common control with, such other 
person; and 
(iv) Any officer, director, partner, 
copartner, or employee of such other 
person. 
(6)(i) A person with a ‘‘material 
affiliation’’ with another person 
means— 
(A) Any affiliate of the other person; 
(B) Any person directly or indirectly 
owning, controlling, or holding, 5 
percent or more of the interests of such 
other person; and 
(C) Any person 5 percent or more of 
whose interests are directly or indirectly 
owned, controlled, or held, by such 
other person. 
(ii) For purposes of paragraph (c)(6)(i) 
of this section, ‘‘interest’’ means with 
respect to an entity— 
(A) The combined voting power of all 
classes of stock entitled to vote or the 
total value of the shares of all classes of 
stock of the entity if the entity is a 
corporation; 
(B) The capital interest or the profits 
interest of the entity if the entity is a 
partnership; or 
(C) The beneficial interest of the 
entity if the entity is a trust or 
unincorporated enterprise. 
(7) Persons have a ‘‘material 
contractual relationship’’ if payments 
made by one person to the other person 
pursuant to contracts or agreements 
between the persons exceed 10 percent 
of the gross revenue, on an annual basis, 
of such other person. 
(8) ‘‘Control’’ means the power to 
exercise a controlling influence over the 
management or policies of a person 
other than an individual. 
(d) Class exemption. (1) General. 
Pursuant to section 408(a) of the Act 
and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code— 
(i) The restrictions of sections 406(a) 
and 406(b) of the Act and the sanctions 
resulting from the application of section 
4975 of the Code, by reason of section 
4975(c)(1)(A) through (F) of the Code, 
shall not apply to: 
(A) The provision of investment 
advice described in section 3(21)(A)(ii) 
of the Act by a fiduciary adviser to a 
participant or beneficiary of an 
individual account plan that permits 
such participant or beneficiary to direct 
the investment of their individual 
accounts; 
(B) The acquisition, holding, or sale of 
a security or other property pursuant to 
the investment advice; and 
(C) except as otherwise provided in 
this exemption, the direct or indirect 
receipt of fees or other compensation by 
the fiduciary adviser (or any employee, 
agent, registered representative or 
affiliate thereof) in connection with the 
provision of the advice or in connection 
with an acquisition, holding, or sale of 
a security or other property pursuant to 
the investment advice, provided that the 
conditions set forth in paragraph (d)(2) 
are met; 
(ii) The sanctions resulting from the 
application of section 4975 of the Code, 
by reason of section 4975(c)(1)(A) 
through (F) of the Code, shall not apply 
to: 
(A) The provision of investment 
advice described in section 
4975(e)(3)(B) of the Code by a fiduciary 
adviser to a beneficiary of an IRA that 
permits such beneficiary to direct the 
investment of the assets of his or her 
IRA; 
(B) The acquisition, holding, or sale of 
a security or other property pursuant to 
the investment advice; and 
(C) Except as otherwise provided in 
this exemption, the direct or indirect 
receipt of fees or other compensation by 
the fiduciary adviser (or any employee, 
agent, registered representative or 
affiliate thereof) in connection with the 
provision of the advice or in connection 
with an acquisition, holding, or sale of 
a security or other property pursuant to 
the investment advice, provided that the 
conditions set forth in paragraph (d)(2) 
of this section are met. 
(2) Conditions. The relief described in 
paragraph (d)(1) shall be available if the 
fiduciary adviser— 
(i) Provides investment advice in 
accordance with paragraphs (d)(3) or (4), 
or both; and 
(ii) Satisfies the requirements of 
paragraphs (d)(5) through (10). 
(3) Use of computer model or 
investment education. The requirements 
of this paragraph (d)(3) will be satisfied 
if: 
(i) Except as provided in paragraph 
(d)(3)(ii), before providing other 
investment advice covered by this 
exemption, the participant or 
beneficiary shall be furnished with 
investment recommendations generated 
by a computer model that— 
(A) Meets the requirements of 
paragraphs (b)(4)(i) and (ii); or 
(B) Meets the requirements of 
paragraph (b)(4)(i) and was designed 
and is maintained by a person 
independent of the fiduciary adviser 
(and any of the adviser’s affiliates) and 
utilizes methodologies and parameters 
determined appropriate solely by the 
independent person, without influence 
from the fiduciary adviser (or any of the 
adviser’s affiliates); for purposes of this 
paragraph (d)(3)(i), a person is 
‘‘independent’’ of another person if it is 
not an affiliate of the other person, and 
does not have a material affiliation or 
material contractual relationship with 
the other person. 
(ii)(A) In the case of a plan that offers 
a ‘‘brokerage window,’’ ‘‘self-directed 
brokerage account’’ or similar 
arrangement that enables participants 
and beneficiaries to select investments 
beyond those designated by the plan, if 
any, before providing investment advice 
with respect to any investment utilizing 
such arrangement, the participant or 
beneficiary shall be furnished the 
material described in paragraph 
(d)(3)(ii)(B) and, if the plan offers 
designated investment options, the 
participant or beneficiary also shall be 
furnished the recommendations 
described in paragraph (d)(3)(i ) with 
regard to such options. 
(B) In the case of an IRA with respect 
to which the types or number of 
investment choices reasonably 
precludes the use of a computer model 
meeting the requirements of section 
408(g)(3)(B) of ERISA to generate 
recommendations, before providing 
other investment advice covered by this 
exemption, the participant or 
beneficiary shall be furnished with 
material, such as graphs, pie charts, case 
studies, worksheets, or interactive 
software or similar programs, that reflect 
or produce asset allocation models 
taking into account the age (or time 
horizon) and risk profile of the 
beneficiary, to the extent known. 
Nothing shall preclude the furnishing of 
material, in addition to the foregoing, 
reflecting asset allocation portfolios of 
hypothetical individuals with different 
time horizons and risk profiles. For 
purposes of any materials provided 
pursuant to this paragraph (d)(3)(ii): 
(1) Models must be based on generally 
accepted investment theories that take 
into account the historic returns of 
different asset classes (e.g., equities, 
bonds, or cash) over defined periods of 
time; 
(2) Such models must operate in a 
manner that is not biased in favor of 
investments offered by the fiduciary 
adviser or a person with a material 
affiliation or material contractual 
relationship with the fiduciary adviser; 
and 
(3) All material facts and assumptions 
on which such models are based (e.g., 
retirement ages, life expectancies, 
income levels, financial resources, 
replacement income ratios, inflation 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 19:29 Jan 16, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00030 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\21JAR3.SGM 21JAR3ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 P
R
O
D1
PC
66
 w
ith
 R
UL
ES
3
3851 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 12 / Wednesday, January 21, 2009 / Rules and Regulations 
rates, and rates of return) accompany 
the models. 
(iii) The fiduciary adviser shall retain 
the information furnished pursuant to 
paragraph (d)(3)(i) or (ii) in accordance 
with paragraph (e) of this section. 
(4) Use of fee-leveling. Any fees or 
other compensation (including salary, 
bonuses, awards, promotions, 
commissions or any other thing of 
value) received, directly or indirectly, 
by an employee, agent or registered 
representative providing advice on 
behalf of the fiduciary adviser pursuant 
to this exemption (as distinguished from 
any compensation received by the 
fiduciary adviser on whose behalf the 
employee, agent or registered 
representative is providing such advice) 
do not vary depending on the basis of 
any investment option selected by a 
participant or beneficiary. 
(5) Authorized by a plan fiduciary or 
IRA beneficiary. (i) Except as provided 
in paragraph (d)(5)(ii), the arrangement 
pursuant to which investment advice is 
provided to participants and 
beneficiaries is expressly authorized in 
advance by a plan fiduciary (or, in the 
case of an IRA, the IRA beneficiary) 
other than: The person offering the 
investment advice arrangement; any 
person providing designated investment 
options under the plan; or any affiliate 
of either. Provided, however, that for 
purposes of the preceding, in the case of 
an IRA, an IRA beneficiary will not be 
treated as an affiliate of a person solely 
by reason of being an employee of such 
person. 
(ii) In the case of an arrangement 
pursuant to which investment advice is 
provided to participants and 
beneficiaries of a plan sponsored by the 
person offering the arrangement or a 
plan sponsored by an affiliate of such 
person, the authorization described in 
paragraph (d)(5)(i) may be provided by 
the plan sponsor of such plan, provided 
that the person or affiliate offers the 
same arrangement to participants and 
beneficiaries of unaffiliated plans in the 
ordinary course of its business. 
(iii) For purposes of the authorization 
described in paragraph (d)(5)(i), a plan 
sponsor shall not be treated as a person 
providing a designated investment 
option under the plan merely because 
one of the designated investment 
options of the plan is an option that 
permits investment in securities of the 
plan sponsor or an affiliate. 
(6) Basis for advice. (i) The 
investment advice— 
(A) Is based on generally accepted 
investment theories that take into 
account the historic returns of different 
asset classes over defined periods of 
time; provided, however, that nothing 
herein shall preclude any investment 
advice from being based on generally 
accepted investment theories that take 
into account additional considerations; 
(B) Takes into account investment 
management and other fees and 
expenses attendant to the recommended 
investments; and 
(C) Takes into account, to the extent 
furnished by a plan, participant or 
beneficiary, information relating to age, 
time horizons (e.g., life expectancy, 
retirement age), risk tolerance, current 
investments in designated investment 
options, other assets or sources of 
income, and investment preferences of 
the participant or beneficiary. A 
fiduciary adviser shall request such 
information, but nothing in this 
paragraph (d)(6)(i)(C) shall require that 
any investment advice take into account 
information requested, but not 
furnished by a participant or 
beneficiary, nor preclude requesting and 
taking into account additional 
information that a plan or participant or 
beneficiary may provide. 
(ii) In connection with the provision 
of the investment advice— 
(A) The fiduciary adviser concludes 
that the advice to be provided is 
prudent and in the best interest of the 
participant or beneficiary, and explains 
to the participant or beneficiary— 
(1) The basis for the conclusion, 
(2) If applicable, why the advice 
includes an option(s) with higher fees 
than other options in the same asset 
class(es) available under the plan, and 
(3) If applicable, in the case of 
investment advice provided pursuant to 
paragraph (d)(3)(i) or (ii), how the 
advice deviates from or relates to the 
information provided pursuant to such 
paragraphs; 
(B) Not later than 30 days following 
the explanation described in paragraph 
(d)(6)(ii)(A), the employee, agent, or 
registered representative providing the 
advice on behalf of the fiduciary adviser 
shall document such explanation; and 
(C) The fiduciary adviser retains the 
documentation developed pursuant to 
paragraph (d)(6)(ii)(B) in accordance 
with paragraph (e) of this section. 
(7) Policies and procedures. The 
fiduciary adviser adopts and follows 
written policies and procedures that are 
designed to assure compliance with the 
conditions of this exemption. 
(8) Disclosure. (i) The fiduciary 
adviser provides, without charge, to the 
participant or beneficiary before the 
initial provision of investment advice 
under the class exemption, written 
notification of: 
(A) The role of any party that has a 
material affiliation or material 
contractual relationship with the 
fiduciary adviser in the development of 
the computer model described in 
paragraph (d)(3)(i) of this section or, if 
applicable, the materials described in 
paragraph (d)(3)(ii) of this section, and, 
to the extent applicable, in the selection 
of investment options available under 
the plan; 
(B) The types of services provided by 
the fiduciary adviser in connection with 
the provision of investment advice by 
the fiduciary adviser, including, with 
respect to a computer model 
arrangement referred to in paragraph 
(d)(3)(i) of this section, any limitations 
on the ability of a computer model to 
take into account an investment 
primarily in qualifying employer 
securities; and 
(C) The information described in 
paragraphs (b)(7)(i)(B) through (E), (G) 
and (H); 
(ii)(A) Such notification must be 
written in a clear and conspicuous 
manner and in a manner calculated to 
be understood by the average plan 
participant and shall be sufficiently 
accurate and comprehensive to 
reasonably apprise such participants 
and beneficiaries of the information 
required to be disclosed; 
(B) The appendix to this section 
contains a model disclosure form that 
may be used to provide the notification 
of information described in paragraph 
(b)(7)(i)(C). Use of the model disclosure 
form is not mandatory. However, use of 
an appropriately completed model 
disclosure form will be deemed to 
satisfy the requirements of paragraphs 
(d)(8)(i)(C) and (d)(8)(ii)(A) with respect 
to such information. 
(iii) Such notification may, in 
accordance with 29 CFR 2520.104b–1, 
be provided in written or electronic 
form. 
(iv) With respect to the information 
required to be disclosed pursuant to 
paragraph (d)(8)(i) of this section, the 
fiduciary adviser shall, at all times 
during the provision of advisory 
services to the participant or beneficiary 
pursuant to the arrangement— 
(A) Maintain accurate, up-to-date 
information in a form that is consistent 
with paragraph (d)(8)(ii) of this section, 
(B) Provide, without charge, accurate, 
up-to-date information to the recipient 
of the advice no less frequently than 
annually, 
(C) Provide, without charge, accurate 
information to the recipient of the 
advice upon request of the recipient, 
and 
(D) Provide, without charge, to the 
recipient of the advice any material 
change to the information described in 
paragraph (d)(8)(i) at a time reasonably 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 19:29 Jan 16, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00031 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\21JAR3.SGM 21JAR3ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 P
R
O
D1
PC
66
 w
ith
 R
UL
ES
3
3852 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 12 / Wednesday, January 21, 2009 / Rules and Regulations 
contemporaneous to the change in 
information. 
(9) Annual audit. (i) The fiduciary 
adviser shall, at least annually, engage 
an independent auditor, who has 
appropriate technical training or 
experience and proficiency and so 
represents in writing to the fiduciary 
adviser, to: 
(A) Conduct an audit for compliance 
with the policies and procedures of 
paragraph (d)(7) of this section and the 
requirements of paragraph (d) of this 
section; and 
(B) Within 60 days following the 
completion of the audit, issue a written 
report to the fiduciary adviser, and, 
except with respect to an arrangement 
with an IRA, to each fiduciary who 
authorized the arrangement, in 
accordance with paragraph (d)(5), 
setting forth the specific findings of the 
auditor regarding compliance of the 
arrangement with the policies and 
procedures of paragraph (d)(7) and the 
requirements of paragraph (d) of this 
section. 
(ii) With respect to an arrangement 
with an IRA, the fiduciary adviser: 
(A) Within 30 days following receipt 
of the report from the auditor, shall 
furnish a copy of the report to the IRA 
beneficiary or make such report 
available on its Web site, provided that 
such beneficiaries are provided 
information, with the information 
required to be disclosed pursuant to 
paragraph (d)(8) of this section, 
concerning the purpose of the report, 
and how and where to locate the report 
applicable to their account; and 
(B) In the event that the report of the 
auditor identifies noncompliance with 
the policies and procedures required by 
paragraph (d)(7) or the conditions of 
paragraph (d) of this section, within 30 
days following receipt of the report from 
the auditor, sends a copy of the report 
to the Department of Labor at the 
following address: Investment Advice 
Notification—Class Exemption, U.S. 
Department of Labor, Employee Benefits 
Security Administration, Room N–1513, 
200 Constitution Ave., NW., 
Washington, DC 20210. 
(iii) For purposes of paragraph 
(d)(9)(i), an auditor is considered 
independent if it does not have a 
material affiliation or material 
contractual relationship with the person 
offering the investment advice 
arrangement to the plan or IRA or any 
designated investment options under 
the plan or IRA. 
(iv) For purposes of the audit 
described in paragraph (d)(9)(i), the 
auditor shall review sufficient relevant 
information to formulate an opinion as 
to whether the investment advice 
arrangements, and the advice provided 
pursuant thereto, offered by the 
fiduciary adviser during the audit 
period were in compliance with the 
policies and procedures of paragraph 
(d)(7) of this section and the 
requirements of this paragraph (d); 
provided, however, that nothing in this 
subparagraph shall preclude an auditor 
from using information obtained by 
sampling, as reasonably determined 
appropriate by the auditor, investment 
advice arrangements, and the advice 
pursuant thereto, during the audit 
period. 
(v) The selection of an auditor for 
purposes of this paragraph (d)(9) is a 
fiduciary act governed by section 
404(a)(1) of ERISA. 
(10) Other. The requirements of 
paragraph (b)(8), relating to other 
conditions, and paragraph (e), relating 
to retention of records, of this section 
are met. 
(e) Retention of records. The fiduciary 
adviser must maintain, for a period of 
not less than 6 years after the provision 
of investment advice under this section 
any records necessary for determining 
whether the applicable requirements of 
this section have been met. A 
transaction prohibited under section 
406 of ERISA shall not be considered to 
have occurred solely because the 
records are lost or destroyed prior to the 
end of the 6-year period due to 
circumstances beyond the control of the 
fiduciary adviser. 
(f) Noncompliance. (1) The relief from 
the prohibited transaction provisions of 
section 406 of ERISA and the sanctions 
resulting from the application of section 
4975 of the Code described in 
paragraphs (b) and (d) of this section 
shall not apply to any transaction 
described in such paragraphs in 
connection with the provision of 
investment advice to an individual 
participant or beneficiary with respect 
to which the applicable conditions of 
this section have not been satisfied. 
(2) In the case of a pattern or practice 
of noncompliance with any of the 
applicable conditions of this section, the 
relief described in paragraph (b) or (d) 
shall not apply to any transaction in 
connection with the provision of 
investment advice provided by the 
fiduciary adviser during the period over 
which the pattern or practice extended. 
(g) Applicability date. This section 
shall apply to transactions described in 
paragraphs (b) and (d) of this section 
occurring on or after March 23, 2009. 
Appendix to § 2550.408g–1 
Fiduciary Adviser Disclosure 
This document contains important 
information about [enter name of Fiduciary 
Adviser] and how it is compensated for the 
investment advice provided to you. You 
should carefully consider this information in 
your evaluation of that advice. 
[enter name of Fiduciary Adviser] has been 
selected to provide investment advisory 
services for the [enter name of Plan]. [enter 
name of Fiduciary Adviser] will be providing 
these services as a fiduciary under the 
Employee Retirement Income Security Act 
(ERISA). [enter name of Fiduciary Adviser], 
therefore, must act prudently and with only 
your interest in mind when providing you 
recommendations on how to invest your 
retirement assets. 
Compensation of the Fiduciary Adviser and 
Related Parties 
[enter name of Fiduciary Adviser] (is/is 
not) compensated by the plan for the advice 
it provides. (if compensated by the plan, 
explain what and how compensation is 
charged (e.g., asset-based fee, flat fee, per 
advice)). (If applicable, [enter name of 
Fiduciary Adviser] is not compensated on the 
basis of the investment(s) selected by you.) 
Affiliates of [enter name of Fiduciary 
Adviser] (if applicable enter, and other 
parties with whom [enter name of Fiduciary 
Adviser] is related or has a material financial 
relationship) also will be providing services 
for which they will be compensated. These 
services include: [enter description of 
services, e.g., investment management, 
transfer agent, custodial, and shareholder 
services for some/all the investment funds 
available under the plan.] 
When [enter name of Fiduciary Adviser] 
recommends that you invest your assets in an 
investment fund of its own or one of its 
affiliates and you follow that advice, [enter 
name of Fiduciary Adviser] or that affiliate 
will receive compensation from the 
investment fund based on the amount you 
invest. The amounts that will be paid by you 
will vary depending on the particular fund in 
which you invest your assets and may range 
from l% to l%. Specific information 
concerning the fees and other charges of each 
investment fund is available from [enter 
source, such as: your plan administrator, 
investment fund provider (possibly with 
Internet Web site address)]. This information 
should be reviewed carefully before you 
make an investment decision. 
(if applicable enter, [enter name of 
Fiduciary Adviser] or affiliates of [enter name 
of Fiduciary Adviser] also receive 
compensation from non-affiliated investment 
funds as a result investments you make as a 
result of recommendations of [enter name of 
Fiduciary Adviser]. The amount of this 
compensation also may vary depending on 
the particular fund in which you invest. This 
compensation may range from l% to l%. 
Specific information concerning the fees and 
other charges of each investment fund is 
available from [enter source, such as: your 
plan administrator, investment fund provider 
(possibly with Internet Web site address)]. 
This information should be reviewed 
carefully before you make an investment 
decision. 
(if applicable enter, In addition to the 
above, [enter name of Fiduciary Adviser] or 
affiliates of [enter name of Fiduciary Adviser] 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 19:29 Jan 16, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00032 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\21JAR3.SGM 21JAR3ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 P
R
O
D1
PC
66
 w
ith
 R
UL
ES
3
3853 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 12 / Wednesday, January 21, 2009 / Rules and Regulations 
also receive other fees or compensation, such 
as commissions, in connection with the sale, 
acquisition or holding of investments 
selected by you as a result of 
recommendations of [enter name of Fiduciary 
Adviser]. These amounts are: [enter 
description of all other fees or compensation 
to be received in connection with sale, 
acquisition or holding of investments]. This 
information should be reviewed carefully 
before you make an investment decision. 
(if applicable enter, When [enter name of 
Fiduciary Adviser] recommends that you 
take a rollover or other distribution of assets 
from the plan, or recommends how those 
assets should subsequently be invested, 
[enter name of Fiduciary Adviser] or affiliates 
of [enter name of Fiduciary Adviser] will 
receive additional fees or compensation. 
These amounts are: [enter description of all 
other fees or compensation to be received in 
connection with any rollover or other 
distribution of plan assets or the investment 
of distributed assets]. This information 
should be reviewed carefully before you 
make a decision to take a distribution. 
Consider Impact of Compensation on Advice 
The fees and other compensation that 
[enter name of Fiduciary Adviser] and its 
affiliates receive on account of assets in 
[enter name of Fiduciary Adviser] (enter if 
applicable, and non-[enter name of Fiduciary 
Adviser]) investment funds are a significant 
source of revenue for the [enter name of 
Fiduciary Adviser] and its affiliates. You 
should carefully consider the impact of any 
such fees and compensation in your 
evaluation of the investment advice that 
[enter name of Fiduciary Adviser] provides to 
you. In this regard, you may arrange for the 
provision of advice by another adviser that 
may have not material affiliation with or 
receive compensation in connection with the 
investment funds or products offered under 
the plan. This type of advice is/is not 
available through your plan. 
Investment Returns 
While understanding investment-related 
fees and expenses is important in making 
informed investment decisions, it is also 
important to consider additional information 
about your investment options, such as 
performance, investment strategies and risks. 
Specific information related to the past 
performance and historical rates of return of 
the investment options available under the 
plan (has/has not) been provided to you by 
[enter source, such as: your plan 
administrator, investment fund provider]. (If 
applicable enter. If not provided to you, the 
information is attached to this document.) 
For options with returns that vary over 
time, past performance does not guarantee 
how your investment in the option will 
perform in the future; your investment in 
these options could lose money. 
Parties Participating in Development of 
Advice Program or Selection of Investment 
Options 
Name, and describe role of, affiliates or 
other parties with whom the fiduciary 
adviser has a material affiliation or 
contractual relationship that participated in 
the development of the investment advice 
program (if this is an arrangement that uses 
computer models) or the selection of 
investment options available under the plan. 
Use of Personal Information 
Include a brief explanation of the 
following— 
What personal information will be 
collected; 
How the information will be used; 
Parties with whom information will be 
shared; 
How the information will be protected; and 
When and how notice of the Fiduciary 
Adviser’s privacy statement will be available 
to participants and beneficiaries. 
Should you have any questions about 
[enter name of Fiduciary Adviser] or the 
information contained in this document, you 
may contact [enter name of contact person for 
fiduciary adviser, telephone number, 
address]. 
■ 3. Add § 2550.408g–2 to read as 
follows: 
§ 2550.408g–2 Investment advice— 
fiduciary election. 
(a) General. Section 408(g)(11)(A) of 
the Employee Retirement Income 
Security Act, as amended (ERISA), 
provides that a person who develops a 
computer model or who markets a 
computer model or investment advice 
program used in an ‘‘eligible investment 
advice arrangement’’ shall be treated as 
a fiduciary of a plan by reason of the 
provision of investment advice referred 
to in ERISA section 3(21)(A)(ii) to the 
plan participant or beneficiary, and 
shall be treated as a ‘‘fiduciary adviser’’ 
for purposes of ERISA sections 
408(b)(14) and 408(g), except that the 
Secretary of Labor may prescribe rules 
under which only one fiduciary adviser 
may elect to be treated as a fiduciary 
with respect to the plan. Section 
4975(f)(8)(J)(i) of the Internal Revenue 
Code, as amended (the Code), contains 
a parallel provision to ERISA section 
408(g)(11)(A) that applies for purposes 
of Code sections 4975(d)(17) and 
4975(f)(8). This section sets forth 
requirements that must be satisfied in 
order for one such fiduciary adviser to 
elect to be treated as a fiduciary with 
respect to a plan under an eligible 
investment advice arrangement. 
(b)(1) If an election meets the 
requirements in paragraph (b)(2) of this 
section, then the person identified in 
the election shall be the sole fiduciary 
adviser treated as a fiduciary by reason 
of developing or marketing the 
computer model, or marketing the 
investment advice program, used in an 
eligible investment advice arrangement. 
(2) An election satisfies the 
requirements of this subparagraph with 
respect to an eligible investment advice 
arrangement if the election is in writing 
and such writing— 
(i) Identifies the investment advice 
arrangement, and the person offering the 
arrangement, with respect to which the 
election is to be effective; 
(ii) Identifies a person who— 
(A) Is described in any of 29 CFR 
2550.408g–1(c)(2)(i)(A) through (E); 
(B) Develops the computer model, or 
markets the computer model or 
investment advice program, utilized in 
satisfaction of 29 CFR 2550.408g–1(b)(4) 
with respect to the arrangement, and 
(C) Acknowledges that it elects to be 
treated as the only fiduciary, and 
fiduciary adviser, by reason of 
developing such computer model, or 
marketing such computer model or 
investment advice program; 
(iii) Is signed by the person identified 
in paragraph (b)(2)(ii) of this section; 
(iv) Is furnished to the fiduciary who 
authorized the arrangement, in 
accordance with 29 CFR 2550.408g– 
1(b)(5); and 
(v) Is maintained in accordance with 
29 CFR 2550.408g–1(e). 
Signed at Washington, DC, this 9th day of 
January, 2009. 
Bradford P. Campbell, 
Assistant Secretary, Employee Benefits 
Security Administration, Department of 
Labor. 
[FR Doc. E9–710 Filed 1–16–09; 8:45 am] 
BILLING CODE 4510–29–P 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 19:29 Jan 16, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00033 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4700 E:\FR\FM\21JAR3.SGM 21JAR3ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 P
R
O
D1
PC
66
 w
ith
 R
UL
ES
3
