4408 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 18 / Friday, January 27, 2012 / Proposed Rules 
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE 
Food Safety and Inspection Service 
9 CFR Parts 381 and 500 
[Docket No. FSIS–2011–0012] 
RIN 0583–AD32 
Modernization of Poultry Slaughter 
Inspection 
AGENCY: Food Safety and Inspection 
Service, USDA. 
ACTION: Proposed rule. 
SUMMARY: The Food Safety and 
Inspection Service (FSIS) is proposing a 
new inspection system for young 
chicken and turkey slaughter 
establishments that would replace the 
current Streamlined Inspection System 
(SIS), the New Line Speed Inspection 
System (NELS), and the New Turkey 
Inspection System (NTIS). The Agency 
is also proposing several changes that 
would affect all establishments that 
slaughter poultry other than ratites, 
regardless of the inspection system 
under which they operate. This 
proposed rule is a result of the Agency’s 
2011 regulatory review efforts 
conducted under Executive Order 13563 
on Improving Regulation and Regulatory 
Review. 
DATES: Comments must be received by 
April 26, 2012. 
ADDRESSES: FSIS invites interested 
persons to submit relevant comments on 
the implementation of this proposed 
rule. The Agency specifically requests 
comment on whether it should phase-in 
the implementation of this proposed 
rule to provide additional time for small 
and very small establishments to adjust 
their operations to comply with the new 
requirements. If commenters believe 
that a phased implementation would 
mitigate the impact of this rule on small 
and very small establishments, FSIS 
requests comments on how the Agency 
can make the phased implementation 
most effective. 
Comments may be submitted by either 
of the following methods: 
• Federal eRulemaking Portal: This 
Web site provides the ability to type 
short comments directly into the 
comment field on this Web page or 
attach a file for lengthier comments. Go 
to http://www.regulations.gov. Follow 
the online instructions at that site for 
submitting comments. 
• Mail, including floppy disks or CD– 
ROMs, and hand- or courier-delivered 
items: Send to Docket Clerk, U.S. 
Department of Agriculture (USDA), 
FSIS, Docket Clerk, Patriots Plaza 3, 355 
E. Street SW., 8–163A, Mailstop 3782, 
Washington, DC 20250–3700. 
Instructions: All items submitted by 
mail or electronic mail must include the 
Agency name and docket number FSIS– 
2011–0012. Comments received in 
response to this docket will be made 
available for public inspection and 
posted without change, including any 
personal information, to http:// 
www.regulations.gov. 
Docket: For access to background 
documents or comments received, go to 
the FSIS Docket Room at the address 
listed above between 8 a.m. and 4:30 
p.m., Monday through Friday. 
All background documents referenced 
in this proposed rule are available for 
viewing by the public on the FSIS Web 
site at: http://www.fsis.usda.gov/ 
regulations_&_policies/Proposed_Rules/ 
index.asp or in the FSIS docket room. 
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Dr. 
Daniel Engeljohn, Assistant 
Administrator, Office of Policy and 
Program Development, FSIS, U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, 1400 
Independence Avenue SW., 
Washington, DC 20250–3700, (202) 720– 
2709. 
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 
Executive Summary 
In January 2011, President Obama 
issued Executive Order (E.O.) 13563 on 
Improving Regulation and Regulatory 
Review. As part of this E.O., agencies 
were asked to review existing rules that 
may be outmoded, ineffective, 
insufficient, or excessively burdensome, 
and to modify, streamline, expand, or 
repeal them accordingly. FSIS is 
proposing to modernize poultry 
slaughter inspection as a result of its 
2011 regulatory review efforts 
conducted under E.O. 13563. The 
Agency is taking this action to improve 
food safety and the effectiveness of 
poultry slaughter inspection systems, 
remove unnecessary regulatory 
obstacles to innovation, and make better 
use of the Agency’s resources. 
FSIS is proposing a new inspection 
system for young chicken and turkey 
slaughter establishments. The new 
inspection system would replace the 
current Streamlined Inspection System 
(SIS), the New Line Speed Inspection 
System (NELS), and the New Turkey 
Inspection System (NTIS). Under this 
proposed rule, establishments that 
slaughter young chickens or turkeys 
would have to choose whether to 
operate under the traditional inspection 
system or under the proposed new 
inspection system. FSIS is proposing to 
limit the number of online inspectors in 
the traditional inspection system to two. 
Key elements of the new inspection 
system include: (1) Requiring 
establishment personnel to conduct 
carcass sorting activities before FSIS 
conducts online carcass inspection so 
that only carcasses that the 
establishment deems likely to pass 
inspection are presented to the carcass 
inspector; (2) reducing the number of 
online FSIS carcass inspectors to one 
per line; (3) permitting faster line speeds 
than are permitted under the current 
inspection systems it replaces; and (4) 
removing the existing Finished Product 
Standards (FPS) and replacing them 
with a requirement that establishments 
that operate under the new system 
maintain records to document that the 
products resulting from their slaughter 
operations meet the regulatory 
definition of ready-to-cook poultry. 
The proposed new inspection system 
may facilitate the reduction of pathogen 
levels in poultry products by permitting 
FSIS to conduct more food safety related 
offline inspection activities, will allow 
for better use of FSIS inspection 
resources, and will lead to industry 
innovations in operations and 
processing. 
In addition to the New Poultry 
Slaughter Inspection System, FSIS is 
proposing changes to its regulations that 
will apply to all establishments that 
slaughter poultry other than ratites, 
regardless of the inspection system 
under which they operate. Because 
contamination by enteric pathogens and 
fecal material are hazards reasonably 
likely to occur in poultry slaughter 
operations unless they are addressed in 
a sanitation standard operating 
procedure (SOP) or other prerequisite 
program, the Agency is proposing that 
all poultry slaughter establishments 
develop, implement, and maintain, as 
part of their HACCP plans, or sanitation 
SOPs, or other prerequisite programs 
written procedures to ensure that 
carcasses contaminated with visible 
fecal material do not enter the chiller. 
FSIS is also proposing to require that all 
poultry slaughter establishments 
develop, implement, and maintain, as 
part of their HACCP plans, or sanitation 
SOPs, or other prerequisite programs 
written procedures to prevent 
contamination of carcasses and parts by 
enteric pathogens (e.g., Salmonella and 
Campylobacter) and fecal material 
throughout the entire slaughter and 
dressing operation. FSIS is proposing 
that, at a minimum, these procedures 
must include sampling and analysis for 
microbial organisms at the pre-chill and 
post-chill points in the process to 
monitor process control for enteric 
pathogens. FSIS is proposing to remove 
the current requirement that poultry 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:33 Jan 26, 2012 Jkt 226001 PO 00000 Frm 00002 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\27JAP2.SGM 27JAP2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
4V
PT
VN
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
4409 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 18 / Friday, January 27, 2012 / Proposed Rules 
establishments test for generic E. coli 
and to remove the codified Salmonella 
pathogen reduction performance 
standards for poultry. 
Finally, FSIS is proposing to amend 
its regulations to provide for the use of 
certain poultry slaughter technologies 
that have been demonstrated to be 
successful through waivers of the 
existing regulations, thus ending most 
current waivers. FSIS is proposing to 
remove the chilling requirements for 
ready-to-cook poultry, which now 
provide specific time and temperature 
parameters, and to require that 
establishments incorporate procedures 
for chilling poultry into their HACCP 
plans, or sanitation SOPs, or other 
prerequisite programs. This will give 
establishments greater flexibility to 
determine what chilling process is best 
suited to prevent outgrowth of 
pathogens on carcasses immediately 
after slaughter operations. The Agency 
is also proposing to permit poultry 
slaughter establishments to use (1) 
approved online reprocessing 
antimicrobial systems or (2) offline 
reprocessing antimicrobial agents 
including chlorinated water containing 
20 ppm to 50 ppm available chlorine or 
other antimicrobial substances that have 
been approved as safe and suitable for 
reprocessing poultry. Establishments 
would be required to address the use of 
online or offline reprocessing of poultry 
in their HACCP plans, or sanitation 
SOPs, or other prerequisite programs. 
Statutory Authorities 
FSIS inspects and regulates the 
production of poultry prepared for 
distribution in interstate commerce 
under the authority of the Poultry 
Products Inspection Act (PPIA) (21 
U.S.C. 451 et seq.). 21 U.S.C. 455(b) 
provides that the Secretary shall cause 
to be made by inspectors post-mortem 
inspection of the carcass of each bird 
processed, and at any time reinspection 
as he deems necessary of poultry and 
poultry products capable of use as 
human food. 21 U.S.C. 455(c) requires 
that all poultry carcasses and other 
poultry products found to be 
adulterated be condemned. Carcasses 
and parts that may be reprocessed to be 
made not adulterated are not required to 
be condemned if they are reprocessed 
under the supervision of an inspector 
and thereafter found to be not 
adulterated (21 U.S.C. 455(c)). Under 
the PPIA, a poultry product is 
adulterated, among other circumstances, 
if it bears or contains any poisonous or 
deleterious substance that may render it 
injurious to health; it is unhealthful, 
unwholesome, or otherwise unfit for 
human consumption; it was prepared, 
packaged, or held under insanitary 
conditions whereby it may have been 
rendered injurious to health; or if 
damage or inferiority has been 
concealed in any manner (21 U.S.C. 
453(g)(1), (3), (4), and (8)). Finally, 21 
U.S.C. 463(b) provides that the Secretary 
shall promulgate such other rules and 
regulations as are necessary to carry out 
the provisions of the PPIA. FSIS 
regulations and inspection programs are 
designed to verify that poultry products 
are unadulterated, wholesome, and 
properly marked, labeled, and packaged. 
Table of Contents of Proposed Rule 
Discussion 
I. Background 
A. Poultry Slaughter Inspection Systems 
Under Existing Regulations 
1. Description of Inspection Systems Under 
Existing Regulations 
2. Limitations of Current Inspection 
Systems Under Existing Regulations and 
Need for Improvement 
B. Regulations for Microbiological Testing 
Under the Existing Inspection Systems 
1. Generic E. coli Criteria for Measuring 
Process Control 
2. Salmonella Pathogen Reduction/HACCP 
Performance Standards 
C. Waivers of Regulatory Requirements 
1. Regulations Providing for the 
Administrator To Waive Provisions of 
Inspection Regulations 
2. The FSIS Salmonella Initiative Program 
II. Consideration of Need for a New Poultry 
Slaughter Inspection System 
A. Early Development of the Inspection 
Models Program 
B. Existing HACCP–Based Inspection 
Models Program 
C. Analysis of HIMP 
1. FSIS Evaluation of HIMP 
a. Overview of HIMP Report 
b. Inspection of Each Carcass by Online 
FSIS Inspectors To Determine Whether 
the Carcass Is Not Adulterated and 
Therefore Eligible To Bear the Mark of 
Inspection 
c. Verification by Offline Inspectors of the 
Establishment Executing Its HIMP 
Process Control Plan Under Which 
Establishment Employees Sort 
Acceptable and Unacceptable Carcasses 
and Parts 
d. Verification of the Establishment 
Executing Its Sanitation SOPs and Its 
HACCP System Under 9 CFR Parts 416 
and 417 
e. Verification of the Outcomes of the 
Establishment Process Control Plan, Both 
Organoleptic and Microbiologic 
f. Conclusion 
2. 2001 Government Accountability Office 
Report on HIMP 
D. Public Health Benefits Projected From 
Allocating More Inspection Resources to 
Food Safety-Related Inspection 
Activities 
1. Risk Assessment 
2. Model 
3. Conclusions of the Risk Assessment 
III. Proposed New Poultry Inspection System 
for Young Chickens and Turkeys 
A. Replacement of SIS, NELS, and NTIS 
With the New Poultry Inspection System 
B. Carcass Sorting and Online Carcass 
Inspection 
C. Offline Verification Inspection 
D. Finished Product Standards To Be 
Replaced With Requirement That 
Establishments Operating Under the 
New Poultry Inspection System Maintain 
Records To Document That the Products 
Resulting From Their Slaughter 
Operations Meet the Definition of Ready- 
to-Cook Poultry 
1. Establishment Requirements 
2. FSIS Verification 
E. Maximum Line Speeds Under the New 
Poultry Inspection System 
F. Facilities Requirements for 
Establishments Operating Under the 
New Poultry Inspection System 
1. General 
2. Online Carcass Inspection Stations 
3. Offline Verification Inspection Stations 
4. Location To Inspect the Viscera of the 
First 300 Carcasses of Each Flock 
5. Drainage From Processing Line 
G. Eligibility To Operate Under the New 
Poultry Inspection System 
IV. Other Proposed Changes to Poultry 
Slaughter Regulations 
A. Proposed Changes to Traditional 
Inspection System 
B. Proposed Changes Affecting All Poultry 
Slaughter Establishments 
1. Procedures To Address Enteric 
Pathogens and Fecal Contamination as 
Hazards Reasonably Likely To Occur 
a. Contamination of Poultry Carcasses and 
Parts by Fecal Material and Enteric 
Pathogens Are Hazards Reasonably 
Likely To Occur in Poultry Slaughter 
Establishments 
b. Procedures Addressing Zero Tolerance 
for Visible Fecal Material Before Chilling 
c. Procedures To Prevent Contamination of 
Carcasses and Parts by Enteric Pathogens 
and Fecal Material Throughout the 
Entire Slaughter and Dressing Operation 
2. Impact Considerations for Small/Very 
Small Low Volume Establishments 
3. Proposed Changes to Time and 
Temperature Requirements for Chilling 
a. Background 
b. Proposed Rule 
c. Air Chilling 
4. Proposed Changes to Online and Offline 
Reprocessing Regulations 
a. Background 
b. Proposed Rule 
V. Executive Order 12866 and Executive 
Order 13563 
VI. Initial Regulatory Flexibility Analysis 
VII. E–Government Act 
VIII. Executive Order 13175 
IX. USDA Nondiscrimination Statement 
X. Environmental Impact 
XI. Paperwork Reduction Act 
XII. Additional Public Notification 
XIII. Proposed Regulatory Amendments 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:33 Jan 26, 2012 Jkt 226001 PO 00000 Frm 00003 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\27JAP2.SGM 27JAP2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
4V
PT
VN
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
4410 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 18 / Friday, January 27, 2012 / Proposed Rules 
1 Ratites, including ostriches, can grow to exceed 
600 lbs and typically weigh as much as 350 lbs 
when slaughtered. They are slaughtered and 
inspected under a system that is more similar to red 
meat than other poultry species. This rule would 
not affect ratite inspection. 
2 SIS, NELS, and NTIS are codified at 9 CFR 
381.76; traditional inspection is codified at 9 CFR 
381.67 and 381.76(a). 
I. Background 
A. Poultry Slaughter Inspection Systems 
Under Existing Regulations 
1. Description of Inspection Systems 
Under Existing Regulations 
Under current regulations, FSIS 
employs four inspection systems for 
poultry other than ratites: 1 The 
Streamline Inspection System (SIS), the 
New Line Speed Inspection System 
(NELS), the New Turkey Inspection 
System (NTIS), and traditional 
inspection.2 SIS, NELS, and NTIS are 
employed in official poultry slaughter 
establishments that utilize automated 
evisceration systems. Traditional 
inspection is typically employed at 
smaller, lower product volume 
establishments that eviscerate carcasses 
by hand. Automated evisceration allows 
establishments to run at faster line 
speeds than is possible when the 
carcasses are eviscerated by hand. 
Under all of the current inspection 
systems, the inspection process consists 
of online post-mortem inspection and 
offline reinspection. 
In all four of the existing inspection 
systems, one or more FSIS online 
inspectors inspect every carcass, with 
its viscera, at a fixed point along the 
slaughter and evisceration line 
immediately following the separation of 
the viscera from the interior of the 
carcass (9 CFR 381.76(b)). They examine 
each eviscerated carcass for visual 
defects and direct establishment 
employees to take appropriate corrective 
actions if the defects can be corrected 
through trimming or reprocessing. The 
online inspectors also identify and 
condemn carcasses with septicemic and 
toxemic animal diseases, which cannot 
be corrected through trimming or 
reprocessing. Establishment personnel 
then dispose of the condemned 
carcasses under FSIS supervision. 
Under each of the existing inspection 
systems, establishments conduct no 
carcass sorting to determine which 
eviscerated carcasses appear eligible to 
bear the mark of inspection, which 
carcasses contain removable defects 
correctable through trimming or 
reprocessing, and which carcasses must 
be condemned because of septicemic 
and toxemic animal diseases. Rather, 
the existing regulations require 
establishments to assign a helper to take 
such actions as directed by the online 
post-mortem inspector after the 
inspector has conducted the initial 
sorting activities (9 CFR 381.76(b)). 
Thus, under the existing inspection 
systems, establishments rely on FSIS 
online inspection personnel to 
effectively control and direct their 
processing. Moreover, because FSIS 
online inspectors are responsible for 
identifying unacceptable carcasses and 
parts, it takes online inspectors more 
time to conduct a carcass-by-carcass 
appraisal than would be necessary if 
establishments sorted and trimmed 
carcasses before they were inspected. 
In addition to post-mortem inspection 
conducted by the online inspector, the 
existing inspection systems consist of 
reinspection activities conducted by 
offline inspectors (9 CFR 381.76(b)). 
During reinspection, FSIS inspectors 
apply various trim and processing 
standards, referred to as Finished 
Product Standards (FPS), designed to 
verify that the slaughter and 
evisceration process is under control (9 
CFR 381.76(b)(3)(iv)(c). This is done by 
examining ten bird sample sets to 
determine compliance with the FPS. 
Under traditional inspection, all trim 
defects (e.g., breast blisters, bruises, 
fractures, and scabs) identified by the 
online carcass inspector must be 
removed at the online inspection 
station. Processing defects (e.g. ingesta, 
cloaca, and feathers) may be corrected 
further down the line, subject to 
reinspection. Under SIS, NELS, and 
NTIS, all reinspection is conducted at 
separate reinspection stations located 
either before and after the chiller (SIS; 
9 CFR 381.76(b)(3)(iv)(a)), or before the 
chiller only (NELS and NTIS; 9 CFR 
381.76(b)(4)(i)(b) and 381.76(b)(5)(i)(b)). 
In addition to applying the trim and 
dressing standards under FPS, offline 
inspection also consists of such food 
safety related activities as verifying 
Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point 
(HACCP) critical limits, verifying the 
effectiveness of sanitation SOPs, and 
collecting samples for pathogen testing. 
2. Limitations of Current Inspection 
Systems Under Existing Regulations and 
Need for Improvement 
Traditional inspection is generally 
sufficient for low product volume 
establishments that operate at relatively 
slower line speeds; however, SIS, NELS, 
and NTIS are lacking in two important 
respects. First, they obscure the proper 
roles of industry and inspection 
personnel by assigning to FSIS online 
inspectors responsibility for sorting 
acceptable product from unacceptable 
product, finding defects, identifying 
corrective actions, and solving 
production control problems. Second, 
they require FSIS to allocate significant 
inspection personnel resources towards 
inspection activities to detect defects 
and conditions that present minimal 
food safety risks, thus limiting the 
resources available for more important 
food safety-related inspection activities. 
One limitation of the existing 
inspection systems is that they require 
online inspectors to conduct sorting 
activities. This necessitates a time- 
intensive online process that requires 
FSIS to allocate significant personnel 
resources to conduct activities that are 
more appropriately the responsibility of 
the establishment. The current systems 
thus limit line speeds, even if 
establishments can demonstrate that 
they are able to produce safe, 
unadulterated, wholesome products at 
more efficient rates. It also limits 
establishments’ incentive to improve 
their processing methods and to develop 
more efficient slaughter and dressing 
technologies. 
For example, under SIS, an 
establishment operating under optimal 
processing conditions is limited to line 
speeds of 35 carcasses per minute with 
one online inspector per line and 70 
carcasses per minute with two online 
inspectors per line. Although NELS 
allows for a slightly faster maximum 
line speed—91 birds per minute under 
optimal processing conditions—it 
requires three online inspectors per line. 
And under NTIS, an establishment 
operating under optimal processing 
conditions is limited to processing 32 
light birds per minute with one online 
inspector per line and 51 light birds per 
minute with two online inspectors per 
line. For heavy birds, those speeds 
decrease to 25 birds per minute and 45 
birds per minute, respectively. 
FSIS is proposing a new inspection 
system to improve food safety and the 
effectiveness of inspection systems, 
reduce the risk of foodborne illness in 
the United States, remove unnecessary 
regulatory obstacles to innovation, and 
make better use of the Agency’s 
resources. If establishment personnel 
sorted the carcasses and took necessary 
corrective actions before the carcasses 
were presented for inspection, the 
online inspectors could be stationed 
later in the process and would be 
presented with carcasses that have 
fewer defects. Such a system would 
allow the online inspector to conduct a 
more efficient inspection, a carcass-by- 
carcass critical appraisal, to determine 
whether each carcass is not adulterated 
and therefore eligible to bear the mark 
of inspection. As a result, FSIS could 
assign fewer inspectors to online 
inspection, freeing up Agency resources 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:33 Jan 26, 2012 Jkt 226001 PO 00000 Frm 00004 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\27JAP2.SGM 27JAP2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
4V
PT
VN
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
4411 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 18 / Friday, January 27, 2012 / Proposed Rules 
3 Gomis, S.M., Riddell, C., Potter, A.A., and Allan, 
B.J., Phenotypic and genotypic characterization of 
virulence factors Escherichia coli isolated from 
broiler chickens with simultaneous occurrence of 
cellulites and other colibacillosis lesions. Can J Vet 
Res. 2001 Jan; 65(1):1–6. 
Russell, S. M., The effect of airsacculitis on bird 
weights, uniformity, fecal contamination, 
processing errors, and populations of 
Campylobacter spp. and Escherichia coli. Poult. 
Sci. 2003; 82:1326–1331. 
to conduct offline inspection activities 
that are more important for food safety, 
such as verifying compliance with 
sanitation and HAACP requirements, or 
conducting Food Safety Assessments. 
Moreover, the existing poultry 
slaughter inspection systems were 
designed before FSIS issued its HACCP 
regulations and began targeting its 
resources to address public health risks 
associated with foodborne pathogens. 
The existing systems were developed 
when visually detectable animal 
diseases were more prevalent and 
considered to be more of a concern than 
they are today. The line speed limits 
prescribed in SIS, NELS, and NTIS 
reflect the Agency’s previous focus on 
the detection of visible defects and 
animal diseases and do not give 
establishments the flexibility to develop 
new technologies that would allow for 
a more efficient approach to address 
these conditions. For example, while 
FSIS inspectors are required to inspect 
and condemn carcasses for visual 
defects at one point in the slaughter 
process, poultry slaughter 
establishments could be given more 
flexibility to develop procedures to 
identify and condemn unacceptable 
carcasses and parts earlier and at 
various points in the slaughter and 
production process. An inspection 
system that provides flexibility for 
establishments to detect and remove 
visible defects and animal at point in 
the process before the carcasses are 
presented to the FSIS inspector would 
permit establishments to operate at 
faster line speeds if they are able to 
maintain process control. 
Another limitation with SIS, NELS, 
and NTIS is that they focus substantial 
FSIS inspection resources on detecting 
visible trim and dressing defects that are 
less important to food safety, 
particularly in light of what is now 
known about the role microbial 
contamination plays in causing 
foodborne human illness. These 
inspection models need to be updated 
in light of the significant advances that 
have been made in the control or 
eradication of many animal diseases 
that were more prevalent and were 
considered to present a greater concern 
when the existing inspection systems 
were designed, particularly in generally 
healthy classes of animals such as 
young chickens. 
Moreover, the analysis in the risk 
assessment conducted by FSIS suggests 
a significant correlation between 
increased unscheduled offline 
inspection services and lower levels of 
Salmonella and Campylobacter in 
young chicken and turkey slaughter 
establishments. This analysis indicates 
that reallocating inspection resources 
currently dedicated to online inspection 
under the existing inspection systems to 
offline, food safety related inspection 
activities, such as increased HACCP 
verification, sanitation SOP verification, 
pathogen sampling, and Food Safety 
Assessments, could potentially reduce 
pathogen levels. Additionally, FSIS 
could devote more resources to 
inspection activities that focus on the 
areas of greatest risk in the poultry 
production system if establishments 
were required to assume greater 
responsibility for monitoring 
compliance with trim and dressing 
performance standards. 
B. Regulations for Microbiological 
Testing Under the Existing Inspection 
Systems 
1. Generic E. coli Criteria for Measuring 
Process Control 
The current regulations require that 
official poultry slaughter establishments 
conduct regular testing for generic 
Escherichia coli (E. coli) at the end of 
the chilling process or at the end of the 
slaughter line as a means to verify 
process control (9 CFR 381.94(a)). These 
regulations prescribe requirements for 
collecting the samples, obtaining 
analytical results, and maintaining 
records of such results (9 CFR 
381.94(a)(2), (3), and (4)). They also 
include criteria for evaluating an 
establishment’s generic E. coli testing 
results (9 CFR 381.94(a)(5)). The 
regulations provide that generic E. coli 
testing results that do not meet the 
criteria described in the regulations 
indicate that the establishment may not 
be maintaining process controls 
sufficient to prevent fecal contamination 
(9 CFR 381.94(a)(6)). If an establishment 
is not meeting the E. coli test results 
criteria, the regulations state that FSIS 
will take further action as appropriate to 
ensure that all applicable provisions of 
the law are being met (9 CFR 381.94(6)). 
In the preamble to the HACCP final 
rule (61 FR 38806, July 25, 1996), FSIS 
stated that microbial testing is an 
essential element for verifying process 
control of raw meat and poultry. 
Escherichia coli Biotype 1 (generic E. 
coli) was selected as the target organism 
for verifying process control for a 
variety of reasons, including: A strong 
association of E. coli with the presence 
of enteric pathogens and, in the case of 
slaughtering, the presence of fecal 
contamination; E. coli occurs at a higher 
frequency than Salmonella, and 
quantitative E. coli testing permits more 
rapid and more frequent adjustment of 
process control; and there is wide 
acceptance in the international 
scientific community of its use as an 
indicator of the potential presence of 
enteric pathogens. However, since the 
implementation of the HACCP final 
rule, and with respect to young chicken 
carcasses, the reliability of E. coli as an 
indicator of process control has been 
called into question. In its final report 
adopted February 13, 2004, ‘‘Response 
to the Questions Posed by FSIS 
Regarding Performance Standards with 
Particular Reference to Broilers (Young 
Chickens),’’ the National Advisory 
Committee on Microbiological Criteria 
for Foods (NACMCF) stated that E. coli 
may no longer be as useful in broiler 
operations as originally thought. 
NACMCF recognized that FSIS viewed 
E. coli as a direct measure of control of 
fecal contamination and, by implication, 
Salmonella or other enteric pathogens. 
However, NACMCF stated that recent 
published information indicates that 
this assumption may not be valid for E. 
coli in young chickens. For example, in 
young chickens, its presence may also 
be a result of infectious process and air 
sacculitis, in addition to fecal 
contamination.3 
Thus, FSIS has tentatively decided to 
remove the requirement that poultry 
slaughter establishments test for generic 
E. coli at post-chill and to allow 
establishments to use other, more 
relevant indicators of process control. 
FSIS is proposing that all poultry 
slaughter establishments collect and 
analyze carcass samples for 
microbiological analysis at the pre-chill 
and post-chill points in the process. The 
basis for this decision and a discussion 
of the proposed testing requirements are 
set out later in this document. 
2. Salmonella Pathogen Reduction/ 
HACCP Performance Standards 
In addition to generic E. coli criteria, 
the existing regulations contain 
Salmonella pathogen reduction 
performance standards for certain 
poultry slaughter establishments and 
establishments that produce certain raw 
ground poultry products (9 CFR 
381.94(b)). The codified performance 
standards are based on the prevalence of 
Salmonella found by the Agency’s 
nationwide microbiological baseline 
studies, which were conducted before 
the PR/HACCP rule was adopted. The 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:33 Jan 26, 2012 Jkt 226001 PO 00000 Frm 00005 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\27JAP2.SGM 27JAP2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
4V
PT
VN
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
4412 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 18 / Friday, January 27, 2012 / Proposed Rules 
4 For Agency New Technology waiver procedures, 
see http://www.fsis.usda.gov/Regulations_&_
Policies/New_Technologies/index.asp. 
regulations provide for FSIS to collect 
and analyze unannounced Salmonella 
samples sets in poultry slaughter 
establishments to detect whether these 
establishments are meeting the pathogen 
reduction performance standards (9 CFR 
381.94(b)(2)). The performance 
standards set a maximum number of 
Salmonella-positive samples allowable 
per sample set and are defined on a 
product class basis so that an 
establishment operating at the baseline 
level would have an 80 percent chance 
of meeting the standard. Establishments 
are required to take corrective actions 
when FSIS determines that they are not 
meeting the performance standards (9 
CFR 381.94(b)(3)(i) and (ii)). 
Under the regulations, an 
establishment’s failure to take the 
corrective actions necessary to comply 
with the Salmonella performance 
standards, or an establishment’s failure 
to meet the standards on the third 
consecutive series of FSIS-conducted 
tests for that product, constitutes a 
failure to maintain sanitary conditions 
and to maintain an adequate HACCP 
plan (9 CFR 381.94(b)(3)(iii)). The 
regulations provide that such failure 
will cause FSIS to suspend inspection 
services (9 CFR 381.94(b)(3)(iii)). 
However, the Agency’s ability to 
directly enforce the pathogen reduction 
performance standards has been limited 
since 2001, after a ruling by the U.S. 
Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit in 
Supreme Beef Processors, Inc. v. USDA. 
In that case, the court enjoined FSIS 
from suspending inspection services 
against a meat grinding operation for 
failure to meet the Salmonella 
performance standards. Since that time, 
FSIS has used Salmonella failures as a 
basis to conduct an in-depth evaluation 
of the establishment’s food safety 
systems, including its HACCP plan and 
sanitation SOPs. 
In 2006, after an intensive review of 
the results of several years of 
Salmonella testing that showed a trend 
of increasing prevalence of Salmonella 
in young chicken establishments, FSIS 
established three establishment 
performance categories for Salmonella 
based on the codified performance 
standards (‘‘Salmonella Verification 
Sample Result Reporting: Agency Policy 
and Use in Public Health Protection,’’ 
71 FR 9772–9777, February 27, 2006). 
The new performance Category 1 
represented the best performing 
establishments and was defined as no 
more than half of the regulatory 
standard. Category 2 was set at more 
than half but not exceeding the 
regulatory standard. Category 3 
establishments were exceeding the 
regulatory standard and represent the 
worst performing establishments. 
When FSIS announced the new 
performance categories, the Agency 
explained that it intended to track the 
performance of the different product 
classes it samples for Salmonella and 
publish on the FSIS Web site the names 
of establishments in Categories 2 and 3 
for any product class that did not have 
90 percent of its establishments in 
Category 1. FSIS began publishing the 
names of young chicken establishments 
in Category 2 and 3 in March 2008. FSIS 
has continued to publish the names of 
these establishments on or about the 
15th of each month since then. 
Since it established the new 
Salmonella performance categories, 
FSIS has updated the year-long 
Nationwide Microbiological Baseline 
Data Collection Programs to better 
measure improvements in pathogen 
reduction in all classes of raw product. 
Young chicken and young turkey 
microbiological baselines were 
completed in 2008 and 2009, 
respectively. On May 14, 2010, in 
response to a charge from the 
President’s Food Safety Working Group, 
the Agency announced that it had 
developed new performance standards 
for Salmonella and Campylobacter for 
chilled carcasses in young chicken and 
turkey slaughter establishments based 
on the new baseline results (‘‘New 
Performance Standards for Salmonella 
and Campylobacter in Young Chicken 
and Turkey Slaughter Establishments,’’ 
75 FR 27288). 
On March 21, 2011, FSIS published a 
Federal Register notice to announce the 
forthcoming implementation of the new 
performance standards for Salmonella 
and Campylobacter (‘‘New Performance 
Standards for Salmonella and 
Campylobacter in Young Chicken and 
Turkey Slaughter Establishments: 
Response to Comments and 
Announcement of Implementation 
Schedule,’’ 76 FR 15282). In the Federal 
Register notice, FSIS announced, among 
other actions, that Web-posting of young 
chicken and turkey establishments that 
fail the new Salmonella standards 
(‘‘Category 3’’) for their last set will 
begin as sample sets scheduled for July 
2011 are completed. In that notice, the 
Agency also explained that ‘‘[t]hese new 
Salmonella standards are to be applied 
to sample sets from establishments 
included in the Agency’s Salmonella 
Verification Program in the place of the 
performance standards for young 
chickens (as broilers) codified at 9 CFR 
381.94 and the standards for young 
turkeys announced in a Federal Register 
Notice of 1995.’’ FSIS also stated that 
‘‘[t]he Agency intends to issue a 
proposed rule that would formally 
rescind the codified standards that are 
no longer in effect’’ (76 FR 15282). 
Therefore, FSIS is proposing to 
eliminate the pathogen performance 
standard regulations in 9 CFR 381.94(b). 
FSIS can effectively address Salmonella 
through the actions discussed above and 
through the Salmonella Initiative 
Program described below. 
C. Waivers of Regulatory Requirements 
1. Regulations Providing for the 
Administrator To Waive Provisions of 
Inspection Regulations 
The regulations in 9 CFR 303.2(h) and 
381.3(b) provide for the Administrator 
to waive for limited periods any 
provisions of the regulations to permit 
experimentation so that new 
procedures, equipment, or processing 
techniques may be tested to facilitate 
definite improvements. Under these 
regulations, FSIS may only grant 
waivers from the provisions in the 
regulations that are not in conflict with 
the purposes or provisions of the FMIA 
or PPIA (9 CFR 303.1(h) and 381.3(b)). 
FSIS decides whether to grant 
requests for waivers based on proposals 
and documentation submitted by 
establishments to demonstrate that the 
use of a new technology is scientifically 
sound; that it will facilitate definite 
improvements; and that issuing the 
waiver will not conflict with the 
provisions of the FMIA or PPIA.4 If FSIS 
determines that the information 
submitted by an establishment supports 
the requested waiver, the Agency will 
waive the appropriate provisions in the 
regulation for a limited period of time 
to allow the establishment to conduct an 
in-plant trial. The purpose of the in- 
plant trial is to gather data on the effects 
of the use of the new technology. FSIS 
reviews the data that is developed in the 
trial to determine whether they establish 
that the purpose of the waiver is being 
met. 
Several poultry slaughter 
establishments are operating under 
waivers that allow them to use 
technologies that are not provided for in 
the regulations. As of April 2011, for 
example, FSIS had granted waivers to 
144 poultry slaughter establishments to 
allow these establishments to conduct 
online re-processing of poultry carcasses 
and parts accidentally contaminated 
with digestive tract contents. As 
discussed in detail later in this 
document, the current regulations only 
provide for reprocessing of accidentally 
contaminated poultry at a designated 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:33 Jan 26, 2012 Jkt 226001 PO 00000 Frm 00006 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\27JAP2.SGM 27JAP2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
4V
PT
VN
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
4413 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 18 / Friday, January 27, 2012 / Proposed Rules 
offline reprocessing station (9 CFR 
381.91). Under the Salmonella Initiative 
Program (SIP) (76 FR 41186, July 13, 
2011), the Agency has also granted six 
poultry slaughter establishments 
waivers from the specific time and 
temperature chilling requirements 
prescribed in 9 CFR 381.66. Any 
establishment that has been granted a 
waiver for on-line reprocessing, or any 
other slaughter process, and is 
continuing to operate under that waiver, 
must now participate in SIP and 
conduct testing as discussed in greater 
detail below. 
The data generated from the in-plant 
trials conducted under the online 
reprocessing waivers and the waivers 
from the time and temperature chilling 
requirements have demonstrated that 
the technologies used in these studies 
have been successful and yielded 
definite improvements.(See ‘‘FSIS 
Analysis of On-line and Off-line 
Reprocessing Systems,’’ available for 
viewing by the public in the FSIS 
docket room and on the FSIS Web site 
at: http://www.fsis.usda.gov/ 
regulations_&_policies/Proposed_Rules/
index.asp.) Therefore, FSIS is proposing 
to amend the regulations to provide for 
the use of these technologies, which 
would end the need for these waivers. 
The proposed amendments are 
described under the headings ‘‘Proposed 
Changes to Time and Temperature 
Requirements for Chilling’’ and 
‘‘Proposed Changes to Online and 
Offline Reprocessing Regulations,’’ 
below. 
All establishments operating under 
waivers from any regulatory 
requirements, not just waivers for OLR 
and time and temperature regulations, 
will be participating in the Salmonella 
Initiative Program (SIP), described 
below. Thus, the SIP would continue 
after any final rule resulting from this 
proposal becomes effective. 
2. The FSIS Salmonella Initiative 
Program (SIP) 
Under SIP, meat and poultry slaughter 
establishments receive waivers of 
regulatory requirements on condition 
that they will conduct regular microbial 
testing and share the resulting data with 
FSIS. The Agency described preliminary 
details of SIP in a January 28, 2008, 
Federal Register notice (73 FR 4767– 
4774) and announced its final terms and 
conditions in the July 13, 2011, Federal 
Register notice (76 FR 41186). SIP 
benefits public health in that it 
encourages slaughter establishments to 
conduct testing for microbial pathogens, 
which is a key feature of effective 
process control, and to respond to 
testing results by taking steps when 
necessary to regain process control. In 
addition, SIP enables FSIS to use 
establishment data to inform Agency 
policy aimed at enhancing public health 
protection. 
SIP establishments test for 
Salmonella, Campylobacter (if 
applicable), and generic E. coli or other 
indicator organisms and share all 
sample results with FSIS. 
Establishments currently operating 
under regulatory waivers must 
participate in SIP or forfeit their 
waivers. All establishments operating 
under waivers will continue to operate 
under a SIP waiver and will continue to 
conduct testing under SIP if their 
waivers are not addressed in the final 
rule resulting from this proposal. 
II. Consideration of Need for a New 
Poultry Slaughter Inspection System 
A. Early Development of the Inspection 
Models Program 
In 1996, FSIS published its PR/ 
HACCP final rule as the first step of a 
comprehensive initiative to target the 
Agency’s resources to address the public 
health risks associated with foodborne 
pathogens, which cannot be detected by 
organoleptic inspection (61 FR 38868). 
Under FSIS’s PR/HACCP regulations, 
establishments are required to develop 
and implement a system of preventive 
controls to ensure that their products 
are safe. This approach gives 
establishments more flexibility to 
determine how they can best meet the 
Agency’s regulatory requirements. FSIS 
verifies the adequacy and effectiveness 
of establishments’ HACCP systems. 
The existing poultry slaughter 
inspection systems were developed 
before HACCP was implemented and 
require that FSIS inspectors sort 
carcasses and direct establishments’ 
corrective actions, rather than requiring 
establishments to sort, trim, and 
reprocess carcasses before they are 
inspected by FSIS. In 1997, in order to 
improve food safety and the 
effectiveness of inspection systems, 
reduce the risk of foodborne illness in 
the United States, remove unnecessary 
regulatory obstacles to innovation, and 
make better use of the Agency’s 
resources, FSIS announced, in a Federal 
Register notice, that the Agency would 
be developing a new HACCP-based 
inspection models project (62 FR 
31553). During the HACCP-based 
inspection models project, FSIS would 
design and test various new inspection 
models in a series of trials in volunteer 
meat and poultry slaughter 
establishments. 
Under the initial inspection models 
approach, establishment personnel were 
responsible for identifying and 
removing normal from abnormal 
carcasses and parts, and FSIS inspection 
personnel performed inspection 
activities that focused on the areas of 
greatest risk in the poultry products 
inspection system in each 
establishment. 
In 1998, the American Federation of 
Government Employees, several FSIS 
inspectors, and a public interest 
organization filed a suit to enjoin FSIS 
from implementing the HACCP-based 
inspection model project (‘‘HIMP’’). The 
plaintiffs alleged that HIMP violated the 
requirement in the PPIA that 
government inspectors conduct a post- 
mortem inspection of each poultry 
carcass. Specifically, the PPIA provides 
that the Secretary, whenever processing 
operations are being conducted, shall 
cause to be made by inspectors post- 
mortem inspection of the carcass of each 
bird processed (21 U.S.C. 455(b)). The 
district court upheld HIMP, finding that 
the word ‘‘inspection’’, as used in the 
statute, does not necessarily mandate a 
direct, physical examination of each 
carcass and that the model program was 
a rational policy judgment within the 
discretion afforded to the Secretary. 
The plaintiffs appealed and the Court 
of Appeals for the District of Columbia 
Circuit reversed the district court’s 
decision. The Court found that the PPIA 
requires Federal inspectors—rather than 
plant employees—to make the decision 
about whether each carcass is 
adulterated within the meaning of the 
statute. The case was remanded to the 
district court for further proceedings. 
In response to the Court of Appeals’ 
opinion, FSIS modified HIMP to 
position one inspector at a fixed 
location near the end of the slaughter 
line in each poultry slaughter 
establishment. This inspector was 
responsible for examining each poultry 
carcass for adulteration after the 
carcasses had been eviscerated, sorted, 
washed, and trimmed by establishment 
employees, but before the carcasses 
entered the chiller. The modified 
models project also included FSIS off- 
line inspectors who were responsible for 
conducting HACCP and sanitation 
system verification activities and for 
closely examining a sample of carcasses 
for food safety defects to ensure that the 
establishment’s process was under 
control and that adulterated birds were 
not getting past the establishment 
sorters. On remand, the district court 
found that HIMP, as modified, complied 
with both the applicable statutory 
provisions and the opinion issued by 
the Court of Appeals. 
The plaintiffs again appealed to the 
Court of Appeals for the DC Circuit. 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:33 Jan 26, 2012 Jkt 226001 PO 00000 Frm 00007 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\27JAP2.SGM 27JAP2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
4V
PT
VN
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
4414 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 18 / Friday, January 27, 2012 / Proposed Rules 
5 For a description of the performance standards 
used during the HIMP pilot, see Appendix A. 
Plaintiffs argued that the modified 
inspection procedures were not in 
compliance with the Court of Appeals’ 
opinion because FSIS had delegated 
some inspection duties to plant 
employees who were responsible for 
sorting defective carcasses and making 
preliminary decisions regarding 
adulteration. The court rejected this 
argument, finding that the PPIA does 
not prohibit plant employees from 
paring down the overall number of 
carcasses by sorting and removing 
carcasses before they reach the Federal 
inspector. The Court held that because 
the modified inspection model program 
required Federal inspectors to 
personally examine each poultry carcass 
leaving the slaughter line, FSIS was in 
compliance with the PPIA’s requirement 
that ‘‘the carcass of each bird 
processed’’ be inspected for 
adulteration. 
Plaintiffs also argued that the line 
speeds allowed in the HIMP plants were 
too fast to allow Federal inspectors to 
make a critical appraisal of each carcass. 
The Court found that FSIS’s decision to 
allow higher line speeds was reasonable 
in light of the fact that establishment 
employees are required to sort defective 
carcasses prior to Federal inspection, 
resulting in fewer adulterated poultry 
carcasses being presented for Federal 
inspection. The Court also noted that 
although the PPIA delineates what must 
be inspected and by whom, it does not 
tell the reader exactly what an 
inspection is. The court concluded that 
HIMP, as modified, reflected a 
reasonable design of an inspection 
system by the agency charged with 
responsibility for administering the 
PPIA and that it would rely on the 
agency’s experience and informed 
judgment in evaluating the validity of 
the system under the law. Under these 
circumstances, the Court of Appeals 
upheld HIMP, as modified. 
B. Existing HACCP-Based Inspection 
Models Program 5 
The revised HACCP-Based Inspection 
Models Project (HIMP) was initiated in 
20 young chicken slaughter 
establishments and 5 turkey slaughter 
establishments on a waiver basis. 
Under HIMP, post-mortem inspection, 
referred to simply as ‘‘carcass 
inspection,’’ is conducted by a single 
online carcass inspector who visually 
inspects every carcass at a fixed location 
on the evisceration line immediately 
prior to the chiller. Carcass inspection 
takes place after establishment 
personnel have already sorted the 
eviscerated carcasses, disposed of 
carcasses that they have identified as 
having condemnable conditions, and 
conducted any trim and reprocessing 
they believe necessary to correct 
removable defects. Carcass inspection is 
conducted much more efficiently and 
effectively under HIMP than under the 
existing inspection systems because 
establishment personnel have already 
sorted, trimmed, and reprocessed the 
carcasses, thereby removing most visible 
defects, before the online carcass 
inspector appraises them. 
Under HIMP, offline inspection is 
referred to as ‘‘verification inspection.’’ 
Verification inspection consists of 
system verification activities through 
which FSIS continuously monitors and 
evaluates establishment process control. 
FSIS conducts more offline, food safety 
related verification inspection activities 
under HIMP than under the existing 
inspection systems. Some examples of 
verification inspection activities 
include: HACCP, sanitation SOP, and 
other prerequisite program verification 
procedures, including verification 
checks specifically for septicemia and 
toxemia and for fecal contamination; 
verifying sanitary dressing requirements 
at multiple points in the inspection 
system; and sample collection for 
pathogen testing. 
FSIS has concluded that the HIMP 
model has a number of benefits, such as 
focusing FSIS inspection personnel on 
the areas of greatest risk in the poultry 
production system and providing an 
incentive to establishments to improve 
and innovate, while ensuring effective 
online inspection at line speeds of 175 
birds per minute. 
C. Analysis of HIMP 
1. FSIS Evaluation of HIMP 
FSIS has conducted a comprehensive 
analysis of data collected from the 
operation of HIMP in young chicken 
slaughter establishments and has 
prepared a written report (the ‘‘HIMP 
Report’’) that presents a thorough 
evaluation of the models tested. Based 
on this evaluation, FSIS has concluded 
that compared to inspection at non- 
HIMP establishments, HIMP has 
improved the safety of poultry products 
and increased overall consumer 
protection while still ensuring carcass- 
by-carcass inspection of each 
eviscerated carcass. 
A detailed summary of the HIMP 
Report is provided below. The full 
HIMP Report is available for viewing by 
the public in the FSIS docket room and 
on the FSIS Web site at: http:// 
www.fsis.usda.gov/ 
regulations_&_policies/Proposed_Rules/ 
index.asp. 
Prior to beginning HIMP, an 
independent consulting firm, Research 
Triangle Institute (RTI) conducted 
baseline organoleptic and 
microbiological data collection in 16 
young chicken slaughter establishments 
that volunteered to participate in the 
HIMP program. These baseline 
collection results reflect the 
performance of pre-HIMP poultry 
slaughter inspection systems and 
provided the basis to establish HIMP 
performance standards for septicemia 
and toxemia, for fecal contamination, 
and for five other consumer protection 
(OCP) concerns (see Appendix A for 
information about these performance 
standards). Prior to finalizing the 
standards, RTI conducted the same data 
collection after HIMP was implemented 
in 16 establishments and found 
improvement in various aspects of 
establishment performance after 
implementation of the HIMP system. 
The HIMP performance standards were 
finalized in November 2000. To 
participate in the program, 
establishments operating under HIMP 
are required to maintain process control 
plans to meet the performance standards 
for food safety and non-food safety OCP 
defects. The HIMP performance 
standards are a measure for comparing 
the performance of establishments 
operating under the new HIMP 
inspection system with performance 
when operating under the current non- 
HIMP inspection systems. 
Following entry of a total of 20 young 
chicken slaughter establishments into 
the HIMP program, in 2002, FSIS 
collected FSIS verification data that 
show that HIMP establishments 
exceeded the performance standards for 
food safety and all but one of the OCP 
standards. The HIMP Report contains 
the most recent data showing that the 
HIMP establishments continue to meet 
the HIMP performance standards. The 
HIMP Report also evaluates other 
measures to compare HIMP 
establishment performance with non- 
HIMP establishment performance. 
Therefore, based on these results, HIMP 
establishments have consistently 
performed better under HIMP than they 
did under non-HIMP inspection 
systems. 
a. Overview of HIMP Report 
The HIMP Report describes FSIS’s 
microbiological and inspection findings 
in young chicken slaughter 
establishments participating in HIMP 
and compares them with the HIMP 
performance standards or with 
comparison sets of non-HIMP 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:33 Jan 26, 2012 Jkt 226001 PO 00000 Frm 00008 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\27JAP2.SGM 27JAP2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
4V
PT
VN
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
4415 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 18 / Friday, January 27, 2012 / Proposed Rules 
establishments. The first comparison set 
of establishments was a subset of 64 
non-HIMP establishments selected to be 
comparable to HIMP establishments 
with respect to total slaughter volume, 
line speeds, and geographic 
distribution. The second comparison set 
was all 176 non-HIMP establishments 
that slaughtered young chickens in all 5 
years considered in the study. The 
evaluation is based on data for the 
calendar years CY2006 through CY2010, 
with exceptions where only more recent 
data are available. 
Across HIMP and non-HIMP 
establishments, analyses compared the 
number of offline inspection 
procedures, the rates of health-related 
regulatory noncompliances, fecal 
contamination noncompliances, and 
Salmonella positive rates. FSIS 
evaluated offline inspection procedures 
to determine whether comparable levels 
of inspection are being performed in 
HIMP establishments compared to non- 
HIMP establishments. FSIS looked at 
the other data to evaluate whether the 
HIMP system resulted in public health 
benefits and continued to ensure that 
FSIS inspected each carcass presented 
for inspection. 
b. Inspection of Each Carcass by FSIS 
Inspectors To Determine Whether the 
Carcass Is Not Adulterated and 
Therefore Eligible To Bear the Mark of 
Inspection 
The HIMP Report evaluates the ability 
of the FSIS online carcass inspector (CI) 
to detect carcasses affected with 
septicemia/toxemia and visible fecal 
contamination after the establishment 
has sorted the carcasses but before the 
carcasses enter the chiller. The purpose 
of this analysis is to demonstrate that 
even though CI’s in HIMP plants are 
presented with an extremely low 
number of carcasses affected with 
septecimia/toxemia and visible fecal 
contamination, they are still able to 
detect carcasses with these visible food 
safety defects. 
Data collected from April 1, 2009, to 
March 31, 2011, show that the CI in 
HIMP establishments found 125 
carcasses affected with septicmia/ 
toxemia and 26,815 carcasses with 
visible fecal contamination. The HIMP 
Report calculates the CI detection rates 
for both of these food safety defects by 
dividing the number of carcasses 
affected with them by the total number 
of carcasses presented to the CI 
inspector. For septicemia/toxemia, the 
CI detected affected carcasses at a rate 
of 0.000004 percent or 4 per 100 million 
carcasses slaughtered. For visible fecal 
contamination, the CI detected affected 
carcasses at a rate of 0.0009 percent or 
9 per million carcasses slaughtered. The 
levels of these diseases and fecal 
contamination that are presented to the 
CI can be measured by the results of the 
FSIS off-line verification of the HIMP 
performance standards. Verification 
checks are conducted by the FSIS 
verification inspector (VI) before the CI 
and after the establishments has sorted 
the carcasses. The findings of those 
verification checks show that fewer than 
8 per 1 million carcasses (0.0008 
percent) processed in HIMP 
establishments were found to have 
septicemia/toxemia and that fewer than 
0.8 per thousand carcasses (0.08 
percent) processed in HIMP 
establishments were found to have 
visible fecal contamination. These rates 
were lower than the HIMP performance 
standards of 0.1% carcasses for 
septicemia/toxemia and 0.8% carcasses 
for visible fecal contamination. 
Therefore, levels of these diseases and 
fecal contamination presented to the CI 
are very low in HIMP establishments. 
Nevertheless, the CI in HIMP 
establishments further reduces the 
number of carcasses with septicemia, 
toxemia, or visible fecal contamination, 
thereby reducing food safety defects to 
levels lower than found in non-HIMP 
establishments. In conclusion, the most 
recent data demonstrates that the CI in 
HIMP establishments is able to identify 
carcasses affected with septicemia, 
toxemia, and visible fecal 
contamination. 
c. Verification by Offline Inspectors of 
the Establishment Executing Its HIMP 
Process Control Plan Under Which 
Establishment Employees Sort 
Acceptable and Unacceptable Carcasses 
and Parts 
Because fewer inspectors are required 
to conduct online carcass inspection in 
HIMP establishments, FSIS inspection 
personnel are able to perform more 
offline food safety inspection activities. 
The HIMP study focuses on 11 offline 
inspection procedures identified by 
codes that apply to all poultry slaughter 
establishments. FSIS chose to focus on 
these procedures because they are all 
related to food safety or production of 
wholesome product (with minimal 
defects). These inspection procedures 
determine the type of inspection 
activities that FSIS personnel perform to 
verify compliance with specific 
regulatory requirements. The 11 
inspection procedure codes considered 
in the HIMP study are associated with 
procedures that FSIS inspection 
personnel perform to: 
• Verify an establishment’s 
compliance with the sanitation SOP 
regulations in 9 CFR 416.11–416.16 
(procedure codes 01A01, 01B01, 01B02, 
01C01, 01C02); 
• Verify compliance the HACCP 
regulations in 9 CFR part 417 
(procedure codes 03A01, 03J01, 03J02); 
• Verify compliance with relevant 
regulations for finished product 
standards (FPS) and good commercial 
practices (procedure code 04C04); 
• Verify compliance with generic E. 
coli testing requirements under 9 CFR 
381.91 (procedure code 05A01); and 
• Verify compliance with the 
Sanitation Performance Standards 
regulations in 9 CFR 416.1–416.6 
(procedure code 06D01). 
The HIMP Report compares the ratio 
of each inspection procedure performed 
per young chicken slaughter 
establishment for HIMP and non-HIMP 
establishments. The comparison shows 
that in CY2010, FSIS offline inspection 
personnel performed 1.6 times more 
offline inspection procedures in HIMP 
establishments than in non-HIMP 
establishments. These procedures 
include verifying compliance with both 
OCP- and food safety-related 
regulations. This increased level of 
offline inspection activities ensures that 
HIMP establishments are maintaining 
OCP and food safety defects at levels 
that are less than in non-HIMP 
establishments and thereby producing a 
safer product. 
Table 1 below presents the findings 
for each inspection procedure code. 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:33 Jan 26, 2012 Jkt 226001 PO 00000 Frm 00009 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\27JAP2.SGM 27JAP2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
4V
PT
VN
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
4416 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 18 / Friday, January 27, 2012 / Proposed Rules 
TABLE 1—CY2010 RATIOS OF INSPECTION PROCEDURES PER ESTABLISHMENT IN HIMP TO NON-HIMP 
Procedure code 
20 HIMP 
establishments 
(procedures/ 
establishment) 6 
64 Non-HIMP 
comparison 
establishments 
(procedures/ 
establishment) 
HIMP/Non-HIMP 
ratio 
Total ................................................................................................................................. 14135.9 8723.7 1.6 
Sanitation SOP verification procedures 
01A01 ............................................................................................................................... 3.4 3.7 0.9 
01B01 ............................................................................................................................... 140.3 148.7 0.9 
01B02 ............................................................................................................................... 98.0 110.9 0.9 
01C01 .............................................................................................................................. 259.2 272.5 1.0 
01C02 .............................................................................................................................. 294.8 299.0 1.0 
HACCP verification procedures 
03A01 ............................................................................................................................... 2.5 1.9 1.3 
03J01 ............................................................................................................................... 10296.1 3027.5 3.4 
03J02 ............................................................................................................................... 287.0 259.4 1.1 
FPS and good commercial practices verification procedures 
04C04 .............................................................................................................................. 2612.3 4447.4 0.6 
Generic E. Coli testing verification procedures 
05A01 ............................................................................................................................... 0.2 1.3 0.2 
Sanitation Performance Standards verification procedures 
06D01 .............................................................................................................................. 142.2 151.5 0.9 
The number of 04C04 inspections in 
HIMP establishments appears to be less 
than in non-HIMP establishments. 
However, the number of 04C04 
inspection procedures in HIMP and 
non-HIMP establishments is not directly 
comparable since they are counted 
differently. In HIMP establishments, 
during this procedure, a minimum of 2 
OCP 10 bird sample sets are conducted 
in a single shift and are counted as a 
single 04C04 inspection procedure. In 
non-HIMP plants, each 10 bird sample 
set is counted as a separate 04C04 
inspection procedure. 
d. Verification of the Establishment 
Executing Its Sanitation SOPs and Its 
HACCP System Under 9 CFR Parts 416 
and 417 
(1) Offline Inspection Procedures 
Performed 
The Sanitation SOP regulations in 9 
CFR 416 and the HACCP regulation in 
9 CFR 417 are among the regulations 
most strongly related to public health. 
There are eight inspection procedures 
associated with activities that FSIS 
inspectors perform to verify compliance 
with the Sanitation SOP and HACCP 
regulations. These are the inspection 
procedures with codes in the 01 series 
and 03 series presented in Table 1 
above. The HIMP Report found that in 
CY2010, FSIS inspectors performed 
approximately 2.8 more offline 
procedures to verify compliance with 
Sanitation SOP and HACCP regulatory 
requirements than inspectors did in 
non-HIMP establishments. 
The HIMP Report also compares the 
rate at which inspectors in HIMP 
establishments performed the HACCP 
3J01 procedure in HIMP establishments 
to the rate performed in non-HIMP 
establishments. The inspection 
activities under the 03J01 procedure 
include random verification of all 
HACCP requirements, and over 90 
percent of these activities involve 
verifying an establishment’s compliance 
with FSIS’s zero tolerance for visible 
fecal contamination. The HIMP Report 
found that in CY2010, inspectors in 
HIMP establishments performed 3.4 
more 03J01 procedures overall than 
inspectors in non-HIMP establishments 
(see Table 3 above). These data show 
that under HIMP, compared to non- 
HIMP inspection systems, inspectors are 
able to spend more time in prevention- 
oriented inspections, which better 
protects the public from foodborne 
disease. This increased level of 
inspection ensures that HIMP 
establishments continuously satisfy 
food safety performance standards and 
HACCP regulations and are maintaining 
OCP- and food safety defects at levels 
that are less than in non-HIMP 
establishments and thereby producing a 
safer product. 
(2) Public Health Related Non- 
Compliances 
For purposes of data analysis and for 
targeting FSIS resources, FSIS 
categorizes each of its regulatory 
requirements based on how strongly 
non-compliance with that regulation 
could adversely affect public health. 
The categories are ranked from zero to 
three, and the FSIS regulations that are 
most strongly related to public health 
are classified as category 3 regulations. 
Category 3 regulations are those that if 
in non-compliance are most likely to 
endanger public health. A non- 
compliance record or ‘‘NR’’ associated 
with a category 3 regulation is classified 
as a ‘‘W3 Non-compliance Record’’ or 
‘‘W3NR.’’ These are also referred to as 
‘‘health-related’’ NRs. 
The HIMP Report summarizes and 
compares the health-related NR rates by 
inspection procedure for HIMP and the 
control set of non-HIMP establishments 
for the 5 years of combined CY2006 to 
CY2010 data. The health-related NR rate 
for an inspection procedure is 
calculated by dividing the total number 
of health-related NRs associated with 
that inspection procedure by the total 
number of inspection procedures 
performed under that inspection 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:33 Jan 26, 2012 Jkt 226001 PO 00000 Frm 00010 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\27JAP2.SGM 27JAP2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
4V
PT
VN
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
4417 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 18 / Friday, January 27, 2012 / Proposed Rules 
procedure. The comparison shows that 
health-related NR rates at HIMP 
establishments are not statistically 
different or are statistically lower for all 
inspection procedures considered. This 
information is presented in Table 2 
below. These data demonstrate that 
HIMP establishments are satisfying all 
food safety, HACCP, and sanitation 
regulations designed to insure that 
establishments are producing safe 
product and wholesome products. 
TABLE 2—FIVE YEAR AVERAGE HEALTH-RELATED NR RATES FOR HIMP AND NON-HIMP BROILER ESTABLISHMENTS 
Proc Code 
HIMP broiler 
establishments 
(percent) 
Non-HIMP com-
parison broiler 
establishments 
(percent) 
01A01 ............................................................................................................................................................... 0.00 0.09 
01B01 ............................................................................................................................................................... 0.21 0.28 
01B02 ............................................................................................................................................................... 1.33 1.33 
01C01 .............................................................................................................................................................. 0.38 0.39 
01C02 .............................................................................................................................................................. 1.27 1.27 
03A01 ............................................................................................................................................................... 0.00 0.39 
03J01 ............................................................................................................................................................... 0.90 * 1.41 
03J02 ............................................................................................................................................................... 0.67 0.75 
05A01 ............................................................................................................................................................... 0.00 0.00 
06D01 .............................................................................................................................................................. 0.02 0.03 
* indicates a statistically significant difference at the 0.05 level. 
(3) Fecal Contamination: NRs 
Associated With Fecal Contamination 
The HIMP Report analyzes NR rates 
for visible fecal contamination in HIMP 
and non-HIMP comparison 
establishments for CY2006 to CY2010. 
Because visible fecal contamination is a 
hazard reasonably likely to occur, 
poultry slaughter establishments 
address visible fecal contamination in 
their HACCP plans. The visible fecal NR 
rate was computed as the total number 
of fecal contamination NRs divided by 
the sum of the number of the HACCP 
verification 03J01 and 03J02 procedures 
performed. This comparison found that 
fecal NR rates in HIMP establishments 
are statistically lower than those in both 
the control set of non-HIMP 
establishments and the all non-HIMP 
comparison set for all the years 
considered (see Table 3 below). This 
means that the rate of visible fecal 
material contamination in HIMP 
establishments is about half that of non- 
HIMP establishments. Thus, 
establishments operating under the 
HIMP inspection system had lower rates 
of visible fecal contamination than 
establishments operating under non- 
HIMP inspection systems. In slaughter 
establishments, fecal contamination of 
carcasses is the primary avenue for 
contamination by pathogens. Based on 
these data, HIMP establishments likely 
have lower levels of pathogens than 
non-HIMP establishments. The fecal NR 
rates are presented in Table 3 below. 
TABLE 3—FECAL NR RATES AT HIMP AND NON-HIMP COMPARISON ESTABLISHMENTS 
HIMP 
(percent) 
Non-HIMP 
comparison 
establishments 
(percent) 
All Non-HIMP 
establishments 
(percent) 
2006 ................................................................................................................................. 0.70 1.10 1.07 
2007 ................................................................................................................................. 0.59 1.21 1.17 
2008 ................................................................................................................................. 0.67 1.25 1.26 
2009 ................................................................................................................................. 0.65 1.25 1.20 
2010 ................................................................................................................................. 0.73 1.49 1.40 
Additional analysis conducted on the 
fecal NR rates in HIMP and non-HIMP 
establishments shows that that fecal NR 
rates in HIMP establishments are 
independent of production volume. 
The HIMP Report also evaluates the 
effect of line speeds on fecal NR rates 
and found no statistical difference in 
either total fecal NR counts or fecal NR 
rates between establishments with 
different line speeds. 
e. Verification of the Outcomes of the 
Establishment Process Control Plan, 
Both Organoleptic and Microbiologic 
(1) Food Safety Performance Standards 
As discussed above, for the HIMP 
study, FSIS developed food safety 
performance standards for septicemic/ 
toxemic animal conditions and visible 
fecal contamination. These performance 
standards allow the Agency to compare 
performance between HIMP and non- 
HIMP establishments in meeting the 
zero tolerance standard for these 
conditions. The HIMP Report compares 
the findings of the offline FSIS 
verification inspectors (VIs) for the 2- 
year period April 1, 2009, to March 31, 
2011, with the HIMP performance 
standards. The HIMP Report calculates 
the FSIS offline VI detection rates for 
carcasses affected with septicemia/ 
toxemia or contaminated with visible 
fecal material by dividing the number 
affected carcasses identified by the VIs 
by the total number of carcasses 
examined by the VI. The total number 
of carcasses examined by VIs in HIMP 
establishments is 4 times greater than 
the number examined by offline 
inspectors in non-HIMP establishments. 
The findings of the VIs verification 
checks show that fewer than 8 per 1 
million carcasses (0.0008 percent) 
processed in HIMP establishments were 
found to have septicemia/toxemia. This 
rate is 125 times lower than the HIMP 
performance standard of 0.1% of the 
carcasses processed. The data also show 
that fewer than 0.8 per thousand 
carcasses (0.08 percent) processed in 
HIMP establishments were found to 
have visible fecal contamination, which 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:33 Jan 26, 2012 Jkt 226001 PO 00000 Frm 00011 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\27JAP2.SGM 27JAP2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
4V
PT
VN
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
4418 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 18 / Friday, January 27, 2012 / Proposed Rules 
is about 19 times lower than the HIMP performance standard. These findings 
are presented in Table 4 below. 
TABLE 4—HIMP ACHIEVEMENT OF FOOD SAFETY PERFORMANCE STANDARDS AT YOUNG CHICKEN ESTABLISHMENTS 
Defect categories 
HIMP performance 
standards 
(% of carcasses) 
HIMP establishment 
performance based 
on FSIS offline in-
spector verification 
checks 
(% of carcasses) 
Septicemia/Toxemia ................................................................................................................................ * 0.1% 0.0008% (±0.002%) 
Range 0.0–0.008% 
Visible fecal contamination ...................................................................................................................... * 1.5% 0.08% (±0.05%) 
Range 0.008– 
0.17% 
* FSIS has a zero tolerance policy for Septicemia/Toxemia and Visible Fecal Contamination. 
Period of data collection: April 1, 2009 through March 31, 2011. 
(2) OCP Performance Standards 
As discussed in the appendix to this 
proposal, FSIS developed OCP 
performance standards based on a 
tightening of the existing FPS for 
removable animal diseases and trim and 
dressing defects. The OCP performance 
standards allow the Agency to compare 
the performance of HIMP and non-HIMP 
establishments in addressing these non- 
food safety defects. The Agency 
collected data on the number and type 
of OCP defects identified by the FSIS 
offline VIs from January 1, 2009, 
through December 31, 2010, and 
compared them with the corresponding 
OCP HIMP performance standard. A 
comparison of young chicken HIMP 
establishment performance with OCP 
HIMP performance standards is 
presented in Table 5 below. 
TABLE 5—HIMP ACHIEVEMENT OF OCP PERFORMANCE STANDARDS AT YOUNG CHICKEN ESTABLISHMENTS 
Performance stand-
ards based on non- 
HIMP inspection 
(% of carcasses) 
HIMP establishment 
performance based 
on FSIS inspector 
verification checks 
(% of carcasses) 
OCP 1 ...................................................................................................................................................... 1.7% 0.38% (±0.36%) 
Condition—Animal Diseases (e.g., airsacculitis) ............................................................................. Range 0.0–1.25% 
OCP 2 ...................................................................................................................................................... 52.5% 34.1% ± 9.3% 
Condition—Miscellaneous (e.g., bruises, sores, and other processing defects) ............................ Range 18.2–49.9% 
OCP 3 ...................................................................................................................................................... 18.6% 6.3% ± 4.3% 
Contamination—Digestive Content (non-fecal) (e.g., ingesta) ........................................................ Range 0.25–15.2% 
OCP 4 ...................................................................................................................................................... 80.0% 66.4% ± 10.4% 
Dressing Defects—Other (e.g., feathers) ........................................................................................ Range 41.2–80.2% 
OCP 5 ...................................................................................................................................................... 20.8% 9.8% ± 4.0% 
Dressing Defects—Digestive Tract Tissue (e.g., bursa, cloaca) ..................................................... Range 3.2—15.8% 
Period of data collection: CY2009 through CY2010. 
The data show that OCP defects 
identified on carcasses processed in 
HIMP establishments average about half 
the corresponding OCP HIMP 
performance standard. The analysis 
found no statistically significant 
difference in OCP2–OCP5 rates between 
HIMP establishments with different line 
speeds. This shows that these 
establishments are effectively 
addressing OCP standards. 
(3) Salmonella Positive Rates 
The HIMP Report compares the 
Salmonella percent positive rates for 
HIMP young chicken slaughter 
establishments and the control set of 64 
non-HIMP establishments for the years 
CY2006 to CY2010. This comparison is 
presented in Table 6. 
TABLE 6—Salmonella PERCENT POSITIVE RATES FOR HIMP AND NON-HIMP BROILER ESTABLISHMENTS 
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 
20 HIMP Broiler Establishments ...................... 9.0% 5.8% 4.2% 4.9% 4.7% 
64 Non-HIMP Comparison Broiler Establish-
ments ............................................................ 10.8% 8.5% 7.3% 4.3% 4.0% 
176 All Non-HIMP Broiler Establishments ....... 11.1% 8.1% 7.6% 6.8% 4.7% 
Analysis of these rates found that in 
CY2006–CY2008 the Salmonella 
positive rate in HIMP establishments 
was statistically significantly lower than 
in the non-HIMP comparison set and 
that the difference in CY2009 and 
CY2010 was not statistically significant. 
The Salmonella positive rate in HIMP 
establishments was statistically 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:33 Jan 26, 2012 Jkt 226001 PO 00000 Frm 00012 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\27JAP2.SGM 27JAP2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
4V
PT
VN
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
4419 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 18 / Friday, January 27, 2012 / Proposed Rules 
7 GAO, 2001. Food Safety: Weaknesses in Meat 
and Poultry Inspection Pilot Should Be Addressed 
Before Implementation, http://www.gao.gov/ 
new.items/d0259.pdf. 
significantly lower than in the all non- 
HIMP comparison set for CY2006 to 
CY2009. There was no statistically 
significant difference in CY2010, which 
most likely reflects the effects of the 
Salmonella initiatives that FSIS 
implemented in 2006 to reverse the 
multi-year trend of persistently higher 
percent positive rates for Salmonella 
detected through FSIS’s HACCP 
verification testing each year. As a result 
of these initiatives, the entire industry 
was forced to reduce the incidence of 
positive Salmonella results, particularly 
those establishments with the highest 
Salmonella positive rates. 
The analysis in the HIMP Report also 
found that, after adjusting for 
production volume, the difference in the 
Salmonella positive rate between 
establishments with different line 
speeds is not statistically significant. 
This analysis is based on the 10 HIMP 
establishments with Salmonella testing 
during CY2010. The line speeds for 
these 10 establishments ranged from 
annual average of 98 to 162 birds per 
minute. 
f. Conclusion 
Based on its evaluation of the HIMP 
study, FSIS has concluded that 
establishments operating under the 
HIMP inspection system performed 
better than establishments operating 
under non-HIMP inspection systems 
with respect to rates of food safety and 
OCP defects. Also, fecal contamination 
rates and Salmonella positive rates are 
lower in HIMP than in non-HIMP 
establishments. HIMP establishments 
have higher compliance with sanitation 
SOP and HACCP prevention 
regulations. Based on the data discussed 
in the HIMP Report, FSIS has concluded 
that more offline food safety inspections 
results in greater compliance with 
sanitation and HACCP regulations and 
birds with lower levels of fecal and 
Salmonella contamination. In aggregate, 
the findings support that the HIMP 
inspection system results in public 
health benefits, allows FSIS to conduct 
inspection more efficiently, and ensures 
that HIMP inspectors perform in a 
manner that properly enables them to 
inspect each carcass. 
2. 2001 Government Accountability 
Office Report on HIMP 
On December 17, 2001, the 
Government Accountability Office 
(‘‘GAO’’) issued a report on HIMP 
entitled ‘‘Food Safety: Weaknesses in 
Meat and Poultry Inspection Pilot 
Should Be Addressed Before 
Implementation.’’ 7 The following 
describes FSIS’s current thinking 
regarding the GAO’s 2001 
recommendations for executive action 
that that specifically pertain to elements 
of this proposed rule. FSIS requests 
comment on these aspects of the 
proposed rule. 
1. GAO recommended that only 
establishments with a good history of 
regulatory compliance be eligible to 
participate in the inspection program. 
Response: The GAO recommendation 
was made in the context of HIMP as a 
pilot program. The pilot program is now 
completed and FSIS has conducted a 
comprehensive evaluation of the HIMP 
inspection system, which is described 
in the HIMP Report. Thus, FSIS believes 
that this gradation among 
establishments recommended by GAO is 
no longer relevant to the 
implementation of the New Poultry 
Inspection System. 
2. GAO recommended that 
establishments operating under the new 
inspection system be required to 
implement statistical process controls to 
manage and control production and that 
FSIS monitor and verify the efficacy of 
these systems. 
Response: FSIS believes that 
statistical process control (‘‘SPC’’) 
systems, which help to determine 
whether an establishment’s production 
processes are performing within 
established performance standards with 
regard to non-food-safety related 
defects, are effective tools for 
establishments to use to manage and 
control their production. However, 
instead of specifically mandating the 
use of SPC in this proposal, FSIS is 
proposing to allow establishments 
operating under the new inspection 
system to implement the process 
controls that they have determined will 
best allow them to produce ready-to- 
cook poultry that is wholesome and not 
adulterated. FSIS is proposing that the 
establishments document that they are 
meeting the standard for ready-to-cook 
poultry. Establishments could, but 
would not be required to, use SPC 
systems to meet this requirement. FSIS 
expects that most establishments will 
choose to use SPC systems as part of 
their effort to meet this requirement, but 
the Agency believes that it is more 
appropriate and more in keeping with 
HACCP requirements to provide each 
establishment the flexibility to 
determine how best to meet the 
requirement within the context of its 
unique production environment. 
3. GAO recommended that FSIS, in 
conjunction with industry, develop a 
training and certification program for 
establishment sorting activities, and that 
only trained and certified establishment 
personnel be permitted to perform these 
duties. 
Response: FSIS agrees that proper 
training is important to establishment 
sorters’ ability to make accurate 
decisions on how to address animal 
disease conditions and trim and 
dressing defects. If sorters do not make 
these decisions correctly, inspection 
personnel will be required to take 
actions such as stopping the production 
line to remove contaminated carcasses, 
issuing non-compliance records, and 
directing the establishment to reduce 
the line speed to ensure that the 
establishment is able to maintain 
process control, and that inspectors are 
able to conduct a proper inspection. 
Training of sorters is vitally important 
to ensure that sorting procedures are 
properly performed. Lack of effective 
sorter training would cause FSIS to 
initiate action to ensure that plant 
employees are properly trained. 
FSIS is not proposing to require 
specific, formalized sorter training. 
However, FSIS will develop guidance 
documents to assist establishments in 
the training of their sorters. The Agency 
intends to post draft guidance materials 
on the FSIS Web site and announce the 
availability of such materials in the 
Federal Register and through the FSIS 
Constituent Update. The Agency will 
seek public comment on these draft 
materials to inform the development of 
the final guidance documents to ensure 
they are as useful as possible. The 
Agency will make the final guidance 
documents available to the public on 
the FSIS Web site before the final rule 
resulting from this proposal becomes 
effective. The guidance that the Agency 
is planning to develop would be based 
on the training that FSIS provides to on- 
line inspection personnel that are 
responsible for sorting carcasses under 
the existing inspection system. Under 
this proposed rule, establishments 
would have the flexibility to select the 
training program that best assist them to 
meet the requirements of this proposed 
rule. 
D. Public Health Benefits Projected 
From Allocating More Inspection 
Resources to Food Safety-Related 
Inspection Activities 
1. Risk Assessment 
In June 2011, FSIS completed a 
quantitative risk assessment to 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:33 Jan 26, 2012 Jkt 226001 PO 00000 Frm 00013 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\27JAP2.SGM 27JAP2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
4V
PT
VN
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
4420 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 18 / Friday, January 27, 2012 / Proposed Rules 
8 The prevalence of Salmonella on young 
chickens came from the USDA/FSIS Salmonella 
PR/HACCP verification testing program from July 
2007 to September 2010 and the most recent young 
chicken baseline study (2007–2008). Data for 
prevalence of Campylobacter on young chickens 
came from the young chicken baseline study (2007– 
2008). Data for inspection procedures performed in 
an establishment came from the FSIS performance- 
based inspection system (PBIS) data base (July 
2007–September 2010). Data for turkey 
establishments comprise results of the FSIS ‘‘Young 
Turkey Baseline’’ (August 2008 through July 2009, 
9) and PR/HACCP Salmonella verification program 
(July 2007 through September 2010). 
determine how performing a greater 
number of sanitation, sampling, and 
other offline inspection procedures in 
young chicken and turkey slaughter 
establishments might affect the number 
of human illnesses from Salmonella and 
Campylobacter. These offline inspection 
procedures primarily involve activities 
that FSIS inspection personnel perform 
to verify the effectiveness of 
establishment sanitary operations and 
other health and safety-related 
activities. The HIMP Report, discussed 
above, found that FSIS inspectors 
performed more offline inspections to 
verify compliance with Sanitation SOP 
and HACCP regulations in HIMP 
establishments than they do in in non- 
HIMP establishments. The risk 
assessment is available for viewing by 
the public in the FSIS docket room and 
on the FSIS Web site at: http://www.fsis.
usda.gov/regulations_&_policies/
Proposed_Rules/index.asp. 
FSIS developed the risk assessment to 
help the Agency determine how it could 
help reduce risks to public health 
associated with processed poultry by 
improving its approach to inspection. 
To give the Agency the information it 
needed, the risk assessment focused on 
four risk management questions: (1) Can 
FSIS redeploy its inspection activities 
within official establishments without 
causing an increased prevalence of 
microbial pathogens in the 
establishments? (2) Will redeploying 
inspectors to offline duties have an 
effect on the prevalence of microbial 
pathogens, and hence on human illness? 
(3) Where in a poultry establishment 
will redeployed inspection activities 
have the greatest effect in reducing the 
prevalence of microbial pathogens and 
thus, in reducing human illness? (4) 
What is the quantitative uncertainty of 
the pathogen prevalence and illness 
reductions? 
2. Model 
FSIS developed a risk assessment 
model for examining relationships 
between current variations in inspection 
personnel assignments and prevalence 
of Salmonella and Campylobacter on 
young chicken and turkey carcasses and 
subsequent human illnesses attributable 
to those pathogens. FSIS paired 
inspection data with Salmonella and 
Campylobacter prevalence data for the 
same establishments and timeframes.8 
FSIS employed a stochastic 
simulation model using multi-variable 
logistic regressions to identify 
correlations between the numbers of 
offline food-safety inspection 
procedures, both scheduled and 
unscheduled, along with numbers of 
non-compliances and scheduled-but- 
not-completed procedures, and 
contamination of poultry with 
Salmonella or Campylobacter. 
(Scheduled procedures are assigned to 
inspectors at an establishment by the 
Agency’s automated management 
system. Unscheduled procedures are 
performed according to inspector needs 
at an establishment and may include 
fecal checks for compliance with the 
zero-tolerance requirement, or they may 
be a response to unforeseen hazards or 
unsanitary conditions arising from 
sanitation SOP failures, or the need to 
verify corrective actions taken under the 
establishment’s HACCP plan.) The 
correlations were used to predict the 
effect that devoting more resources to 
these procedures would have on human 
illness attributable to the consumption 
of young chicken. Stochastic 
simulations were used to account for 
uncertainty in the estimates relating 
inspection procedures in an 
establishment to detection of 
Salmonella and Campylobacter in 
poultry. Illness estimates were based on 
CDC data, and uncertainty distributions 
were used to account for the variability 
in annual Salmonella and 
Campylobacter illnesses and 
uncertainty about the relationship 
between the pathogen prevalence levels 
at the establishments and the 
corresponding annual number of 
illnesses that could be attributed to the 
pathogens. 
3. Conclusions of the Risk Assessment 
The results of the risk assessment 
show that redeployment of Agency 
resources from on-line inspection 
activities to unscheduled off-line 
activities to verify compliance with 
Sanitation SOPs, HACCP requirements, 
and other requirements that are 
important to food safety, is correlated 
with lower prevalence of carcasses 
contaminated with Salmonella and 
Campylobacter and may result in a 
reduction in the number of human 
illnesses. 
Regarding the first risk-management 
question, the risk assessment showed 
that establishments with more 
unscheduled offline inspection 
activities have lower Salmonella and 
Campylobacter prevalence than 
establishments with fewer unscheduled 
offline activities. The assessment also 
suggested that there may be fewer 
illnesses attributable to both Salmonella 
and Campylobacter when additional 
unscheduled offline inspection 
procedures are performed. 
In answer to the second risk- 
management question, the lower 
prevalence of Salmonella and 
Campylobacter on poultry at 
establishments where additional 
unscheduled offline procedures were 
performed could lead to as many as 
4286 fewer Salmonella-related illnesses 
and 986 fewer Campylobacter-related 
illnesses per year. FSIS has estimated 
that 174,686 expected annual 
Salmonella illnesses could be attributed 
to both young chicken and turkey 
consumption, and an estimated 169,005 
expected annual Campylobacter 
illnesses attributable to young chicken 
or turkey consumption. Thus, a 
reduction of 4,286 expected Salmonella 
illnesses annually, reflects a 2.5% 
reduction in attributable illnesses. A 
reduction of 986 expected 
Campylobacter illnesses annually 
reflects a 0.6% reduction in attributable 
illnesses. 
Responding to the third question, the 
risk assessment showed that the greatest 
effect on Salmonella and Campylobacter 
prevalence and related illness would 
occur when inspection activities were 
concentrated on increased unscheduled 
off-line procedures. These could include 
additional unscheduled sanitation 
procedures, additional unscheduled 
sampling procedures, or additional 
unscheduled HACCP procedures. 
In answer to the fourth risk- 
management question, on the 
uncertainty of the results for pathogen 
prevalence and illness reductions, FSIS 
analysts reflected the uncertainty of 
illness estimates by reporting not only 
expected values but also the upper and 
lower bounds of an 80-percent 
confidence band around the estimates. 
Thus, for example, they calculated the 
annual averted Salmonella illnesses to 
be as few as 1514 and as many as 7682, 
and the averted Campylobacter illnesses 
as few as 26 and as many as 2865. Table 
7 presents total estimated reductions in 
human illnesses relating to increased 
offline inspection procedures. 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:33 Jan 26, 2012 Jkt 226001 PO 00000 Frm 00014 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\27JAP2.SGM 27JAP2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
4V
PT
VN
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
4421 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 18 / Friday, January 27, 2012 / Proposed Rules 
TABLE 7—TOTAL POTENTIAL REDUCTIONS IN ANNUAL HUMAN ILLNESSES RELATING TO BETTER OFFLINE INSPECTION 
PROCEDURE PERFORMANCE IN YOUNG CHICKEN AND TURKEY SLAUGHTER ESTABLISHMENTS 
What happens if unscheduled offline inspection proce-
dures increase in young chicken and turkey 
establishments? 1 
Expected value 
Confidence interval 
10th% 90th% 
Annual Salmonella illnesses prevented ........................................................................... 4286 1514 7682 
Annual Campylobacter illnesses prevented .................................................................... 986 26 2865 
1 Risk assessment scenario assumes that all unscheduled inspection activities could change by as little as no increase to as much as a 60% 
increase. 
III. Proposed New Poultry Inspection 
System for Young Chickens and 
Turkeys 
A. Replacement of SIS, NELS, and NTIS 
With the New Poultry Inspection System 
Based on the Agency’s experience 
under HIMP and the improved 
performance related to food safety and 
non-food-safety standards and 
especially in reducing pathogen levels, 
FSIS is proposing to eliminate SIS, 
NELS, and NTIS and to replace them 
with the New Poultry Inspection 
System. All young chicken and turkey 
slaughter establishments would be 
required to operate under either the new 
inspection system or the traditional 
inspection system. 
Establishments that slaughter classes 
of poultry other than young chickens 
and turkeys would be permitted to 
operate under the New Poultry 
Inspection System under a waiver 
through the SIP. FSIS would consider 
the data collected in poultry slaughter 
establishments operating under a SIP 
waiver to determine whether to expand 
the New Poultry Inspection System to 
other classes of poultry. 
B. Carcass Sorting and Online Carcass 
Inspection 
Under the new inspection system, 
establishments will be required to sort 
carcasses, to dispose of carcasses that 
must be condemned, and to conduct any 
necessary trimming or reprocessing 
activities before carcasses are presented 
to the online FSIS carcass inspector. 
After these sorting activities have been 
completed, the online carcass inspector 
will conduct a carcass-by-carcass 
inspection before the carcasses enter the 
chiller. If the online carcass inspector 
observes any food safety defects on any 
of the carcasses, such as the presence of 
septicemic or toxemic animal disease or 
fecal material, he or she will stop the 
line to prevent the contaminated carcass 
from entering the chiller. Under this 
new inspection system, the inspector 
will not restart the line until 
establishment personnel have removed 
the contaminated carcass from the line. 
The online carcass inspector will notify 
the inspector-in-charge if the presence 
of excessive food safety related or non- 
food-safety related conditions, poor 
presentation of carcass for inspection by 
the carcass inspector, or other 
indications that there may be a loss of 
process control. Under such conditions, 
the inspector-in-charge will take 
appropriate remedial action and will be 
authorized to require that the 
establishment slow the line speed. 
Establishments’ responsibility for 
carcass sorting under the proposed new 
inspection system would include 
removing carcasses that exhibit 
septicemic and toxemic conditions from 
the processing line. Carcasses that 
exhibit septicemic and toxemic 
conditions are likely to contain 
infectious agents, such as bacteria, 
virus, richettsia, fungus, protozoa, or 
helminth organisms, which can be 
transmitted to humans. For this reason, 
they present a food safety risk if they are 
permitted to enter the chiller. 
Because establishments operating 
under the proposed new inspection 
system would be required to identify 
and remove carcasses affected by 
septicemic and toxemic conditions 
before FSIS carcass inspection, FSIS is 
proposing that establishments under the 
new system address, as part of their 
HACCP plan, or sanitation SOP, or other 
prerequisite program, procedures for 
ensuring that septicemic and toxemic 
carcasses are prevented from entering 
the chiller. These procedures must 
cover, at a minimum, establishment 
sorting activities for these conditions. 
Under this proposal, FSIS would 
maintain its zero tolerance for 
septicemic and toxemic carcasses. 
Carcasses exhibiting septicemic and 
toxemic conditions would be 
condemned, if not removed by the 
establishment, by the online carcass 
inspector, as under the existing 
regulations (9 CFR 381.83). A 
noncompliance record (NR) would be 
issued for every carcass affected by 
septicemia and toxemia that reaches the 
online carcass inspection station. 
Moreover, because establishments 
would be required to address this food 
safety hazard in their HACCP plan, or 
sanitation SOP, or other prerequisite 
programs, the Agency continuously 
would assess the effectiveness of an 
establishment’s HACCP system if FSIS 
inspection personnel observed 
septicemic or toxemic carcasses. 
Under the proposed new inspection 
system, because the online carcass 
inspector will be positioned 
immediately before the chiller and will 
not conduct a carcass inspection until 
after sorting, trimming, and reprocessing 
has been completed by establishment 
employees, viscera will not be presented 
together with the carcasses as in the 
current inspection systems. FSIS has 
determined that not presenting the 
viscera will not prevent the online 
carcass inspector from ensuring that all 
carcasses are unadulterated and 
wholesome. With the exception of one 
condition, i.e., visceral leukosis, 
observing the outside of the carcass is 
sufficient to determine whether the 
carcass should be condemned. 
Systemically affected carcasses are 
darker in color from dehydration and 
hemorrhaging and may be smaller or 
have less body fat because of 
inappetence or increased metabolic rate. 
There may be an obvious cause of the 
systemic involvement such as a large 
tumor, bruise, or infected joint. 
Although observing the viscera provides 
additional assurance that the decision to 
condemn is correct and may help 
determine the specific category for 
recording the reason for condemnation, 
observing the viscera is not required to 
identify the presence of a condemnable 
condition, with the exception of visceral 
leukosis. 
Avian visceral leukosis can only be 
detected by observing the viscera. Avian 
visceral leukosis, a rare manifestation of 
the viral disease leukosis, is not 
transmissible to humans and does not 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:33 Jan 26, 2012 Jkt 226001 PO 00000 Frm 00015 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\27JAP2.SGM 27JAP2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
4V
PT
VN
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
4422 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 18 / Friday, January 27, 2012 / Proposed Rules 
present a human health concern. 
However, it may render poultry 
unwholesome or otherwise unfit for 
human food. 
Avian leukosis can be identified by 
observing the viscera of the first 300 
birds of each flock because if avian 
visceral leukosis is present, it will be 
present throughout the entire flock. In 
general, a flock constitutes birds raised 
under similar circumstances on the 
same premises. It is common 
commercial practice to vaccinate each 
flock of chickens for viral leukosis. 
Nationwide data from 1984 revealed 
that all forms of leukosis (skin, visceral, 
other viral leukoses) resulted in the 
condemnation of 0.017 percent of the 
approximately 7.4 billion young 
chickens slaughtered. On rare occasions, 
the vaccine is not effective. If it is not, 
visceral leukosis is present on a flock 
basis. Accordingly, FSIS is proposing 
that an offline inspector will observe the 
viscera of the first 300 birds slaughtered 
of each young chicken flock under the 
New Poultry Inspection System to 
determine whether the disease is 
present in the flock. FSIS has followed 
this practice in young chicken HIMP 
establishments, and it has been shown 
to be effective. (See HIMP Report, 
available for viewing by the public in 
the FSIS docket room and on the FSIS 
Web site at: http://www.fsis.usda.gov/ 
regulations_&_policies/Proposed_Rules/ 
index.asp). Turkeys do not typically 
display liver lesions associate with 
leukosis, therefore, the 300 bird viscera 
check is not performed on turkeys. 
To allow FSIS to properly inspect 
viscera for avian leukosis, FSIS is 
proposing to require that establishments 
that slaughter young chickens notify the 
FSIS IIC prior to the slaughter of each 
new flock. Under this proposed rule, if 
the inspector identifies a carcass 
affected with visceral leukosis, he or she 
may expand the sample beyond 300 
birds. The decision to designate a flock 
as leukosis positive would be made by 
the FSIS inspector-in-charge (IIC). In 
case of a positive flock, the IIC would 
position an inspector to inspect each 
viscera for visceral leukosis only, at a 
location where viscera and carcass can 
be identified together. This activity 
would be for the duration of the 
slaughter of the flock. 
C. Offline Verification Inspection 
In addition to the online carcass 
inspector, FSIS is proposing that one 
offline verification inspector be assigned 
for each evisceration line in 
establishments operating under the New 
Poultry Inspection System. As in HIMP, 
verification inspectors under the new 
inspection system will conduct food 
safety related inspection activities and 
will continuously monitor and evaluate 
establishment process control. 
Verification inspectors will conduct 
inspection activities including HACCP, 
sanitation SOP, and other prerequisite 
program verification procedures; 
verification checks for septicemia and 
toxemia, and fecal contamination; 
checks to verify and ensure that sanitary 
dressing requirements are being met; 
ante-mortem inspection; and sample 
collection for pathogen testing. The 
offline verification inspector will work 
with the inspector-in-charge to ensure 
that food safety related or non-food- 
safety related conditions do not impair 
the online carcass inspector’s ability to 
conduct the inspection of each carcass 
or will notify the inspector-in-charge 
whenever circumstances indicate a loss 
of process control. Under such 
conditions, the inspector-in-charge will 
take appropriate remedial action and 
will be authorized to require that the 
establishment slow the line speed. 
D. Finished Product Standards To Be 
Replaced With Requirement That 
Establishments Maintain Records To 
Document That the Products Resulting 
From Their Slaughter Operations Meet 
the Definition of Ready-to-Cook Poultry 
1. Establishment Requirements 
FSIS is proposing to eliminate SIS, 
NELS, and NTIS, which would include 
eliminating the current ‘‘Finished 
Product Standards’’ (FPS) under 9 CFR 
381.76 that address trim and dressing 
defects. FSIS is proposing to replace 
these FPS with a requirement that 
establishments operating under the New 
Poultry Inspection System document 
that the products resulting from their 
slaughter operations meet the definition 
of ready-to-cook poultry. 
FPS are criteria applied to processed 
birds before and after chill to ensure 
that the product being produced is 
consistently wholesome and 
unadulterated. The FPS address defects 
that are less important to food safety 
than conditions such as septicemia/ 
toxemia or visible fecal contamination. 
However, the conditions addressed in 
the FPS may render a carcass 
unwholesome or adulterated. 
Ready-to-cook poultry is ‘‘* * * any 
slaughtered poultry free from protruding 
pinfeathers and vestigial feathers (hair 
or down) from which the head, feed 
crop, oil gland, trachea, esophagus, 
entrails, and lungs have been removed, 
and from which the mature 
reproductive organs and kidneys may 
have been removed, and with or without 
giblets, and which is suitable for 
cooking without need for further 
processing’’ (9 CFR 381.1). All poultry 
slaughter establishments are required to 
prepare all eviscerated carcasses as 
‘‘ready-to-cook poultry’’ (9 CFR 
381.76(a)). Carcasses affected with 
removable animal diseases or that 
contain numerous trim and dressing 
defects are not ‘‘suitable for cooking 
without the need for further 
processing,’’ and thus do not meet the 
definition for ready-to-cook poultry. 
Examples of removable animal 
diseases include airsacculitis, arthritis, 
ascites, avian leukosis complex, avian 
tuberculosis, cadaver, enteritis, 
erysipelas, generalized inflammatory 
process, generalized keratoacanthomas, 
neoplasms, nephritis, osteomyelitis, 
pericarditis, salpingitis, tenosynovitis, 
and tumors (e.g., carcinoma or sarcoma). 
Although these conditions are less 
important to food safety than conditions 
such as septicemic/toxemic carcasses or 
visible fecal contamination do, they do 
render carcasses unwholesome and 
unfit for human food at levels above 
those provided for in the regulations. 
Moreover, under 9 CFR 381.81–90, 
carcasses and parts affected with these 
conditions must be condemned unless 
the condition can be removed. 
Examples of trim and dressing defects 
include extraneous material, such as, 
feathers, lung, oil gland, trachea, and 
bile; digestive tract tissue defects, such 
as bursa of fabricius, cloaca, crop, 
esophagus, and intestine; non-fecal 
digestive content contamination, such 
as ingesta; and other miscellaneous 
defects, such as breast blisters, bruises, 
external mutilation, fractures, overscald, 
scabs, trimable keratoacanthomas, and 
localized inflammatory process. Like 
removable animal diseases, poultry 
carcasses or parts that contain a large 
number of trim or dressing defects 
would not be ‘‘suitable for cooking 
without the need for further processing’’ 
and therefore would not meet the 
definition of ready-to-cook poultry. 
As discussed above, under HIMP, 
removable animal diseases and trim and 
dressing defects addressed in the FPS 
are referred to as ‘‘OCPs.’’ There are five 
categories of OCPs addressing 
removable animal diseases and various 
types of trim and dressing defects that 
account for 29 specific defects 
addressed under the existing FPS. 
To develop the OCP categories FSIS 
first determined baseline performance 
levels for establishments operating 
under the FPS. To do this, a private 
consulting firm, Research Triangle 
Institute, collected thousands of 
samples from 16 young chicken 
slaughter establishments operating 
under the existing inspection systems. 
The sampled carcasses had passed FSIS 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:33 Jan 26, 2012 Jkt 226001 PO 00000 Frm 00016 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\27JAP2.SGM 27JAP2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
4V
PT
VN
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
4423 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 18 / Friday, January 27, 2012 / Proposed Rules 
online inspection, undergone trimming 
by establishment personnel to remove 
visible defects, and been determined by 
FSIS offline inspectors to be in 
compliance with the FPS. As such, 
these carcasses were suitable for 
cooking without the need for further 
processing, and thus met the definition 
of ready-to-cook poultry. 
FSIS ranked the 16 establishments 
based on their performance under each 
of the five OCP categories. The 
performance standard for each OCP 
category was then established based on 
the performance level of the 
establishment representing the 75th 
percentile for that category (i.e., the 
performance level of the fourth-best 
performing establishment of each 
category). Thus, the OCP performance 
standards represent a reduction from the 
highest prevalence of defects found in 
ready-to-cook poultry that had passed 
the FPS. 
Data collected from young chicken 
and turkey establishments operating 
under HIMP show that for the two year 
period CY2009 through CY2010, HIMP 
establishments maintained OCP defect 
levels that average about half the 
corresponding OCP performance 
standards derived from the performance 
of non-HIMP establishments. Thus, the 
data show that establishments operating 
under both HIMP and non-HIMP 
inspection systems perform well in 
controlling for OCP defects, but that 
establishments operating under the 
HIMP system do exceptionally well. 
Accordingly, FSIS has concluded that it 
is not necessary to adopt prescriptive 
OCP requirements as a condition for 
establishments to participate in the New 
Poultry Inspection System. Under this 
proposal, establishments operating 
under the New Poultry Inspection 
System will be allowed to implement 
the process controls that they have 
determined will best allow them to 
produce ready-to-cook poultry that is 
wholesome and not adulterated. 
Under this proposed rule, 
establishments will have the flexibility 
to design and implement measures to 
address OCP defects that are best suited 
to their operations. They will also be 
responsible for determining the type of 
records that will best document that 
they are meeting the ready-to-cook 
poultry definition. FSIS expects that 
most establishments will implement 
some type of statistical process control 
to address removable animal diseases 
and trim and dressing defects and use 
the statistical control charts associated 
with such procedures to document that 
the resulting products are ready-to-cook 
poultry. 
If they choose to do so, establishments 
operating under the New Poultry 
Inspection System could incorporate 
procedures to address removable animal 
diseases and trim and dressing defects 
into their HACCP plans, or sanitation 
SOPs, or other prerequisite programs, 
and rely on the records generated under 
these programs to document that the 
resulting products are ready-to-cook 
poultry. Establishments would most 
likely address these defects in their 
sanitation SOPs or other prerequisite 
programs. However, an establishment 
could address these defects in its 
HACCP plan if its hazard analysis 
determined that one or more of these 
removable diseases presented a food 
safety hazard. Establishments could also 
address removable animal diseases and 
trim and dressing defects as part of a 
quality control program and rely on the 
records generated under that program to 
document that they are meeting the 
ready-to-cook poultry definition. 
2. FSIS Verification 
Under this proposed rule, FSIS would 
verify that an establishment’s poultry 
products comply with the ready-to-cook 
poultry definition by reviewing the 
records maintained by the establishment 
to document that its products are ready- 
to-cook poultry. In addition to 
inspecting for food safety defects, the 
FSIS on-line carcass inspector will also 
inspect carcasses for trim and dressing 
defects and removable animal diseases. 
The presence of persistent, unattended 
trim and dressing defects or removable 
animal diseases would indicate that the 
plant is not producing ready-to-cook 
poultry. Furthermore, an 
establishment’s inability to consistently 
produce product that meets the ready- 
to-cook poultry definitions may indicate 
a general lack of control in an 
establishment’s overall slaughter and 
dressing process. Thus, if the 
establishment or FSIS inspection 
personnel observe the presence of 
persistent, unattended removable 
animal diseases or trim and dressing 
defects on poultry carcasses or parts, 
FSIS would require the establishment to 
take appropriate actions to ensure that 
it is operating under conditions needed 
to produce safe, wholesome, and 
unadulterated products. Under this 
proposal, if inspection personnel see 
evidence that an establishment is not 
producing products that meet the 
definition of ready-to-cook poultry, then 
inspector-in-charge would be authorized 
to require that the establishment reduce 
its line speed and remedy the defects. 
E. Maximum Line Speeds Under the 
New Poultry Inspection System 
Based on FSIS’s experience under 
HIMP, the Agency is proposing that the 
maximum line speed for young chicken 
slaughter establishments be 175 birds 
per minute, and that the maximum line 
speed for turkey slaughter 
establishments be 55 birds per minute. 
Establishments operating under HIMP 
have demonstrated that they are capable 
of consistently producing safe, 
wholesome, and unadulterated poultry 
products while operating at these line 
speeds. Moreover, they have 
consistently met pathogen reduction 
and other performance standards 
operating at these line speeds. The new 
inspection system is modeled on HIMP 
and, as discussed later in this 
document, also incorporates additional 
measures that will apply to all poultry 
establishments. These measures, which 
include testing for microbial organisms 
at pre-chill and post-chill, are designed 
to ensure that establishments maintain 
process control. 
To gather additional data on the 
effects of line speeds on the worker 
safety and the ability of establishments 
to maintain process control, the Agency 
will select a maximum of five non-HIMP 
establishments that applied through the 
SIP to receive waivers of existing 
regulations restricting line speeds. The 
Agency limited the number of non- 
HIMP establishments that would receive 
SIP waivers for line speed requirements 
to five because FSIS inspectors rather 
than establishment personnel would 
continue to be responsible for 
conducting carcass sorting. Thus, these 
non-HIMP plants would need additional 
inspectors to ensure that faster line 
speeds do not affect product safety. 
FSIS recognizes that evaluation of the 
effects of line speed on food safety 
should include the effects of line speed 
on establishment employee safety. To 
obtain preliminary data on this matter, 
FSIS asked the National Institute for 
Occupational Safety and Health 
(NIOSH) to evaluate the effects of 
increased line speed by collecting data 
from the five non-HIMP plants that have 
been granted waivers from line speed 
restrictions under the SIP. NIOSH has 
expressed its willingness to evaluate the 
effects of increased production volume 
on employee health, with a focus on 
musculoskeletal disorders and acute 
traumatic injuries (76 FR 41186, 41189). 
NIOSH will prepare a report based on 
its findings of short-, intermediate-, and 
long-term effects from the process 
modifications. NIOSH will make 
recommendations as needed. FSIS has 
made cooperation with NIOSH a 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:33 Jan 26, 2012 Jkt 226001 PO 00000 Frm 00017 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\27JAP2.SGM 27JAP2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
4V
PT
VN
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
4424 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 18 / Friday, January 27, 2012 / Proposed Rules 
9 US Consumer Product Safety Commission 
Document #5098, ‘‘Tap Water Scalds.’’ Available at: 
http://www.cpsc.gov/cpscpub/pubs/5098.html. 
condition for the five non-HIMP plants 
to operate at faster line speeds under the 
SIP waiver. FSIS will consider the 
available data on employee effects 
collected from NIOSH activities when 
implementing any final rule resulting 
from this proposal. 
F. Facilities Requirements for 
Establishments Operating Under the 
New Poultry Inspection System 
1. General 
As discussed above, the new 
inspection system would replace SIS, 
NELS, and NTIS. FSIS anticipates that 
most, if not all, of the establishments 
that will choose to use the proposed 
inspection system are establishments 
that operate under one of those 
inspection systems. Accordingly, the 
following discussion of the facilities 
requirements associated with the 
proposed new inspection system 
highlights the differences between the 
proposed system and the existing 
inspection systems. 
The proposed regulatory text 
describing the facilities requirements 
under the new inspection system is 
organized differently than the existing 
regulatory text. Whereas the existing 
regulations describe facilities 
requirements under Sections 9 CFR 
381.36 and 381.76, the proposed 
regulatory text incorporates all facilities 
requirements relating to the new 
inspection system under proposed 9 
CFR 381.36(c). The requirements are 
subdivided into four paragraphs: 
Paragraph (1) describes facilities 
requirements for the online carcass 
inspection station; Paragraph (2) 
describes facilities requirements for the 
offline verification inspection stations; 
Paragraph (3) describes facilities 
requirements pertaining to inspection of 
the viscera of the first 300 carcasses of 
each flock; and Paragraph (4) describes 
a facilities requirement for a trough 
extending beneath the processing line 
from the point of evisceration to the 
point where trimming is performed. 
2. Online Carcass Inspection Stations 
Under the proposed inspection 
system, one online carcass inspection 
station will be provided on each 
processing line. If this proposal is 
adopted, it will be located at the end of 
the processing line, immediately before 
the chiller and after the establishments 
has conducted sorting, trimming, and 
reprocessing activities and has applied 
all pre-chill interventions. This location 
for the online inspection station differs 
from the existing inspection systems, 
which require several online inspection 
stations to be located after evisceration 
has occurred but before any trimming or 
pre-chill interventions have been 
applied. Based on its experience under 
HIMP, FSIS expects that when 
establishments operating under SIS, 
NELS, or NTIS convert to the new 
inspection system, they will use their 
existing online inspection stations to 
conduct required establishment sorting 
activities. 
Under the proposed inspection 
system, as under the existing inspection 
systems, the conveyor line will be level 
for the entire length of the online 
carcass inspection station, and the 
vertical distance from the bottom of the 
shackles to the top of the platform will 
be at least 60 inches. Other 
requirements for the proposed online 
inspection station that are the same as 
those under the existing inspection 
systems include requirements for a 
conveyor line start/stop switch, for 
proper lighting, for a clipboard holder, 
for receptacles to be used for 
condemned carcasses and parts, and for 
hangback racks. 
FSIS is proposing that the platform for 
the online carcass inspection station be 
of the same dimensions and include the 
same safety features as under the 
existing inspection systems except that 
under the proposed system, the platform 
need only be four feet long instead of 
eight feet long. The inspection platform 
can be shorter under the proposed 
inspection system because, unlike the 
existing inspection systems, the new 
inspection system does not require an 
establishment helper to flank each 
online carcass inspector. Also unlike the 
existing inspection systems, the 
platform need not be height-adjustable 
under the proposed inspection system 
because the inspection procedure under 
the proposed system does not require 
the online carcass inspector to handle 
every carcass. 
As under the existing inspection 
systems, FSIS is proposing that 
establishments equip each online 
carcass inspection station with hand 
rinsing facilities to prevent cross- 
contamination from occurring when the 
online carcass inspector is required to 
touch carcasses with his or her hands. 
However, the carcass inspection method 
under the proposed inspection system 
does not require the carcass inspector to 
touch every carcass; such hand contact 
will be infrequent. Therefore, the 
Agency is not proposing to require that 
establishments equip the online 
inspection station with continuous flow 
hand rinse facilities as under the 
existing regulations. Instead, the Agency 
is proposing that establishments provide 
either continuous flow hand rinse 
facilities or hand rinse facilities capable 
of being activated in a hands-free 
manner (e.g., by placing the hands in 
front of a motion sensor or by stepping 
on a foot pedal). This flexibility will 
allow establishments to conserve water. 
As is the case now, under this proposal, 
all online hand rinse facilities must 
operate in a sanitary manner that 
minimizes splashing and the risk of 
cross-contamination, and the hand rinse 
facilities must provide water that is at 
least 65 degrees Fahrenheit to ensure 
effective sanitation. 
FSIS is proposing that the water 
provided by the hand rinse facilities at 
online carcass inspection stations may 
not exceed 120 degrees Fahrenheit. The 
current regulations do not provide a 
maximum temperature. FSIS is 
proposing this change to prevent the 
risk of scalding. According to the U.S. 
Consumer Product Safety Commission 
(CPSC), most adults will suffer third- 
degree burns if exposed to 150 degree 
Fahrenheit water for two seconds, to 
140 degree water for six seconds, to 130 
degree water for 30 seconds, and 120 
degree water for five minutes.9 Carcass 
inspectors wear latex gloves, and it is 
possible for water to become trapped 
underneath the gloves and remain in 
contact with inspectors’ hands even 
after their hands are removed from the 
water source. FSIS has granted some 
establishments waivers to install non- 
continuous flow online hand rinsing 
facilities in order to conserve water. 
These facilities are referred to as ‘‘water 
savers.’’ However, inspection personnel 
have identified that water provided by 
water savers is oftentimes too hot due to 
build-up of water in the pipes, causing 
burning of forearms while contacting 
the water and/or metal railings at the 
inspection station. Inspection personnel 
have also identified that water pressure 
from water savers is uneven, causes 
splattering, and does not provide water 
in a manner that allows inspectors to 
wash their hands quickly between birds 
presented for inspection. Inspection 
personnel have filed grievances against 
FSIS management for not stopping the 
use of these hand rinsing facilities or for 
not getting establishments to correct 
these problems. Therefore, to ensure 
that inspectors are protected from 
scalding and to encourage maximum 
use of hand rinsing facilities as needed 
to prevent cross contamination from 
occurring, FSIS is proposing that hand 
rinsing facilities provide water at a 
minimum temperature of 65 degrees 
Fahrenheit and a maximum temperature 
of 120 degrees Fahrenheit. The Agency 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:33 Jan 26, 2012 Jkt 226001 PO 00000 Frm 00018 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\27JAP2.SGM 27JAP2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
4V
PT
VN
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
4425 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 18 / Friday, January 27, 2012 / Proposed Rules 
10 For more information on FoodNet see http://
www.cdc.gov/foodnet/. 
requests comment on the efficacy and 
safety of this proposed temperature 
range and on the hand rinsing facilities 
requirement in general. 
The online inspection station under 
the proposed inspection system must 
also be equipped with a buzzer within 
reach of the on-line inspector that the 
inspector can use when necessary to 
alert the inspector-in-charge, offline 
inspectors, or establishment 
management of the need to correct a 
deficiency that require their attention. 
3. Offline Verification Inspection 
Stations 
FSIS is proposing to require that 
establishments operating under the 
proposed inspection system provide 
offline verification inspection stations 
that are similar to the offline inspection 
stations required under the existing 
inspection systems. As under the 
existing inspection systems, FSIS is 
proposing that at least one offline 
verification inspection station be 
located at a pre-chill location and at 
least one be located at a post-chill 
location. For establishments having 
more than one processing line or more 
than one chiller, the Agency will 
determine how many offline verification 
inspection stations are required under 
the specific processing conditions of the 
establishment concerned. 
FSIS is proposing to require that the 
offline verification inspection stations 
under the new system consist of the 
same dimensions as the offline stations 
under the existing inspection systems. 
The dimensions and features of the 
offline inspection tables would also be 
the same. The requirements for lighting, 
hangback racks, and accessibility to 
hand washing facilities would also be 
the same as under the existing 
inspection systems. The requirement for 
a clipboard holder is the same except 
FSIS is also proposing to allow 
establishments to elect to provide 
offline verification inspectors with 
electronic means of recording 
inspection results. 
4. Location To Inspect the Viscera of the 
First 300 Carcasses of Each Flock 
Under the proposed inspection 
system, an offline inspector in young 
chicken slaughter establishments will 
inspect the viscera of each of the first 
300 birds slaughtered in each flock. 
Accordingly, FSIS is proposing to 
require that young chicken 
establishments operating under the 
proposed inspection system provide a 
location along the processing line after 
the carcasses are eviscerated at which 
the viscera inspection can safely and 
properly be conducted. The viscera 
must be presented at this location either 
uniformly trailing or leading. Based on 
FSIS’s experience under HIMP, most 
establishments choosing to operate 
under the new inspection system will 
provide this location where 
establishment sorting activities take 
place. 
5. Drainage From Processing Line 
FSIS is proposing no change to the 
existing requirement that a trough or 
other drainage and collection facilities 
must extend beneath the conveyor at all 
places where processing operations are 
conducted from the point where the 
carcass is opened to the point where 
trimming has been performed. 
G. Eligibility To Operate Under the New 
Poultry Inspection System 
FSIS is proposing that young chicken 
and turkey slaughter establishments 
may use the new inspection system if 
they apply to do so, and if the 
Administrator determines that they are 
eligible. To be eligible, the 
establishment must agree to meet all 
facilities requirements and to maintain 
records to document that the products 
resulting from their slaughter operations 
meet the definition of ready-to-cook 
poultry. 
Because FSIS is proposing to 
eliminate SIS, NELS, and NTIS, and to 
end HIMP, the Agency is also proposing 
to require that all young chicken and 
turkey slaughter establishments that do 
not operate under the new inspection 
system operate under traditional 
inspection. 
In addition, FSIS is proposing to 
allow establishments that slaughter 
poultry classes other than young 
chicken and turkey to operate under the 
New Poultry Inspection System if they 
request and are granted a waiver 
through the SIP. 
IV. Other Proposed Changes to Poultry 
Slaughter Regulations 
A. Proposed Changes to Traditional 
Inspection System 
FSIS is proposing to limit to two the 
number of online inspectors per line in 
all poultry slaughter establishments 
operating under traditional inspection, 
with an exception for existing 
establishments other than young 
chicken and turkey that are currently 
operating with more than two online 
inspectors. Under traditional inspection, 
online carcass inspectors would 
continue to use the current traditional 
inspection methods. The Agency 
anticipates that it will assign 
approximately one offline inspector for 
every six online inspectors under 
traditional inspection. Additionally, the 
Agency would continue to provide 
oversight of workforce through 
veterinarians. 
Most poultry slaughter establishments 
operating under traditional inspection 
are currently staffed with two online 
inspectors. As of September 2011, all of 
the very small establishments that 
slaughter young chickens or turkeys 
under the traditional inspection were 
staffed with two or fewer on-line 
inspectors. However, there is a small 
number of poultry slaughter 
establishments that slaughter species 
other than young chickens and turkeys 
that have more than two online 
inspectors. FSIS will continue to staff 
these establishments with the number of 
online inspectors they currently have. 
FSIS has tentatively concluded that 
doing so will ensure that this rule 
change does not have an adverse impact 
on these establishments. FSIS is 
proposing that this exception will not 
apply to new establishments after a final 
rule is published because the Agency 
anticipates that new establishments 
would be aware of the requirements of 
the rule and would factor this into their 
decisions to operate. Also, this 
exception would not apply to young 
chicken and turkey slaughter 
establishments because doing so would 
undercut the efficiencies that are 
presented by this proposal. 
B. Proposed Changes Affecting All 
Poultry Slaughter Establishments 
1. Procedures To Address 
Contamination by Fecal Material and 
Enteric Pathogens as Hazards 
Reasonably Likely To Occur 
a. Contamination of Poultry Carcasses 
and Parts by Fecal Material and Enteric 
Pathogens Are Hazards Reasonably 
Likely To Occur in Poultry Slaughter 
Establishments 
The Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention collects data on laboratory- 
confirmed human foodborne illness 
cases through the Foodborne Diseases 
Active Surveillance Network (FoodNet), 
an active, population-based, sentinel 
surveillance system for the United 
States.10 Several FoodNet case-control 
studies have examined the link between 
chicken and human infection with 
Salmonella or Campylobacter and have 
found that poultry products are an 
important vehicle for human 
Salmonella and Campylobacter 
infections in the United States (CDC 
memo: Foodborne illness from 
Salmonella and Campylobacter 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:33 Jan 26, 2012 Jkt 226001 PO 00000 Frm 00019 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\27JAP2.SGM 27JAP2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
4V
PT
VN
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
4426 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 18 / Friday, January 27, 2012 / Proposed Rules 
11 For more information on CDC’s FDOSS see: 
http://www.cdc.gov/outbreaknet/surveillance
_data.html. 
associated with poultry, United States, 
available at: http://www.fsis.usda.gov/
PDF/Salmonella_Campylobacter_
011811.pdf). 
In addition to FoodNet case-control 
studies, CDC collects outbreak data 
reported by State and local health 
departments through the Foodbome 
Disease Outbreak Surveillance System 
(FDOSS). Outbreak data collected 
through FDOSS provides important 
evidence linking sources of Salmonella 
and Campylobacter to human illness.11 
Fecal contamination is a major 
vehicle for spreading enteric pathogenic 
microorganisms, such as Salmonella, to 
raw poultry. Accordingly, 
contamination of poultry carcasses and 
parts by fecal material and enteric 
pathogens (e.g., Salmonella and 
Campylobacter) are hazards reasonably 
likely to occur in poultry slaughter 
establishments unless addressed in a 
sanitation SOP or other prerequisite 
program. 
In order to ensure that establishments 
properly address the food safety hazards 
associated with contamination of 
poultry carcasses by fecal material and 
enteric pathogens, FSIS is proposing to 
amend the poultry slaughter inspection 
regulations as described in the following 
two sections. 
b. Procedures Addressing Zero 
Tolerance for Visible Fecal Material 
Before Chilling 
In 1997, FSIS codified its zero 
tolerance policy for poultry carcasses 
contaminated with visible fecal material 
entering the chiller (62 FR 5139, 
February 4, 1997). At that time, the 
Agency published a final rule that 
removed ‘‘feces’’ from the list of 
nonconformance elements under the 
FPS and provided that ‘‘Poultry 
carcasses contaminated with visible 
fecal material shall be prevented from 
entering the chilling tank’’ (9 CFR 
381.65(e)). The preamble to that final 
rule emphasized that the ‘‘zero tolerance 
policy for visible fecal contamination is 
an important food safety standard 
because fecal contamination is a major 
vehicle for spreading pathogenic 
microorganisms, such as Salmonella, to 
raw poultry.’’ 
Later the same year, FSIS published a 
second Federal Register document 
entitled ‘‘Notice on complying with 
food safety standards under the HACCP 
system regulations’’ (62 FR 63254, 
November 28, 1997). The purpose of the 
second document was to ensure that 
establishments understood the Agency’s 
zero tolerance policy for visible fecal 
material as a food safety hazard as 
establishments prepared to comply with 
the then newly enacted HACCP system 
regulations. The notice first cited the 
zero tolerance policy for visible fecal 
contamination before the chiller that 
had recently been codified at 9 CFR 
381.65(e). Then, the notice explained 
that, ‘‘to meet the zero tolerance 
standard, an establishment’s [HACCP] 
controls must (among other things) 
include limits that ensure that no visible 
fecal material is present * * * before 
poultry carcasses enter the chilling 
tank’’ (citing 9 CFR 417.2(c)). Finally, 
the notice explained that ‘‘Under the 
HACCP system regulations, critical 
control points to eliminate 
contamination with visible fecal 
material are predictable and essential 
components of all slaughter 
establishments’ HACCP plans.’’ 
Thus, in February 1997, FSIS codified 
the requirement that all poultry 
slaughter establishments must prevent 
carcasses contaminated with visible 
fecal material from entering the chiller 
(9 CFR 381.65(e)); and in November 
1997, FSIS specified in a Federal 
Register notice that procedures for 
doing so must be incorporated in 
establishments’ HACCP systems. As a 
result, all poultry slaughter 
establishments’ HACCP plans currently 
include critical control points for 
preventing carcasses contaminated with 
visible fecal material from entering the 
chiller. Accordingly, FSIS is proposing 
to amend 9 CFR 381.65 to require 
poultry slaughter establishments to 
develop, implement, and maintain as 
part of their HACCP plans, or sanitation 
SOPs, or other prerequisite programs, 
written procedures to ensure that 
poultry carcasses contaminated with 
visible fecal material do not enter the 
chilling tank. Such a requirement will 
ensure that establishments maintain the 
records to verify that that they have 
implemented the necessary measures 
and, when necessary, have taken 
appropriate corrective actions to prevent 
carcasses contaminated with visible 
fecal material from entering the chiller. 
c. Procedures To Prevent Contamination 
of Carcasses and Parts by Enteric 
Pathogens and Fecal Material 
Throughout the Entire Slaughter and 
Dressing Operation 
Background 
Although the existing requirement for 
establishments to prevent visible fecal 
material from entering the chiller, and 
the proposed clarification described 
above that establishments must have 
procedures addressing how they do so, 
are important safeguards, those 
safeguards will not be fully effective if 
an appropriate effort is not made to 
prevent contamination from occurring 
throughout the slaughter and dressing 
operation. Fecal material is a major 
vehicle for spreading pathogenic 
microorganisms, such as Salmonella 
and Campylobacter, to raw poultry, and 
therefore it is vital for establishments to 
maintain sanitary conditions and to 
prevent, to the maximum extent 
possible, contamination from occurring 
before slaughter and throughout the 
slaughter and dressing process. 
Under HACCP, establishments are 
responsible for identifying food safety 
hazards that are reasonably likely to 
occur in the production process and for 
implementing preventive measures to 
control those hazards. However, FSIS’s 
experience with HACCP shows that 
instead of implementing controls to 
prevent contamination from occurring 
early in the production process, some 
poultry slaughter establishments rely on 
interventions applied at the end of the 
process to remove contamination after it 
occurs. This may be due in part to the 
fact that FSIS inspectors perform 
verification checks for zero visible fecal 
contamination and Salmonella and 
Campylobacter testing at the end of the 
slaughter and chilling processes. Failure 
to implement preventive measures 
throughout the slaughter and dressing 
process can lead to the creation of 
insanitary conditions in the 
establishment and increases the 
potential for carcasses and parts to 
become contaminated with enteric 
pathogens and fecal material. 
Interventions with chemical 
antimicrobials applied at the end of the 
process are less likely to be fully 
effective on carcasses that contain high 
levels of pathogens, and these chemical 
treatments are not effective in 
preventing insanitary conditions 
throughout the slaughter establishment. 
Information that FSIS has collected 
from comprehensive Food Safety 
Assessments (FSA’s) it has conducted in 
establishments that have failed to meet 
the Agency’s Salmonella performance 
standards demonstrate the need for 
establishments to adopt preventive 
measures to control contamination 
throughout the entire production 
process, as well as the need to maintain 
documentation to verify the 
effectiveness of those measures on an 
on-going basis. 
For example, FSIS conducted an FSA 
at a young chicken slaughter 
establishment that failed its Salmonella 
set in 2007. For the FSA, FSIS reviewed 
the establishment’s Salmonella testing 
data, controls, and records associated 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:33 Jan 26, 2012 Jkt 226001 PO 00000 Frm 00020 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\27JAP2.SGM 27JAP2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
4V
PT
VN
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
4427 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 18 / Friday, January 27, 2012 / Proposed Rules 
with the establishment’s sanitary 
dressing procedures and microbial 
interventions, and observed the 
establishment’s implementation of these 
controls and procedures. The Agency’s 
review found that the establishment had 
high levels of Salmonella on incoming 
birds. The high levels of Salmonella 
sustained throughout the process 
appeared to have overwhelmed any 
subsequent in-process interventions. As 
a result of the FSA findings, FSIS 
notified the establishment in writing 
that the Agency would withhold or 
suspend inspection unless the 
establishments provided a written 
response within 72 hours on the actions 
it would take to achieve compliance. In 
response, the establishment gave a 
written description of immediate 
corrective actions it would take, 
including removing debris and 
repositioning equipment, retraining of 
employees in the HACCP and Sanitation 
SOP methodology prescribed in the 
establishments control programs, and 
reassessing the establishments HACCP 
plan to incorporate a new antimicrobial 
treatment for the chill tank and similar 
antimicrobial interventions applied 
during the dressing operation. FSIS then 
put in place a verification plan in which 
inspectors in that establishment were 
expected to routinely verify the 
corrective actions proffered by the 
establishment. Since implementation of 
these corrective actions, the 
establishment has passed all of its 
Salmonella performance sets. 
In another example, FSIS conducted 
an FSA in an establishment that had 
failed a Salmonella set in 2005. From 
the FSA, the Agency found that the 
establishment failed to: (i) Identify 
Salmonella as a significant hazard, (ii) 
control hazards it did identify, (iii), 
identify corrective actions in its 
sanitation SOPs, (iv) perform 
verification, (v) perform all corrective 
actions, and (vi) monitor pre-shipment 
records sufficiently. As a result, FSIS 
notified the establishment in writing 
that the Agency would withhold or 
suspend inspection unless the 
establishment provided a timely 
response on how it would achieve 
compliance. Consequently, the 
establishment reassessed and 
redesigned its HACCP plan for 
slaughter; revised its preoperational 
plan; and conducted remedial training 
of personnel in HACCP and sanitation 
SOPs. Because the establishment did 
not previously have defined verification 
activities for its employees to perform 
and document, the establishment 
instituted hourly checks for sanitary 
dressing at evisceration. FSIS issued a 
Notice of Deferral on August 8, 2005, 
and a Closeout Letter of Warning on 
March 3, 2006. FSIS then put in place 
a verification plan in which inspectors 
in that establishment were expected to 
routinely verify the corrective actions 
proffered by the establishment. Since 
implementation of these corrective 
actions, the establishment has passed all 
of its Salmonella performance sets. 
Proposed Regulatory Requirements 
To ensure that establishments 
implement appropriate measures to 
prevent carcasses from becoming 
contaminated with pathogens, and to 
ensure that both FSIS and 
establishments have the documentation 
they need to verify the effectiveness of 
these measures on an on-going basis, 
FSIS is proposing to require that all 
poultry slaughter establishments 
develop, implement, and maintain 
written procedures to prevent 
contamination of carcasses and parts by 
enteric pathogens and fecal material 
throughout the entire slaughter and 
dressing operation. FSIS is proposing 
that establishments incorporate these 
procedures into their HACCP plans, or 
sanitation SOPs, or other prerequisite 
programs, and that they maintain 
records sufficient to document the 
implementation and monitoring of these 
procedures. These proposed 
requirements are necessary to fully 
implement the existing HACCP 
regulations. 
Many establishments have in place 
process control measures to address the 
prevention of contamination by enteric 
pathogens and fecal material, but are not 
maintaining documentation to verify the 
effectiveness of these procedures on an 
on-going basis. If this rule becomes 
final, establishments may choose to 
incorporate those measures into their 
procedures addressing how they prevent 
contamination from occurring during 
slaughter and dressing operations. 
Examples of such measures include: 
monitoring of evisceration equipment to 
ensure it is properly adjusted to the size 
of birds within a particular flock; 
purchase specification agreements 
requiring feed withdrawal; and 
employee hygiene and hand washing 
policies. Under this proposed rule, 
establishments will be required to 
incorporate these procedures into their 
HACCP plans, or Sanitation SOPs, or 
other prerequisite programs, and to 
maintain on-going documentation to 
demonstrate that the procedures are 
effective. This on-going documentation 
will allow both the establishment and 
FSIS to identify specific points in the 
production process where a lack of 
process control may have resulted in 
product contamination or insanitary 
conditions, which will allow the 
establishment to take the necessary 
corrective actions to prevent further 
product contamination. 
FSIS is not proposing to prescribe the 
specific procedures that establishments 
must follow to prevent carcasses from 
becoming contaminated by enteric 
pathogens or fecal material because the 
Agency believes that establishments 
should have the flexibility to implement 
the most appropriate measures that will 
best achieve the requirements of this 
proposed rule. However, on-going 
verification and documentation to 
demonstrate that an establishment’s 
process controls are effective in 
preventing food safety hazards are 
critical components of the HACCP 
system. FSIS believes that 
microbiological test results that 
represent levels of microbial 
contamination at key steps in the 
slaughter process, are necessary for 
establishments to provide 
comprehensive, objective evidence to 
demonstrate that they are effectively 
preventing carcasses from becoming 
contaminated with pathogens before 
and after they enter the chiller. 
As discussed in detail earlier in this 
document, the current regulations 
require that official poultry slaughter 
establishments conduct regular testing 
for generic E. coli at the end of the 
chilling process as a means of verifying 
process control (9 CFR 381.94(a)). The 
regulations include performance criteria 
that are intended to represent the 
highest expected microbial loads on 
carcasses when the slaughter process is 
in control (9 CFR 381.94(a)(5)(1)). 
However, FSIS’s experience with using 
post-chill testing for generic E. coli to 
monitor process control for fecal 
contamination and sanitary dressing has 
led the Agency to conclude that such 
testing is not the most effective way to 
prevent contamination from occurring 
throughout the slaughter and dressing 
operation. As noted above, recent 
studies indicate that E. coli levels may 
not be a valid measure of fecal 
contamination. This finding was also 
supported by a 2004 report issued by 
the National Advisory Committee on 
Microbiological Criteria for Foods 
(NACMCF). Additionally, while post- 
chill testing may be useful for 
identifying microbial levels on carcasses 
after they have been subjected to 
antimicrobial chemicals in the chiller, it 
does not necessarily reflect the 
effectiveness of the preventive measures 
implemented earlier in the process to 
address contamination at points in the 
process before the chiller. 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:33 Jan 26, 2012 Jkt 226001 PO 00000 Frm 00021 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\27JAP2.SGM 27JAP2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
4V
PT
VN
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
4428 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 18 / Friday, January 27, 2012 / Proposed Rules 
12 Low-volume establishments would include 
those classified as very low volume establishments 
under the existing generic E. coli testing 
regulations, e.g., establishments that slaughter no 
more than 440,000 young chicken or no more than 
60,000 young turkeys on an annual basis (9 CFR 
381.94(a)(2)(v)). 
Given these limitations, FSIS is 
proposing to rescind the generic E. coli 
testing requirements in 9 CFR 381.94 
and to replace them with a new testing 
requirement that will provide 
establishments the flexibility to sample 
for other, potentially more useful 
indicator organisms. Under this 
proposal, establishments would 
continue to conduct sampling and 
analysis of carcasses for microbial 
organisms at the post-chill location, but 
in addition the Agency is proposing a 
second testing location at the pre-chill 
position in order to ensure 
establishments will be able to monitor 
the effectiveness of process control for 
enteric pathogens throughout the 
slaughter and dressing operation. 
Although FSIS has tentatively 
concluded that verification testing 
conducted at two proposed points, i.e., 
pre-chill and post-chill, will provide the 
evidence establishments need to verify 
that their process control measures are 
effective in preventing carcasses from 
becoming contaminated with pathogens, 
the Agency also considered two 
alternatives approaches. FSIS 
considered requiring a third verification 
test at the re-hang position to monitor 
the incoming load of pathogens but does 
not believe it is necessary to impose the 
additional costs that would be 
associated with testing at this point. 
FSIS also considered requiring only one 
verification test at any position along 
the production line to provide 
maximum flexibility but concluded this 
approach may not be sufficient to 
monitor the effectiveness of an 
establishment’s procedures to prevent 
contamination throughout the slaughter 
and dressing operation. The Agency 
requests comments on these 
alternatives. 
Under this proposed rule, instead of 
following a prescribed microbiological 
testing program, each establishment 
would be responsible for developing 
and implementing its own 
microbiological sampling plan, which 
would be required to include carcass 
sampling at pre-chill and post-chill. The 
establishment would be responsible for 
determining which microbiological 
organisms will best help it to monitor 
the effectiveness of its process control 
procedures. Because FSIS is proposing 
that an establishment’s microbiological 
sampling plan be part of its HACCP 
plan, sanitation SOP, or other 
prerequisite program, each 
establishment would be required to 
provide scientific or technical 
documentation to support the 
judgments made in designing its 
sampling plan (see 9 CFR 417.4(a)). 
Under this proposal, establishments 
could develop sampling plans to test 
carcasses for enteric pathogens, such as 
Salmonella and Campylobacter, at pre- 
chill and post chill, or they could test 
for an appropriate indicator organism. 
FSIS intends to provide sampling 
guidance to assist small and very small 
establishments develop sampling plans 
that meet the Agency’s expectations for 
testing designs and sampling frequency. 
This proposed rule does not prescribe 
how frequently establishments must 
sample and test poultry carcasses for 
microbiological organisms at pre-chill 
and post-chill. Instead, FSIS is 
proposing to require that an 
establishment’s sampling frequency be 
adequate to monitor the effectiveness of 
the establishment’s process control for 
enteric pathogens. The frequency with 
which establishments would need to 
conduct such testing will depend on a 
number of factors, including their 
production volume, the source of their 
flocks, their slaughter and dressing 
process, and the consistency of their 
microbial test results over time. Because 
the testing frequency would be an 
integral part of an establishment’s 
HACCP system verification procedures, 
establishments would need to collect 
and maintain data to demonstrate that 
their testing frequency is adequate to 
verify the effectiveness of their process 
control procedures. 
This proposed rule does not mandate 
that establishments meet specific 
performance standards for microbial 
testing. Rather, because establishments 
would be required to incorporate their 
procedures for preventing 
contamination by enteric pathogens and 
fecal contamination into their HACCP 
plans, or sanitation SOPs, or other 
prerequisite programs, establishments 
would be required to take appropriate 
corrective action when either the 
establishment or FSIS determines that 
the establishment’s procedures are not 
effective in preventing carcass 
contamination throughout the entire 
slaughter and dressing process. 
Establishments would also need to 
routinely evaluate the effectiveness of 
their procedures in preventing carcass 
contamination. 
Small and very small, low-volume 
establishment 12 that choose to operate 
under the revised traditional inspection 
system rather than the New Poultry 
Inspection System may not need to 
conduct testing at two points in the 
slaughter process to adequately monitor 
process control. Therefore, FSIS is 
considering permitting these 
establishments to conduct testing for 
microbial pathogens at one point in the 
process if they can demonstrate that 
they are maintaining adequate process 
control. Under this proposal, if the 
Agency had evidence to indicate that an 
establishment conducting testing at a 
single point in the process was having 
difficulty maintaining process control, 
such as not meeting FSIS’s pathogen 
performance standards, the 
establishment would need to conduct 
additional testing or implement 
additional measures to ensure that its 
process remains in control. The Agency 
request comments on this aspect of the 
proposed rule. 
If this proposal is finalized, FSIS will 
issue guidance to assist establishments 
in developing procedures for controlling 
contamination throughout the slaughter 
and processing operation and for 
developing appropriate sampling plans 
to verify the effectiveness of their 
procedures. This guidance will include 
a default sampling frequency for small 
and very small establishments. 
Under this proposed rule, FSIS would 
verify the effectiveness of an 
establishment’s process control 
procedures in preventing carcasses from 
becoming contaminated with enteric 
pathogens and fecal material by 
reviewing the establishment’s 
monitoring records, including the 
establishment’s microbial testing 
results, observing an establishment 
implementing its procedures, and 
inspecting carcasses and parts for 
visible fecal contamination when 
conducting both online carcass 
inspection and offline verification 
inspection procedures. FSIS personnel 
would consider both the establishment’s 
testing results, as well as the results of 
the Agency’s testing for Salmonella and 
Campylobacter to determine young 
chicken and turkey establishment’s 
compliance with the Agency’s 
Salmonella and Campylobacter 
performance standards, to help assess 
how well the establishment is 
controlling its slaughter and dressing 
processes. 
If inspection personnel determine that 
an establishment’s process control 
procedures are not effective in 
preventing contamination by enteric 
pathogens or fecal contamination, the 
Agency would take appropriate 
regulatory action to ensure that the 
establishment’s production process is in 
control, and that product is not being 
adulterated. Such action could include 
performing additional visual 
inspections of products or equipment 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:33 Jan 26, 2012 Jkt 226001 PO 00000 Frm 00022 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\27JAP2.SGM 27JAP2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
4V
PT
VN
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
4429 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 18 / Friday, January 27, 2012 / Proposed Rules 
and facilities, increasing offline 
verification inspections, initiating Food 
Safety Assessments (FSAs), conducting 
hazard analysis verification procedures, 
conducting intensified product 
sampling for Salmonella and 
Campylobacter under the Agency’s 
performance standard sampling 
program, and retaining or condemning 
product. 
2. Impact Considerations for Small/Very 
Small Low Volume Establishments 
As noted in the Preliminary Impact 
Analysis (PRIA) for this proposed rule, 
FSIS projects that all 51 of the very 
small establishments that operate under 
the existing traditional inspection 
system will chose to operate under the 
proposed revised traditional inspection 
system. However, this proposed rule 
will impose certain costs on 
establishments regardless of the 
proposed inspection system under 
which they chose to operate. Therefore, 
because FSIS is interested in 
implementing this proposed rule in a 
manner that will minimize the impact 
on small and very small establishments, 
the Agency requests comments on the 
following measures to help mitigate the 
impact on to small and very small 
establishments. 
• Phase-in for small businesses: FSIS 
requests comments on whether a phased 
implementation would help to mitigate 
the impact of this proposed rule on 
small and very small establishments. 
The Agency also requests comments on 
the type of phased implementation that 
would be most effective in mitigating 
the impact on very small 
establishments. For example, would a 
phased implementation that establishes 
separate effective dates for large, small, 
and very small establishments be 
effective in mitigating the impact of this 
proposed rule on small and very small 
establishments? 
• Allow small and very small plants 
that operate under the modified 
traditional inspection system to test for 
microbial pathogens at one point in the 
slaughter process instead of two. As 
noted above, this proposed rule requires 
that all young chicken and turkey 
slaughter establishments conduct testing 
for microbial pathogens at two points in 
the slaughter process regardless of the 
inspection system that they operate 
under. However, FSIS believes that it 
may not be necessary for very small, 
low-volume establishments that operate 
under the revised traditional inspection 
system to conduct testing at two points 
in the process to effectively monitor 
process control. Therefore, FSIS 
requests comments on whether it should 
revise this provision in the proposed 
rule to permit very small, low volume 
establishments to conduct testing for 
microbial pathogens at one point in the 
process if these establishments can 
demonstrate that they are maintaining 
adequate process control through other 
means. 
• Number of on-line inspectors 
permitted for revised traditional 
inspection: As discussed earlier in this 
document, this proposed rule would 
limit the number of on-line inspectors 
for the revised traditions inspection 
system to two, with an exception for 
existing establishments other than 
young chicken and turkey that are 
currently operating with more than two 
online inspectors. FSIS is proposing to 
continue to staff establishments that 
slaughter poultry other than young 
chickens and turkeys with the number 
of online inspectors that they currently 
have to mitigate the impact of this 
proposed rule on these establishments. 
FSIS has tentatively decided that this 
exception would not apply to young 
chicken and turkey slaughter 
establishments because doing so would 
undercut the efficiencies that are 
presented by this proposal. However, 
because the young chicken and turkey 
slaughter establishments that operate 
under the existing traditional inspection 
system are classified as either small or 
very small, FSIS requests comments on 
it should permit these establishments to 
retain more than two inspectors if they 
are currently operating with more than 
two inspectors under the existing 
traditional inspection system. 
In addition to the proposed 
mitigations discussed above, FSIS 
intends to adopt the following measures 
to assist small and very small 
establishments meet the requirements of 
this proposed rule. 
• Provide FSIS outreach training 
programs to small and very small 
establishments to help them comply 
with the proposed requirements to 
address enteric pathogens and fecal 
contamination. FSIS intends to provide 
training to small and very small 
establishments to assist them to 
develop, implement, and maintain 
written procedures for the prevention of 
contamination by enteric pathogens and 
fecal material and for preventing 
carcasses contaminated with fecal 
material from entering the chill tank. To 
ensure that very small plant operators 
have access to such training, FSIS is 
considering providing computer-based 
training or using a webinar format. 
• Provide guidance on measures 
small establishments can take to control 
for enteric pathogens. As discussed 
above, under both the New Poultry 
Inspection System and the revised 
traditional inspection system, 
establishments will be required to 
conduct testing for microbial pathogens 
at pre-chill and post-chill to verify 
process control. The frequency with 
which establishments conduct testing 
under this proposed rule will depend 
on, among other things, the production 
volume, source of flock, and the plants 
slaughter and dressing process. FSIS 
believes that very small, low volume 
establishments that have slower line 
speeds and that do not use automated 
evisceration equipment will likely not 
need to conduct frequent testing to 
demonstrate that their process is in 
control. Therefore, FSIS intends to 
develop guidance to assist small plants 
implement measures other than testing 
to demonstrate that their process is in 
control. FSIS believes that this will help 
to minimize the amount of testing (and 
the associated costs) that small plants 
will need to conduct to comply with the 
proposed rule. The guidance would 
provide for an increase in testing 
frequency if an establishment is having 
difficulty maintaining process control, 
such as not meeting FSIS’s pathogen 
performance standards. 
FSIS requests comments on these and 
other possible measures that that the 
Agency can implement to minimize this 
proposed rule’s impact on small and 
very small, low volume establishments. 
3. Proposed Changes to Time and 
Temperature Requirements for Chilling 
a. Background 
As discussed earlier in this document, 
FSIS has granted SIP waivers from the 
time and temperature chilling 
regulations to six poultry slaughter 
establishments. The current poultry 
chilling regulations (9 CFR 381.66) 
require ready-to-cook poultry, except for 
ratites, to be chilled immediately after 
evisceration unless the poultry is to be 
frozen or cooked immediately at the 
establishment. The purpose of these 
regulations is to ensure prompt removal 
of body heat and to prevent the 
incubation and rapid growth of bacterial 
populations on or within the carcasses, 
thereby preserving the conditions and 
wholesomeness of the poultry and 
preventing adulteration (9 CFR 
381.66(a); 35 FR 15739, October 7, 
1970). 
Under the current regulations, poultry 
slaughtering establishments must ensure 
that the internal temperature of poultry 
carcasses weighing 4 to 8 pounds is 
reduced to 40 °F or below within 4 
hours; carcasses weighing 4 to 8 
pounds, within 6 hours; and those 
weighing over 8 pounds, within 8 hours 
(9 CFR 381.66(b)). Once chilled, poultry 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:33 Jan 26, 2012 Jkt 226001 PO 00000 Frm 00023 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\27JAP2.SGM 27JAP2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
4V
PT
VN
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
4430 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 18 / Friday, January 27, 2012 / Proposed Rules 
to be packaged and shipped must be 
stored at 40 °F or less. FSIS believes that 
a chilling process satisfying the present 
requirement results in no outgrowth of 
bacteria. 
During further processing and 
packaging operations, the internal 
temperature of the poultry carcass may 
be allowed to rise to 55 °F, provided 
that immediately after packaging, the 
poultry is chilled to 40 °F or placed in 
a freezer. The regulation requires that 
any poultry that is to be held at the 
establishment in packaged form longer 
than 24 hours must be held in a room 
at a temperature of 36 °F or lower (9 
CFR 381.66(c)(3)). This requirement 
provides assurance that no bacterial 
outgrowth occurs before the package 
leaves the establishment. 
9 CFR 381.66(c)(4) requires the 
chilling of giblets to 40 °F or lower 
within two hours of the time that they 
are removed from the inedible viscera. 
But when the giblets are cooled with the 
carcass from which they are drawn, the 
giblets are subject to the same chilling 
time as the carcass. 9 CFR 381.66(e) 
requires that the temperature of air- 
chilled, ready-to-cook poultry be 
reduced to 40 °F or lower within 16 
hours. 
The temperature limits in these 
regulations were based on the fact that 
most relevant foodborne bacteria have 
not been reported as being capable of 
multiplying at temperatures below 40 °F 
(35 FR 15739). Thus, any bacteria would 
be in a suspended state, if not actually 
killed. Chilling ready-to-cook poultry 
and keeping it at sufficiently low 
temperatures inhibits the multiplication 
of spoilage organisms as well as 
foodborne pathogens on the poultry and 
permits the poultry to be sold in 
markets at great distances from the 
processing establishment. 
Most poultry slaughtering 
establishments in the United States chill 
eviscerated poultry by immersion in 
vats of water and ice. Where the chilling 
operation has been identified as a CCP 
in an official establishment’s HACCP 
plan, FSIS inspectors verify that the 
establishment is monitoring at that CCP, 
and that the establishment’s process is 
meeting the critical limits for the CCP. 
For raw poultry products, the chilling 
operation must meet the 40 °F 
temperature and time requirement, no 
matter what other limits the 
establishment may have identified in its 
hazard analysis. FSIS inspectors may 
determine whether products are 
compliant with the regulatory 
requirements by taking the temperatures 
of fresh and frozen poultry products— 
including carcasses, parts, and giblets— 
or by observing establishment 
employees conducting monitoring, by 
verification procedures, or by reviewing 
establishment records. 
The regulation limiting chilling 
operations to specific time-and- 
temperature combinations is at odds 
with the PR/HACCP regulations. 
Additionally, FSIS has two long 
pending petitions requesting that the 
Agency repeal the prescriptive time and 
temperature chilling requirements. The 
American Meat Institute (AMI) 
petitioned the Department to amend the 
regulations governing moisture 
absorption and retention in certain raw 
meat and poultry products. AMI also 
requested other changes, including 
repeal of the regulations requiring 
poultry carcasses to be chilled below 40 
°F within a specified time. The National 
Turkey Federation (NTF) has requested 
that FSIS waive the time and 
temperature requirements for poultry 
carcass cooling. FSIS has carefully 
considered the AMI and NTF requests 
in developing this proposal. 
FSIS has concluded that alternative 
approaches to chilling are effective and 
safe. As discussed above, under SIP, the 
Agency has granted six poultry 
slaughter establishments waivers from 
the specific time and temperature 
chilling requirements prescribed in 9 
CFR 381.66. FSIS will review the data 
provided through these waivers to 
ensure that these alternative approaches 
to chilling poultry are effective at 
controlling levels of bacteria and 
ensuring food safety. The Agency will 
take this data into consideration before 
issuing a final rule in this proceeding. 
Based on the foregoing, FSIS is 
proposing to eliminate the time and 
temperature requirements for chilling 
ready-to-cook poultry carcasses and 
giblets. The existing requirements 
prescribe both the time and temperature 
parameters to be used in the chilling 
process and do not allow for alternative 
approaches that the establishment can 
use to control levels of bacteria. The 
regulation gives an establishment 
producing ready-to-cook poultry no 
flexibility to use procedures other than 
those in the regulations, even if 
alternative procedures achieve the same 
results. Because the objective of the 
current chilling regulations is to prevent 
microbial multiplication, establishments 
should have the option of choosing the 
means to do so, instead of being 
required to use a prescribed method of 
chilling that achieves a specific 
temperature limit, 40 °F, that applies to 
ready-to-cook poultry products. 
In addition, the time and temperature 
regulations are inconsistent with the 
Agency’s regulations on retained water 
(9 CFR 441.10) in that they tend to 
prevent poultry establishments from 
making full use of available options for 
reducing retained water in their 
products, such as the option of reducing 
the dwell time of products in immersion 
chillers. 
b. Proposed Rule 
FSIS is proposing to replace these 
prescriptive time and temperature 
requirements with a requirement that 
poultry slaughter establishments 
develop and maintain procedures that 
control the levels and prevent the 
multiplication of spoilage organisms 
and pathogenic bacteria in the product 
after evisceration. Establishments would 
have to include these procedures in 
their HACCP plans, or sanitation SOPs, 
or other prerequisite programs. 
Establishments would be required to 
maintain a chilling process so that at the 
end of slaughter operations, no 
pathogen outgrowth occurs. 
Additionally, establishments would 
be required to keep previously chilled 
poultry carcasses and major portions 
chilled so that there would be no 
outgrowth of the pathogens, unless such 
poultry is to be packed and frozen 
immediately at the official 
establishment. And establishments 
would be required to chill giblets after 
processing so that there is no outgrowth 
of pathogens. Giblets could either be 
chilled with the carcass or separately. 
Under this proposed rule, unless 
poultry are to be frozen or cooked 
immediately at the establishment after 
evisceration, poultry establishments 
would be required to identify those 
conditions at the establishment affecting 
carcass chilling and pathogen outgrowth 
afterwards. These conditions could 
include the amount of agitation of the 
chiller medium, the concentration of 
anti-microbial substances in the chiller 
medium, the temperature of the chiller 
medium, the rate of temperature 
reduction of the carcasses, and the 
internal temperature or microbial 
condition of the carcasses exiting the 
chiller. 
Establishments would have to 
incorporate procedures for chilling into 
their HACCP plans, or Sanitation SOPs, 
or other prerequisite programs. These 
written procedures would include the 
conditions of use affecting carcass 
chilling and microbial multiplication 
identified by the establishment. 
FSIS would consider the present 
chilling requirements as safe harbors. If 
an establishment uses a chilling and 
subsequent storage process different 
from the present requirements, the 
establishment would be required to 
specify the point where chilling has 
been completed and to validate that at 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:33 Jan 26, 2012 Jkt 226001 PO 00000 Frm 00024 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\27JAP2.SGM 27JAP2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
4V
PT
VN
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
4431 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 18 / Friday, January 27, 2012 / Proposed Rules 
that point any residual microbial 
population is inhibited from growing. 
The establishment would also be 
required to validate that the bacterial 
population does not increase during 
storage at the establishment. 
To ensure that the bacterial 
population does not multiply during 
storage (after chilling), the 
establishment could take into account 
any of several effects of temperature on 
microbial growth. For example, at 
temperatures of 48 °F (10 °C) or below, 
the multiplication of microorganisms of 
concern is very slow and has no 
significant effect on the microbiological 
quality of the carcass. At temperatures 
below 50 °F, spoilage bacteria generally 
multiply faster than pathogens, and 
meat or poultry kept below 50 °F will 
tend to spoil before excessive pathogen 
multiplication could occur. Gram 
negative pathogens, such as 
salmonellae, tend not to multiply below 
45 °F (7° C). 
Removal of the time and temperature 
chilling requirements is unlikely to lead 
to a significant change in carcass 
chilling methods or long-established 
packaging and shipping practices that 
the poultry products industry considers 
necessary to meet both regulatory and 
market requirements to maintain raw 
products in a sanitary condition. It 
would, however, eliminate a 
prescriptive requirement and give 
establishments greater flexibility to 
manage how they chill poultry. 
Processors must ensure good 
temperature controls at the 
establishment and during shipment to 
maintain product quality during 
transport and ensure a usable shelf life 
for the products after delivery to retail 
establishments. 
More than half of the raw poultry 
products destined for the retail market 
are shipped using the chill-pack method 
of refrigeration, under which the 
products are quickly chilled after 
packaging and held at temperatures of 
from 28 °F to 32 °F. The rapid chilling 
limits the growth of pathogenic and 
spoilage bacteria on the carcass. Almost 
a third of the products are packed in 
containers filled with shaved or crushed 
ice (the ice-pack method) or dry ice 
(dry-ice pack) and held at temperatures 
between 30 °F and 35 °F and shipped 
to distributors, grocers, and fast-food 
chains. Other raw poultry products are 
shipped either in the frozen state or 
under other forms of refrigeration. This 
proposal would not affect these 
practices and the resulting consumer 
protections. The Agency has, therefore, 
concluded that consumers would be 
fully protected without the very 
prescriptive requirements that this 
proposed rule would eliminate. 
Time and temperature requirements 
are intended to remove animal heat and 
inhibit the multiplication of bacteria, 
including food-poisoning organisms, on 
ready-to-cook poultry products. But 
time and temperature combinations 
other than those in the current 
regulations and technologies other than 
chilling are available to reduce bacterial 
levels and control bacterial 
multiplication on products at the 
processing establishment. 
FSIS would verify that establishments 
are controlling levels of bacteria through 
verifying an establishment’s chilling 
procedures in its HACCP plan or 
Sanitation SOP or other prerequisite 
programs. Consistent with current 
regulations, once the product is chilled, 
the establishment would be required to 
continue to inhibit the outgrowth of 
such organisms as long as the product 
remains at the establishment. 
c. Air Chilling 
Under this proposal, air-chilled 
poultry would be required to meet the 
same regulatory requirements for 
pathogen control as poultry chilled by 
immersion. FSIS is proposing to amend 
the regulations to clarify what 
constitutes the air chilling of poultry 
carcasses and parts. Air chilling is a 
production method that rapidly cools 
poultry carcasses and parts by moving 
them through cold air chambers. In 
immersion chilling, by contrast, the 
carcasses are dipped into ice cold water 
containing one or more antimicrobial 
agents. Regardless of the method used, 
establishments would need to define 
when the chilling process is complete. 
The Agency is taking this step 
because industry is using ‘‘air chilling’’ 
and ‘‘air chilled’’ as label claims on 
packages of ready-to-cook poultry and 
parts. Moreover, many consumers 
apparently believe that air-chilled 
poultry is superior in taste and in 
wholesomeness to poultry that is chilled 
by conventional methods. 
Because of the perceived marketing 
advantage in air chilling poultry, the 
industry has asked FSIS exactly what 
constitutes air chilling. Consequently, 
the Agency has decided to propose a 
definition of air chilling. Based on FSIS’ 
knowledge of industry practices and 
consumer expectations, the Agency is 
proposing to define ‘‘air chilling’’ as the 
method of chilling raw poultry carcasses 
and parts exclusively with air. Under 
this proposed definition, an anti- 
microbial intervention that is applied 
with water may be used for a short 
duration if its use does not result in any 
pick-up of water or moisture, and if it 
does not assist the chilling process by 
lowering the product temperature 
(cooling effect). 
By contrast, so-called evaporation 
chilling does not qualify as air chilling. 
Evaporation chilling consists of using a 
mist to chill poultry carcasses and parts 
and then using air to further chill the 
poultry. 
FSIS is also proposing that ready-to- 
cook poultry may bear an ‘‘air chilled’’ 
or ‘‘air chilling’’ claim on the label if the 
chilling process used with the poultry 
carcasses and parts meets the definition 
of air chilling. 
FSIS would verify that establishments 
that use air chilling and include ‘‘air 
chilled’’ or ‘‘air chilling’’ on their 
product labels use procedures that meet 
all the regulatory requirements, i.e., no 
water is used to aid the chilling process, 
and, if water is used to apply an anti- 
microbial, the product retains no water. 
4. Proposed Changes to Online and 
Offline Reprocessing Regulations 
a. Background 
As noted earlier in this document, 144 
poultry slaughter establishments are 
operating under waivers that allow them 
to use online antimicrobial systems to 
reprocess carcasses accidentally 
contaminated with digestive tract 
contents. On December 1, 2000, FSIS 
issued a proposed rule to permit the use 
of online reprocessing in poultry 
slaughter establishment (‘‘Performance 
Standards for On-line Antimicrobial 
Reprocessing of Pre-chill Poultry 
Carcasses’’ (65 FR 75187)). FSIS 
initiated this rulemaking in response to 
petitions submitted by two companies 
that have developed online reprocessing 
systems, Rhodia, Inc. and Alcide 
Corporation. Rhodia’s online 
reprocessing system uses trisodium 
phosphate (TSP) rinse in combination 
with a chlorinated water system to treat 
carcasses pre-chill. Alcide’s system uses 
acidified sodium chlorite as pre-chill 
antimicrobial treatment. Both systems 
are among those used in establishments 
operating under online reprocessing 
waivers. 
The Agency proposed to amend its 
regulations to allow establishments to 
reprocess contaminated carcasses online 
by applying a pre-chill antimicrobial 
intervention if such carcasses met pre- 
chill performance standards for 
Salmonella and generic E. coli that 
would be significantly lower than the 
current generic E. coli regulatory criteria 
for verifying process control and the 
codified pathogen reduction Salmonella 
performance standards (65 FR 75192). 
At that time, FSIS had determined that 
it was necessary to hold poultry 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:33 Jan 26, 2012 Jkt 226001 PO 00000 Frm 00025 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\27JAP2.SGM 27JAP2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
4V
PT
VN
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
4432 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 18 / Friday, January 27, 2012 / Proposed Rules 
contaminated with digestive tract 
contents to a more rigid pathogen 
reduction standard than product that is 
not visibly contaminated because 
digestive tract contents are a source of 
pathogens and other microorganisms. 
The available data evidenced that 
physical removal of visible 
contamination does not necessarily 
remove significant levels of pathogens 
and other microorganisms. However, 
although both the Rhodia and Alcide 
petition included data from in-plant 
trials that demonstrated that each 
company’s pre-chill online reprocessing 
system is effective in reducing 
pathogens and other microorganisms on 
visibly contaminated poultry carcasses, 
Rhodia’s data were quantitative and 
focused on absolute levels of reduction 
(e.g., less than 0.5 percent of the treated 
samples were positive for Salmonella), 
while Alcide’s data documented degrees 
of reduction (e.g., there was an average 
reduction by 27.27 percent of the 
prevalence of Salmonella on the treated 
samples). 
Therefore, because the various 
antimicrobial treatments used in the in- 
plant online reprocessing trials had 
differing effects with respect to 
pathogen reduction, FSIS did not 
include specific pre-chill standards in 
the proposed rule. Instead, the 
December 2000 proposed rule requested 
comments, especially in the form of 
additional data, on the specific 
performance standards that 
establishments that use pre-chill online 
antimicrobial reprocessing systems 
should be required to meet. 
Most of the comments submitted in 
response to the proposed rule supported 
the use of online reprocessing. Some 
commenters recommended different 
kinds of performance standards that 
could be associated with online 
reprocessing but did not include 
microbiological data to support the 
suggested standards. There was also a 
general lack of consensus on the type of 
performance standard the Agency 
should adopt. Other commenters said 
that FSIS should not require a 
performance standard specifically for 
the use of online reprocessing. 
As discussed above, FSIS enforces a 
zero tolerance standard for 
contamination by visible fecal material 
on poultry carcasses and parts pre-chill. 
Under the current regulations, the 
Agency permits the reprocessing of 
carcasses contaminated on their inner 
surfaces with visible digestive tract 
material before they enter the chilling 
tank. The regulations require that all 
reprocessing of poultry occur at an 
approved reprocessing station away 
from the processing line. Contaminated 
surfaces that are cut must be 
reprocessed only by trimming. 
Contaminated inner surfaces that are not 
cut may be reprocessed by trimming 
alone or in combination with other 
methods, such as washing and 
vacuuming. If the inner surfaces of 
carcasses are reprocessed other than 
solely by trimming, all surfaces of the 
carcass must be treated with chlorinated 
water containing 20 ppm available 
chlorine (9 CFR 381.91 (b)). The Agency 
estimates that approximately 2 to 3 
percent of inspected poultry carcasses is 
reprocessed offline. 
There are concerns that offline 
reprocessing of poultry carcasses may 
spread pathogenic organisms because 
the technique involves a significant 
amount of product handling and 
provides ample opportunity for cross 
contamination. As mentioned earlier in 
this document, FSIS has experience 
with industry use of online reprocessing 
in poultry slaughter establishments 
through approved experimentation 
conducted under waivers from the 
current regulations. Although the data 
generated from these in-plant trials 
demonstrated that various online 
antimicrobial treatments have differing 
effects with respect to pathogen 
reduction, the results indicate that 
online reprocessing, when properly 
employed, is safe and effective. The 
results of 11 online reprocessing system 
waivers show that on the aggregate, 
online reprocessing reduces APC, E. 
coli, Coliforms, and Salmonella on 
treated carcass. 
The Agency also has experience with 
industry use of offline reprocessing 
using antimicrobial agents other than 
chlorinated water containing 20 ppm 
available chlorine through approved 
experimentation conducted under 
waivers. The results from four offline 
reprocessing system waivers show that 
on the aggregate, offline reprocessing 
using antimicrobial agents other than 
chlorine reduces APC, E. coli, and 
Salmonella at a level equal to or better 
than chlorine. These waivers have also 
demonstrated that the use of chlorinated 
water containing between 20 and 50 
ppm available chlorine is safe and 
effective when properly employed. 
b. Proposed Rule 
FSIS is re-proposing to amend its 
regulations to permit the use of online 
reprocessing of poultry carcasses. 
However, the Agency has decided not to 
propose performance standards 
specifically associated with the use of 
online reprocessing. As noted above, 
data generated from in-plant trials show 
that various online antimicrobial 
treatments have differing but equally 
effective results with respect to 
pathogen reduction. The comments 
submitted on this issue did not provide 
any new data on the type of 
performance standard that the Agency 
should adopt. Therefore, instead of 
proposing performance standards, FSIS 
has decided to permit establishments to 
use online reprocessing antimicrobial 
interventions if the parameters for use of 
the antimicrobial intervention system 
have been approved by the FSIS, and 
the establishment incorporates 
procedures for online reprocessing into 
its HACCP plan, or sanitation SOP, or 
other prerequisite programs. 
Establishments choosing to use online 
reprocessing would be required to 
comply with the same standards and 
regulations addressing digestive tract 
contents that are applicable to all 
poultry slaughter establishments. 
Establishments using online 
reprocessing would still be required to 
ensure that poultry carcasses 
contaminated with visible fecal material 
do not enter the chilling tank. 
Permitting establishments the option 
of online reprocessing would allow 
visibly contaminated poultry carcasses 
to remain online for treatment by a 
system of automatic bird washers and 
antimicrobial spraying or drenching 
equipment, rather than have to be 
moved off the line to an offline 
reprocessing station. All carcasses 
would remain on the line to be treated 
with the on-line anti-microbial agent, 
whether they are contaminated or not. 
However, carcasses that are mutilated or 
entirely contaminated are adulterated 
and would not be permitted to be 
reprocessed online or offline. 
Online reprocessing of pre-chill 
young poultry carcasses offers 
substantial benefits—it will reduce the 
potential of cross-contamination, reduce 
digestive tract contamination for all 
carcasses because all carcasses would 
pass through the same system of 
automatic bird washers and 
antimicrobial spraying or drenching 
equipment, and will maintain a 
continuous flow of carcasses down the 
processing line. 
This proposed rule would not require 
establishments to use online 
reprocessing. Establishments that elect 
to use online reprocessing would have 
to incorporate procedures into their 
HACCP plans, or sanitation SOPs, or 
other prerequisite programs for applying 
an online antimicrobial intervention to 
all carcasses after evisceration and 
before the carcasses enter the chiller. 
FSIS will list all antimicrobial agents 
that have been approved for use in 
online reprocessing, together with the 
specific parameters of use under which 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:33 Jan 26, 2012 Jkt 226001 PO 00000 Frm 00026 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\27JAP2.SGM 27JAP2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
4V
PT
VN
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
4433 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 18 / Friday, January 27, 2012 / Proposed Rules 
the antimicrobial agents have been 
approved, in FSIS Directive 7120.1: 
‘‘Safe and Suitable Ingredients Used in 
the Production of Meat, Poultry, and Egg 
Products.’’ As under current regulations, 
the safety of antimicrobial substances 
will be determined by the FDA. The 
suitability of those substances as 
reprocessing agents will be determined 
by FSIS. Establishments opting to use 
online reprocessing would be permitted 
to use online reprocessing systems and 
antimicrobial agents that have been 
approved by FSIS under the specific 
conditions of use for which they have 
been approved. Establishments would 
not need to request a waiver to use these 
approved online reprocessing systems. 
If deficiencies occur with the use of 
online reprocessing, an establishment 
would be required to take corrective 
actions. 
FSIS would verify that establishments 
were properly using online reprocessing 
by verifying an establishment’s online 
reprocessing procedures as detailed in 
its HACCP plan, sanitation SOP, or 
other prerequisite programs. 
FSIS is also proposing to amend the 
current regulations pertaining to offline 
reprocessing to allow establishments 
that reprocess inner surfaces other than 
solely by trimming to use chlorinated 
water containing 20 ppm to 50 ppm 
available chlorine or another approved 
antimicrobial substance in accordance 
with the parameters approved by the 
Agency. As with the methods of online 
reprocessing described above, approved 
methods of offline reprocessing will be 
listed in FSIS Directive 7120.1, ‘‘Safe 
And Suitable Ingredients Used in the 
Production of Meat, Poultry, And Egg 
Products,’’ and establishments would be 
required to incorporate their procedures 
for offline reprocessing into their 
HACCP plans, or sanitation SOPs, or 
other prerequisite programs. 
FSIS is proposing to revise the offline 
reprocessing regulations to remove the 
provisions that provide for the Agency 
to withdraw approval for an 
establishment to conduct offline 
reprocessing. As noted above, under this 
proposal, FSIS would ensure the 
effectiveness of an establishment’s 
procedures for online or offline 
reprocessing through its HACCP 
verification activities. 
Finally, even though a poultry 
product has been subjected to anti- 
microbial treatments as part of online 
reprocessing, it may still qualify for a 
certified organic claim, depending on 
the anti-microbial agent that was used. 
The use of ‘‘organic’’ labeling for such 
poultry products is determined on a 
case-by-case basis. Two treatments 
permitted for use in poultry products 
labeled as ‘‘organic’’ are Hydrogen 
Peroxide and Peracetic Acid. In 
addition, Orange Pulp and Acidified 
Sodium Chlorite have been formally 
recommended for use in organic 
handling in an Agricultural Marketing 
Service (AMS) National Organic 
Program (NOP) proposed rule. 
V. Executive Order 12866 and 
Executive Order 13563 
Executive Orders 13563 and 12866 
direct agencies to assess all costs and 
benefits of available regulatory 
alternatives and, if regulation is 
necessary, to select regulatory 
approaches that maximize net benefits 
(including potential economic, 
environmental, public health and safety 
effects, distributive impacts, and 
equity). Executive Order 13563 
emphasizes the importance of 
quantifying both costs and benefits, of 
reducing costs, of harmonizing rules, 
and of promoting flexibility. This rule 
has been designated an ‘‘economically 
significant regulatory action,’’ under 
section 3(f) of Executive Order 12866. 
Accordingly, the rule has been reviewed 
by the Office of Management and 
Budget. 
Introduction 
The Food Safety and Inspection 
Service (FSIS) is proposing to 
implement a new system for inspecting 
the slaughter of young chickens and 
turkeys. Furthermore, other proposed 
actions include a revised traditional 
inspection system for inspecting the 
slaughter of all poultry; and proposed 
requirements that would apply to all 
establishments that slaughter poultry, 
other than ratites (e.g., ostriches, emu, 
and rhea). 
Need for the Rule 
Given technological advances in the 
production of poultry, the current 
inspection system’s line speed 
restrictions result in higher-than- 
necessary costs per bird. The new 
system described in this document 
makes available a new voluntary 
inspection system that would enable 
producers to decrease production costs 
by increasing line speeds in a manner 
that does not compromise the safety of 
the production process. Based on our 
experience with the HIMP program, 
FSIS expects the new inspection system 
to improve food safety and the 
effectiveness of inspection systems, 
remove unnecessary regulatory 
obstacles to innovation, and make better 
use of the Agency’s resources. 
Furthermore, FSIS has determined 
that contamination of poultry carcasses 
and parts by fecal material and enteric 
pathogens (e.g., Salmonella and 
Campylobacter) are hazards reasonably 
likely to occur in poultry slaughter 
establishments unless addressed in a 
sanitation SOP or other prerequisite 
program. 
Therefore, to ensure that all 
establishments that slaughter poultry 
properly address the food safety hazards 
associated with contamination of 
poultry carcasses by fecal material and 
enteric pathogens, FSIS is proposing 
that all poultry establishments develop, 
implement and maintain written 
procedures to (1) prevent poultry 
carcasses contaminated with visible 
fecal material from entering the chiller 
and (2) prevent contamination of 
carcasses and parts by enteric pathogens 
and fecal contamination throughout the 
entire slaughter and dressing operation. 
FSIS is proposing that establishments 
incorporate these procedures into their 
HACCP plan, or sanitation SOP, or other 
prerequisite program. 
Proposed Actions 
Table 8 compares the components or 
requirements of the actions of the 
proposed rule with a comparison to the 
current regulatory environment for the 
approximately 289 federally inspected 
establishments that slaughtered all 
poultry other than ratites in 2010 (FSIS 
Animal Disposition Reporting System 
(ADRS)). Actions include requirements 
for young chicken and turkey 
establishments and requirements for all 
poultry slaughter establishments 
excluding ratites. Table 8 includes 
information for SIS and NELS 
inspection systems and SIS Automated 
Evisceration Equipment Systems, 
referred to as MAESTRO, which is an 
acronym for ‘‘Meyn’s Automatic 
Evisceration System Total Removal of 
Organs’’, and Nu-Tech Nuova. These 
automated poultry evisceration systems 
were introduced in the late 1990s. For 
young chicken establishments, four 
inspectors are stationed on the same 
side of a processing line that runs at a 
maximum of 140 bpm or 35 bpm per 
inspector—the same per-inspector line 
speed as under SIS. The evisceration 
equipment used in SIS or NELS must be 
supported by establishment employees 
who manually complete carcass and 
viscera presentation. In contrast, the 
automated evisceration systems do not 
require that support. 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:33 Jan 26, 2012 Jkt 226001 PO 00000 Frm 00027 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\27JAP2.SGM 27JAP2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
4V
PT
VN
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
4434 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 18 / Friday, January 27, 2012 / Proposed Rules 
TABLE 8—COMPARISON OF KEY COMPONENTS OF THE BASELINE REGULATORY ENVIRONMENT AND PROPOSED RULE 
Key features or provisions of the proposal 
Very small and small 
establishments, traditional 
Small and large, non-traditional 
Baseline Proposed 
Non-HIMP 
baseline HIMP baseline Proposed 
Number of Establishments .................................... 70 ..................... ........................... 194 ................... 25 .....................
Carcass Sorting Activities ..................................... FSIS ................. FSIS ................. FSIS ................. Establishment ... Establishment. 
Online Inspector per Line ..................................... 1–4 ................... 1–2 a ................. 2–4 ................... 1 ....................... 1. 
Online Inspector Limit ........................................... No ..................... Yes ................... No ..................... Yes ................... Yes. 
Addition of Online Establishment Workers be-
cause of Relocation of Online IPP.
No ..................... Yes ................... No ..................... Yes ................... Yes. 
Line Speed Maximum Birds per minute for 
Young Chickens.
16–25 ............... 16–25 ............... 70–140 ............. 175 ................... 175. 
Line Speed Maximum Birds per minute for Ma-
ture Chickens.
16–25 ............... 16–25 ............... 70 ..................... ........................... SIP Waiver de-
termined. 
Line Speed Maximum Birds per minute for Tur-
keys.
21–51 ............... 21–51 ............... 45 ..................... 55 ..................... 55. 
Line Speed Maximum Birds per minute for Other 
Poultry.
16–25 ............... 16–25 ............... Na ..................... Na ..................... SIP Waiver de-
termined. 
Records to document that products meet the def-
inition of ready-to-cook poultry.
No ..................... No ..................... No ..................... No ..................... Yes. 
New Facilities Requirements ................................ No ..................... No ..................... No ..................... Yes ................... Yes. 
New carcass inspection station online for each 
evisceration line.
No ..................... No ..................... No ..................... Yes ................... Yes. 
New carcass inspection station offline for each 
evisceration line.
No ..................... No ..................... No ..................... Yes ................... Yes. 
New carcass inspection area online for avian leu-
kosis for each evisceration line.
No ..................... No ..................... No ..................... No ..................... Yes. 
Underline Trough for each evisceration line ......... No ..................... No ..................... No ..................... Yes ................... Yes. 
HACCP System—written to prevent contamina-
tion by enteric pathogens and fecal material & 
testing.
No ..................... Yes ................... No ..................... No ..................... Yes. 
HACCP System—written to prevent carcasses 
contaminated with fecal material from entering 
the chill tank.
No ..................... Yes ................... No ..................... No ..................... Yes. 
Replace Requirement to Test for Generic E. coli 
and Salmonella performance standards with 2- 
point testing.
No ..................... Yes ................... No ..................... No ..................... Yes. 
End Waivers for: Chilling Requirements for RTC 
Time and Temp Eliminated.
No ..................... Yes ................... No ..................... No ..................... Yes. 
End Waivers for: Use Online Reprocessing 
(OLR) Antimicrobial Systems or Offline Anti-
microbial Agents.
No ..................... Yes ................... No ..................... No ..................... Yes. 
Na Does not apply. 
a Establishments that already have more than two Inspection Program Personnel (IPP) per evisceration line will get to keep all of them. 
As shown in Table 8, online 
inspectors in the Very Small and Small 
establishments currently range from 1 to 
4 per line. Under the revised traditional 
inspection system, this range will 
decrease to 1 to 2 (except that 
establishments that already have more 
than two IPP per evisceration line will 
be allowed to keep them). The Small 
and Large Establishments, all of which 
FSIS expects to adopt the proposed new 
inspection system, will have 1 online 
inspector per line, down from the 
current 2 to 4 online inspectors per line 
under the current non-traditional 
systems (SIS, NELS, and NTIS) and 
equal to the number of online inspectors 
per line under HIMP. 
Summary of the Proposed Rule’s 
Provisions 
A. Elements of the new system for the 
slaughter of young chickens and 
turkeys: 
(1) Requirements by establishment 
personnel to conduct carcass sorting 
activities before FSIS inspection 
program personnel (IPP) conduct online 
carcass inspection so that only carcasses 
that the establishment deems likely to 
pass inspection are presented to the 
FSIS carcass IPP, expected to impact 
194 establishments; 
(2) A limit of one FSIS online carcass 
inspector per evisceration line, expected 
to impact 194 establishments; 
(3) Faster slaughter and evisceration 
line speeds than are permitted under the 
current inspection systems. Existing 
evisceration line speeds in the non- 
traditional inspection systems are 
currently operating below capacity, 
expected to impact 194 establishments; 
(4) Development, implementation, 
and maintenance of written procedures 
to ensure that young chicken and turkey 
carcasses contaminated with septicemic 
and toxemic conditions do not enter the 
chilling tank. Establishments must 
incorporate these procedures into their 
HACCP plans, or sanitation SOPs, or 
other prerequisite programs, expected to 
impact 219 establishments; 
(5) Removal of the existing Finished 
Product Standards (FPS) and 
subsequent replacement with a 
requirement to maintain records that 
document finished products meet the 
definition of ready-to-cook poultry. 
Establishments will have the flexibility 
to design and implement measures for 
producing ready-to-cook poultry that are 
best suited to their operations. In 
addition to inspecting for food safety 
defects, the FSIS on-line carcass 
inspector will also conduct a carcass 
inspection for defects that are less 
important to food safety. The presence 
of persistent, unattended defects would 
indicate that the plant is not producing 
ready-to-cook poultry, expected to 
impact 219 establishments; and 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:33 Jan 26, 2012 Jkt 226001 PO 00000 Frm 00028 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\27JAP2.SGM 27JAP2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
4V
PT
VN
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
4435 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 18 / Friday, January 27, 2012 / Proposed Rules 
13 Under the revised traditional inspection 
system, only establishments that currently have 
more than two inspectors per line will be allowed 
to retain more than two inspectors per line. 
(6) Requirement that facilities in the 
establishment include: (a) an online 
carcass inspection station for each 
evisceration line; (b) one or more offline 
carcass inspection stations for each 
evisceration line; (c) an online area for 
the online inspection of carcasses for 
avian leukosis; and (d) an underline 
trough for each evisceration line in 
order to prevent the contamination of 
online carcasses by removed poultry 
waste or inedible products of the 
evisceration process. FSIS projects that 
this action would affect about 219 
establishments of about 270 official 
federally inspected establishments that 
slaughter young chickens and turkeys 
and that would adopt this proposed new 
inspection system. This 219 total 
includes HIMP establishments, though 
they will have already installed this 
equipment, meaning that 194 
establishments are affected. 
B. Elements that would affect all 289 
poultry, non-ratite slaughter 
establishments: 
(1) Development, implementation, 
and maintenance of written procedures 
to prevent contamination of carcasses 
and parts by fecal material and enteric 
pathogens (e.g., Salmonella spp. and 
Campylobacter spp.) as part of an 
establishment’s HACCP plans, 
sanitation SOP, or other prerequisite 
programs. FSIS is proposing that, at a 
minimum, these written procedures 
include sampling and analysis for 
microbial organisms at the pre-chill and 
post-chill points in the process to verify 
process control. 
(2) Development, implementation, 
and maintenance of written procedures 
to ensure that carcasses and parts with 
visible fecal contamination do not enter 
the chiller as part of an establishment’s 
HACCP plans, sanitation SOP, or other 
prerequisite programs. 
(3) Removal of current requirement to 
test for generic E. coli and the codified 
Salmonella pathogen reduction 
performance standards for poultry. 
(4) Removal of the chilling 
requirements for ready-to-cook (RTC) 
poultry, which now provide specific 
time and temperature parameters. 
(5) Requirements regarding the use of 
approved online reprocessing 
antimicrobial systems or offline 
reprocessing approved antimicrobial 
agents, if these procedures for 
reprocessing are incorporated into their 
HACCP plans, sanitation SOPs, or other 
prerequisite programs. 
Among the 70 establishments that are 
expected to use the revised traditional 
inspection system, the maximum 
number of FSIS IPP per poultry 
evisceration line will be set to two 
unless the establishment is already 
operating with more than two online 
IPP per line under the current 
traditional poultry inspection system.13 
FSIS projects that this action would 
affect about 51 establishments of about 
270 official federally inspected 
establishments that slaughter young 
chickens and turkeys; and all 19 official 
federally inspected establishments that 
slaughter other chicken and other 
poultry and that would choose to switch 
to the proposed revised traditional 
inspection system. 
Analysis of the Benefits and 
Expenditures (Costs) of the Proposed 
Action 
Baseline 
Table 9 shows the baseline 
characterization of the U.S. poultry 
market other than ratites in 2010. 
Domestic federally inspected 
establishments slaughtered and dressed 
about 9.0 billion birds other than ratites 
in 2010, including about 8.4 billion 
young chickens; about 140 million other 
chickens (e.g., fowl and capon); about 
252 million turkeys; and about 27 
million other poultry (e.g., ducks, geese, 
quail, pheasants, and squab). 
TABLE 9—BASELINE CHARACTERIZATION OF THE U.S. POULTRY MARKET 
Young 
chickens Other chickens Turkey Other poultry 
Market price ($/bird) a ...................................................................................... $3.38 $1.34 $22.74 $9.02 
Market quantity b (thousand birds/year) 
Domestic production ................................................................................. 8,386,671.6 139,499.2 251,787. 8 26,781.1 
Exports ...................................................................................................... 1,314,710.8 14,675.8 18,428.9 903.4 
Imports ...................................................................................................... 9,314.1 0 229.8 243.2 
A summary of the types of young 
chicken and turkey operations and the 
sizes of these official establishments is 
in Table 10 (FSIS ADRS 2010). Table 10 
summarizes the 270 federally inspected 
establishments that slaughtered young 
chickens (231 establishments) and 
turkeys (39 establishments) and 
excludes the 19 other establishments 
that slaughtered only other chickens 
(such as fowl and capon) (6 
establishments) and only other poultry 
(such as squabs, pheasants, quail, ducks 
or geese) (13 establishments) in 2010 
along with the 19 that slaughtered other 
chicken and other poultry. 
TABLE 10—SUMMARY OF HACCP ESTABLISHMENT SIZE OF THE 289 OFFICIAL ESTABLISHMENTS THAT SLAUGHTERED ALL 
POULTRY UNDER FEDERAL INSPECTION IN 2010 (FSIS ADRS, 2010) 
Type of operation Very small Small Large Total Percent of all establishments 
Young Chicken:* 
Young Only ................................................................... 7 (4%) 33 (20%) 124 (76%) 164 (57%) 
Young and Mature ........................................................ 11 (42%) 14 (54%) 1 (4%) 26 (9%) 
Young Chicken and Other Poultry ................................ 26 (63%) 13 (32%) 2 (5%) 41 (14%) 
Turkey: 
Young Only ................................................................... 7 (23%) 6 (20%) 17 (57%) 30 (10%) 
Young and Mature ........................................................ 0 4 (44%) 5 (56%) 9 (3%) 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:33 Jan 26, 2012 Jkt 226001 PO 00000 Frm 00029 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\27JAP2.SGM 27JAP2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
4V
PT
VN
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
4436 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 18 / Friday, January 27, 2012 / Proposed Rules 
14 Based on FSIS’s Animal Disposition Reporting 
System (ADRS) of 2010, 289 establishments 
slaughtered all classes of poultry, under all poultry 
inspection systems in 2010, other than ratites. Of 
the 289 establishments, about 270 establishments 
slaughtered young chicken and young turkey in 
2010. 
15 The very small establishments that slaughter 
annually a relatively small number of young 
chickens and turkeys by methods that do not use 
a high-speed line are included. 
TABLE 10—SUMMARY OF HACCP ESTABLISHMENT SIZE OF THE 289 OFFICIAL ESTABLISHMENTS THAT SLAUGHTERED ALL 
POULTRY UNDER FEDERAL INSPECTION IN 2010 (FSIS ADRS, 2010)—Continued 
Type of operation Very small Small Large Total Percent of all establishments 
Total Young Chicken and Turkeys ........................ 51 (19%) 70 (26%) 149 (55%) 270 (100%) (93%) 
Other Chicken ...................................................................... 0 4 (67%) 2 (33%) 6 (2%) 
Other Poultry ........................................................................ 3 (23%) 10 (77%) 0 13 (4%) 
Total Poultry .................................................................. 54 (19%) 84 (29%) 151 (52%) 289 (100%) (100%) 
* Establishments that slaughter primarily young chickens. 
Projected Number of Establishments 
That Will Opt for the Revised 
Traditional System 
FSIS is proposing that all 
establishments that slaughter poultry 
other than ratites and are not 
participating in the new inspection 
system must switch to the proposed 
revised traditional inspection system. 
FSIS projects that about 70 federally 
inspected establishments will switch 
from their current traditional inspection 
system to the proposed revised 
traditional system for the slaughter of 
poultry, other than ratites. 
The basis for this projection is that 
these 70 establishments consist of 51 
HACCP Very Small establishments, or 
about 19 percent, of the 270 official 
federally inspected establishments that 
slaughter young chickens and turkeys 
and 19 establishments that slaughter 
poultry other than young chicken or 
turkey (or ratites). The Very Small 
young chicken and turkey 
establishments do not have sufficient 
output volume over which to spread the 
initial set-up costs of the proposed new 
system or the training and maintenance 
costs resulting from this system. 
These 70 establishments represent 
about 24 percent of the 289 official 
federally inspected establishments that 
slaughtered one or more classes of 
poultry other than ratites,14 under all 
poultry inspection systems in 2010. In 
addition, based on FSIS’s ADRS records, 
the 70 establishments slaughtered less 
than 1 percent of all poultry (other than 
ratites) of the domestic poultry industry, 
in 2010. Furthermore, based on FSIS’s 
Animal Disposition Reporting System 
(ADRS) records of 2010, the 
approximately 219 official federally 
inspected establishments slaughtered 
about 99.9 percent of the young 
chickens and turkeys of the domestic 
poultry industry in 2010. 
Projected Changes in the Number of 
Lines and Shifts Under the Revised 
Inspection System 
FSIS ADRS 2010 records indicated 
that there were 663 line shifts in 270 
establishments that slaughter young 
chickens and turkeys, as shown in Table 
11.15 In these establishments, one shift 
is defined as about 8 hours per day and 
two shifts as about 16 hours per day. 
Approximately 55 percent of the 270 
establishments operated two slaughter 
shifts per day in 2010. For this analysis, 
the 663 line-shifts of production results 
from multiplying the number of lines by 
the number of shifts. Table 11 shows the 
details of the FSIS ADRS 2010 
information on the 270 young chicken 
and turkey establishments, classified by 
current inspection system. FSIS 
maintains this type of information 
because staffing patterns in current 
inspection are determined based on the 
number and type of slaughter lines. 
These 663 lines operate daily in the 270 
young chicken and turkey 
establishments with one or two 8-hour- 
shift(s), on about 5 or 6 days of the 
week. 
Table 11 also summarizes the 
transition of the young chicken and 
turkey industry to the proposed new 
inspection system. This table shows 
distribution of the 270 establishments 
that slaughtered young chickens and 
turkeys in 2010. 
Of the 187 young chicken 
establishments (not under the 
traditional inspection system) with 542 
high-speed lines, there were 117 
establishments under SIS inspection, 50 
under NELS inspection, and 20 under 
the HIMP inspection. Of the 32 turkey 
establishments (not under the 
traditional inspection system) with 56 
high-speed lines, there were 27 
establishments under NITS inspection, 
and 5 under the HIMP inspection. 
Therefore, 219 of the 270 young chicken 
and turkey establishments, or 81 
percent, have about 598 lines that are 
high speed. 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:33 Jan 26, 2012 Jkt 226001 PO 00000 Frm 00030 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\27JAP2.SGM 27JAP2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
4V
PT
VN
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
4437 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 18 / Friday, January 27, 2012 / Proposed Rules 
TABLE 11—TRANSITION OF 270 OFFICIAL ESTABLISHMENTS AND LINE-SHIFTS THAT SLAUGHTERED YOUNG CHICKENS AND 
TURKEYS UNDER FEDERAL INSPECTION SYSTEMS TO THE NEW INSPECTION SYSTEMS AND THE REVISED TRADITIONAL 
INSPECTION SYSTEM 
[Source: FSIS ADRS, 2010] 
Inspection Systems Before the Rule 
Slaughter Processing—With Lines in 2010 
270 Establishments 
663 Line-shifts 
High-Speed Lines Low-Speed Lines 
219 Establishments 51 Establishments 
598 Line-shifts 65 Line-shifts 
Young Chickens Turkeys Young Chickens and Turkeys 
187 Establishments 32 Establishments 51 Establishments 
542 Line-shifts 56 Line-shifts 65 Line-shifts 
SIS ......................... NELS .................... HIMP ..................... NTIS ..................... HIMP ..................... Traditional. 
117 Estab .............. 50 Estab ............... 20 Estab ............... 27 Estab ............... 5 Estab ................. 51 Establishments. 
346 Line-shifts ....... 153 Line-shifts ...... 43 line-shifts ......... 42 line-shifts ......... 14 line-shifts ......... 65 Line-shifts. 
Expected Inspection Systems After the Proposed Rule Is Implemented 
New Inspection System (Young Chickens and Turkeys) Revised Traditional 
219 Establishments 51 Establishments 
598 Line-shifts 65 Line-shifts 
Notes: The number of line shifts is the number of slaughter lines in establishments that operate one shift plus two times the number of lines in 
establishments that operate two shifts. 
Each shift is about 8 hours of operation per day. 
Table 12 shows that of the 187 young 
chicken establishments (not under the 
traditional inspection system) with 542 
high-speed lines, 127 were HACCP large 
establishments and 60 were HACCP 
small establishments. Of the 32 turkey 
establishments (not under the 
traditional inspection system) with 56 
high-speed lines, 22 were HACCP large 
establishments and 10 were HACCP 
small establishments. None of the 
HACCP very small establishments is 
known to have high-speed line systems. 
TABLE 12—NUMBER OF LINES OF 289 ESTABLISHMENTS THAT SLAUGHTERED YOUNG CHICKENS, OTHER CHICKENS, 
TURKEYS, AND OTHER POULTRY UNDER FEDERAL INSPECTION SYSTEMS 
[FSIS ADRS, 2010] 
Establishment HACCP Size Number of establishments 
Number of 
evisceration 
line-shifts 
Number of 
establishments— 
1-shift 
Number of 
establishments— 
2-shifts 
Numbers of Evisceration Lines in Active Federally Inspected Establishments That Slaughter All Classes of Poultry Other Than Ratites 
Very Small ............................................................................... 54 68 54 0 
Small ........................................................................................ 84 99 82 2 
Large ........................................................................................ 151 531 0 151 
Total .................................................................................. 289 698 136 153 
Numbers of Evisceration Lines in Active Federally Inspected Establishments That Slaughter Primarily Young Chickens 
Very Small ............................................................................... 44 58 44 0 
Small ........................................................................................ 60 60 60 0 
Large ........................................................................................ 127 482 0 127 
Total .................................................................................. 231 600 104 127 
Numbers of Evisceration Lines in Active Federally Inspected Establishments That Slaughter Primarily Turkeys 
Very Small ............................................................................... 7 7 7 0 
Small ........................................................................................ 10 15 10 0 
Large ........................................................................................ 22 41 0 22 
Total .................................................................................. 39 63 17 22 
Numbers of Evisceration Lines in Active Federally Inspected Establishments That Slaughter Only Other Chickens (e.g., Fowl) 
Very Small ............................................................................... 0 0 0 0 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:33 Jan 26, 2012 Jkt 226001 PO 00000 Frm 00031 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\27JAP2.SGM 27JAP2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
4V
PT
VN
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
4438 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 18 / Friday, January 27, 2012 / Proposed Rules 
16 This estimate is very conservative because the 
current maximum speed allowed is 140 BPM for 
young chickens (45 for turkeys), while the proposed 
rule increases this maximum speed to 175 BPM for 
young chickens (55 for turkeys), which represents 
a 25 percent increase in line speed for young 
chickens (22 percent for turkey). 
17 The 3 cents per bird cost reduction will be 
divided between producers and consumers. The 
own price elasticity of demand estimates are ¥0.43 
for chicken and ¥0.58 for turkey and estimates of 
elasticity of supply are 0.22 and 0.26 for chicken 
and turkey, respectively. Muth, M.K., R.H. Beach, 
C.L. Viator, S.A. Karns, and J.L. Taylor. 2006. 
‘‘Poultry Slaughter and Processing Sector Facility- 
Level Model.’’ Prepared for U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Food Safety and Inspection Service. 
Research Triangle Park, NC: RTI International. ERS 
has estimates of own price elasticity of demand for 
chicken ranging from ¥0.602 (1985) to ¥0.841 
(1975–80) (see USDA Economic Research Service at 
http://www.ers.usda.gov/Data/Elasticities/ 
Query.aspx). The greater value, in absolute terms, 
for elasticity of demand suggests that the division 
of the cost reduction between producers and 
consumers will be weighted toward producers. 
18 Structural Change in U.S. Chicken and Turkey 
Slaughter. By Michael Ollinger, James MacDonald, 
Economic Research Service, U.S. Department of 
Agriculture. Agricultural Economic Report No. 787. 
19 See p. 269 of Watkins, B, YC Lu, and YR Chen. 
Economic feasibility analysis for an automated on- 
line poultry inspection technology. Poultry Science 
2000 79: 265–274. 
20 Muth, M.K., R.H. Beach, C.L. Viator, S.A. 
Karns, and J.L. Taylor. 2006. ‘‘Poultry Slaughter and 
Processing Sector Facility-Level Model.’’ Prepared 
for U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food Safety and 
Inspection Service. Research Triangle Park, NC: RTI 
International. 
TABLE 12—NUMBER OF LINES OF 289 ESTABLISHMENTS THAT SLAUGHTERED YOUNG CHICKENS, OTHER CHICKENS, 
TURKEYS, AND OTHER POULTRY UNDER FEDERAL INSPECTION SYSTEMS—Continued 
[FSIS ADRS, 2010] 
Establishment HACCP Size Number of establishments 
Number of 
evisceration 
line-shifts 
Number of 
establishments— 
1-shift 
Number of 
establishments— 
2-shifts 
Small ........................................................................................ 4 4 4 0 
Large ........................................................................................ 2 8 0 2 
Total .................................................................................. 6 12 4 2 
Numbers of Evisceration Lines in Active Federally Inspected Establishments That Slaughter Primarily Other Poultry (e.g., Ducks) 
Very Small ............................................................................... 3 3 3 0 
Small ........................................................................................ 10 20 8 2 
Large ........................................................................................ 0 0 0 0 
Total .................................................................................. 13 23 11 2 
Notes: 
(1) Source: FSIS PBIS, March 2011. These federally inspected establishments have 03J HACCP codes for slaughter operations 
(2) Source: FSIS ADRS, March 2011. These federally inspected establishments slaughtered poultry in 2010. 
(3) 1-shift is about 8 hours of slaughter operation; 2-shifts are about 16 hours of slaughter operation, each workday. 
Expected Benefits associated with the 
voluntary portion of the proposed 
action—Consumer and producer 
benefits from increased line speed: 
Reducing current restrictions on line 
speeds will result in more birds being 
processed per minute. For this analysis, 
we used a conservative increase of an 
average of 6 percent for the line speed 
and measured as increased birds per 
minute (BPM), for young chickens.16 
FSIS requests comments on the 
precision of this estimate for increased 
line speed. At this relatively low 
marginal increase in line speed or BPM, 
we expect that the affected 
establishments would process an 
average of 6 percent more BPM with no 
additional online labor cost on the 
evisceration line. This is because we 
expect that the establishments would do 
some of their sorting and removal of 
defective birds before rehang. Then 
there should be few if any empty 
shackles as can happen when FSIS 
inspection program personnel remove 
defective birds after the rehang process. 
Furthermore, the additional adoption of 
online reprocessing under these actions 
would keep additional birds in the 
evisceration shackles instead of being 
sent to the rework area. These changes 
with the new inspection system would 
increase the number of birds populating 
the evisceration shackles and thus 
increase the throughput or BPM under 
the new inspection system. For the 
private sector (e.g., industry and 
consumer groups) of the economy, FSIS 
projects that the proposed rule will 
result in lower costs of production, 
which will lead to more industry profits 
and lower consumer prices. The lower 
production costs may also lead to 
increased sales of domestic and 
exported products in the long run. We 
estimate these economic benefits to be 
at least $258.9 million (3 cents per bird 
for 99.9 percent of 8.64 billion birds) 
annually. This is the expected annual 
net increase in consumer and producer 
surplus and does not take into account 
either the increased long-term 
production or expanded exports. This 
increase in well-being from the lower 
cost will benefit both consumers and 
producers. Given the estimates of own 
price elasticity of demand and elasticity 
of supply for both chicken and turkey,17 
the expectation is that, with the 
relatively high (in absolute terms) 
estimate for own price elasticity of 
demand, 2 to 2.4 cents of the 3 cents per 
bird will go to producer surplus and the 
remaining 0.6 to 1 cent will go to 
consumer surplus. Assuming an 
increase of 6 percent in line speed 
allows for an estimate of the decrease in 
processing cost per bird. This means 
that, for a given unit of a worker’s time, 
6 percent more birds will be processed. 
Assuming that labor is 15 percent of the 
total cost of processing a bird,18 then 
this increase of 6 percent in the number 
of birds per period of time means a 
decrease of 0.85% in the processing cost 
of a bird. Using a wholesale price of 
ready-to-cook poultry of $1.35 per 
kilogram and a ready-to-cook poultry 
wholesale cost of $1.23 per kilogram,19 
then the mark-up from wholesale is 10 
percent ((1.35¥1.23)/1.23 = 9.8%). With 
a weighted average wholesale price per 
bird for young chicken and turkey of 
$3.94,20 the wholesale cost, using the 
mark-up margin of 10.0%, is $3.58. 
With the 0.85% reduction in cost, the 
wholesale cost will decline by 3 cents 
($3.58 × 0.0085). This reduction of 3 
cents will be divided between producers 
and consumers, based on the relative 
absolute values of the elasticities of 
demand and supply. 
Expected Benefits associated with the 
voluntary portion of the proposed 
action—Public health benefits from 
reallocating FSIS inspection activities: 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:33 Jan 26, 2012 Jkt 226001 PO 00000 Frm 00032 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\27JAP2.SGM 27JAP2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
4V
PT
VN
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
4439 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 18 / Friday, January 27, 2012 / Proposed Rules 
21 Food and Drug Administration, Prevention of 
Salmonella Enteritidis in Shell Eggs During 
Production, Storage, and Transportation, July 2009. 
Batz et. al estimate an averted Salmonella illnesses 
is $3,220. This would reduce the estimated cost 
savings from 4,286 averted cases from Salmonella, 
from $77.15 million to $13.8 million. The final 
economic analysis will provide estimates for 
Salmonella and Campylobacter based on consistent 
methodology. 
22 Batz, Michael B., Sandra Hoffman, and J. Glenn 
Morris, Jr. 2011. Ranking the Risks: The 10 
Pathogen-Food Combinations with the Greatest 
Burden on Public Health. University of Florida 
Emerging Pathogens Institute. 
FSIS hypothesizes that switching 
existing FSIS IPP activities towards 
more off-line verification activities 
(such as sanitation performance 
standards, sampling, other inspection 
requirements, and fecal inspections) 
may reduce pathogen levels in poultry 
slaughter establishments. This is 
supported in the findings from the FSIS 
Risk Assessment (October, 2011), which 
found a significant correlation between 
more off-line inspection activities and 
lower levels of Salmonella and 
Campylobacter in certain poultry 
products. It is possible that these 
reductions may lead to a corresponding 
reduction in illnesses. 
Using results from this risk 
assessment (Table 7), FSIS estimates 
that the proposed rule is expected to 
reduce the number of human illness 
attributed to young chicken and turkey 
products by an average of about 4,286 
(with a range of 1,514 to 7,682) 
Salmonella spp. illnesses and about 986 
(with a range of 26 to 2,865) 
Campylobacter spp. illnesses. Annual 
Salmonella spp. cost savings from an 
averted case is $18,000 (74 FR 33030); 21 
and the annual Campylobacter spp. cost 
savings from an averted case is $2,067.22 
Thus, FSIS projects that the monetized 
value of the human illness reductions is 
an expected annual average of about 
$79.19 million (with a range of $27.3 
million to $144.2 million). 
TABLE 13—EXPECTED TOTAL POTENTIAL REDUCTIONS IN HUMAN ILLNESSES OR ILLNESSES AVERTED AND PROJECTED 
COST SAVINGS DUE TO BETTER INSPECTION PROCEDURE PERFORMANCE IN YOUNG CHICKEN AND TURKEY SLAUGH-
TER ESTABLISHMENTS 
What happens if all young chicken and turkey establishments have increased unscheduled offline inspec-
tion procedures? 1 2 3 
Expected value 
Range 
10th percentile 90th percentile 
Annual Salmonella spp. cost sav-
ings a and averted illnesses: 
$77.15 million ...............................
(4,286 illnesses averted) ..............
$27.25 million ...............................
(1,514 illnesses averted) ..............
$138.28 million. 
(7,682 illnesses averted). 
Annual Campylobacter spp. cost 
savings b and averted illnesses: 
$2.04 million .................................
(986 illnesses averted) .................
$0.05 million .................................
(26 illnesses averted) ...................
$5.92 million 
( 2,865 illnesses averted). 
Annual Total Cost savings ...... $79.19 million ............................... $27.30 million ............................... $144.20 million. 
1 The number of establishments in each size category throughout the economic analysis is different from the number used in the risk assess-
ment. The risk assessment uses the most recent data for the correlation between baseline and inspection data (2008) and participating establish-
ments, while the economic analysis uses 2010 size categories to reflect the most up-to-date size distribution. 
2 The reported expected reductions in illnesses represent the unscheduled inspection procedures scenario from the risk assessment. 
3 Totals may not add up due to rounding. 
a Average cost savings from an averted Salmonella spp. cost case is $18,000. This estimate is based on the FDA estimate (74 FR 33030). 
b Average cost savings from an averted Campylobacter spp. is $2,067. This estimate is based on Batz, Michael B., Sandra Hoffman, and J. 
Glenn Morris, Jr. 2011. 
Thus, FSIS estimates that the total 
annual average private sector benefit 
from this proposed rule is 
approximately $338.1 million ($258.9 + 
$79.19). 
Unquantifiable Benefits Associated With 
the Mandatory Portion of the Proposed 
Action—Public Health Benefits 
Resulting From Preventing 
Contamination of Carcasses and Parts 
by Enteric Pathogens and Fecal Material 
Throughout the Entire Slaughter and 
Dressing Operation 
In addition to the benefits listed in the 
previous section, FSIS expects public 
health benefits from the mandatory 
component of the proposed rule, which 
is proposed to apply to all poultry 
slaughter establishments. FSIS is 
proposing to require that all poultry 
slaughter establishments develop, 
implement, and maintain, as part of 
their HACCP plans, sanitation SOPs, or 
other prerequisite programs, written 
procedures to prevent contamination of 
carcasses and parts by enteric pathogens 
and fecal contamination throughout the 
entire slaughter and dressing operation. 
FSIS is proposing that, at a minimum, 
these procedures must include sampling 
and analysis for microbial organisms at 
the pre-chill and post-chill points in the 
process to monitor process control for 
enteric pathogens. 
Effective sanitary dressing and 
process control procedures are crucial to 
an establishment’s ability to produce a 
clean, safe, and wholesome product. 
The existing regulations require that 
establishments prevent poultry 
carcasses contaminated with visible 
fecal contamination from entering the 
chiller (9 CFR 381.65(a)). To clarify the 
existing requirements, FSIS is proposing 
to require that that establishments 
develop, implement, and maintain 
written procedures to ensure that 
poultry carcasses contaminated with 
visible fecal material do not enter the 
chilling tank. However, because this 
proposed requirement reflects existing 
practices, it is unlikely to have a 
significant effect on the poultry 
industry. 
While preventing poultry carcasses 
contaminated with visible fecal material 
from entering the chiller is an important 
safeguard for reducing the prevalence of 
pathogens on poultry carcasses, it 
cannot be fully effective unless 
establishments implement appropriate 
measures to prevent contamination from 
occurring throughout the slaughter and 
dressing operation. Although many 
establishments do have in place process 
control measures to prevent 
contamination of carcasses by enteric 
pathogens and fecal material throughout 
the slaughter and dressing process, they 
are not required to maintain written 
procedures that describe their process 
control measures or to maintain records 
to verify the effectiveness of their 
process controls. In addition, under the 
existing regulations, official poultry 
slaughter establishments are required to 
comply with prescriptive requirements 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:33 Jan 26, 2012 Jkt 226001 PO 00000 Frm 00033 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\27JAP2.SGM 27JAP2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
4V
PT
VN
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
4440 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 18 / Friday, January 27, 2012 / Proposed Rules 
23 Based on the 2008 Bureau of Labor Statistics 
employment cost index. 
24 This is a simplifying assumption. 
for testing for generic E. coli at the end 
of the chilling process as a means of 
verifying process control. 
As discussed earlier in this document, 
FSIS’s experience with using post-chill 
testing for generic E. coli to monitor 
process control for fecal contamination 
and sanitary dressing has led the 
Agency to conclude that such testing is 
not the most effective way to prevent 
contamination from occurring 
throughout the slaughter and dressing 
operation. Therefore, FSIS is proposing 
to remove the prescriptive generic E. 
coli testing and replacing it with a more 
flexible microbiological testing scheme 
that provides for testing at the points in 
the process where contamination is 
most likely to occur, i.e., pre-chill and 
post-chill. Such a testing scheme has the 
benefit of allowing poultry slaughter to 
have the flexibility they need to 
determine which microbiological 
organisms will best help them to 
monitor the effectiveness of their 
process control procedures. It will also 
allow establishments to identify the 
points in their production process 
where microbial levels are the highest 
and to implement controls at the points 
where contamination is most likely to 
occur. 
FSIS is proposing to require that 
establishments incorporate their 
procedures for preventing 
contamination of carcasses with enteric 
pathogens and fecal material into their 
HACCP systems, and that they maintain 
records sufficient to document the 
implementation and monitoring of their 
procedures. These records will improve 
the establishment’s overall HACCP 
system by providing additional 
documentation that the establishment 
and FSIS can use to verify the 
effectiveness of the establishment’s 
process control procedures. The records 
that would be required under this 
proposed rule, including the records of 
the establishment’s testing results, will 
provide establishments and FSIS with 
on-going information on the 
effectiveness of the establishment’s 
process controls, and allow 
establishments to identify situations 
associated with in an increase in 
microbial levels so that they can take 
the necessary corrective actions to 
prevent further potential contamination. 
The documentation that would result 
from this proposed rule could also limit 
the scope of a product recall if the 
establishment maintains records 
sufficient to allow it to identify the 
point when a lack of process control 
could have resulted in product 
contamination. 
Summary of Estimated Costs and Cost 
Savings of the Proposed Rule 
Items 1–7 are costs and cost savings 
associated with the voluntary 
component of the proposed new rule: 
1. Addition of Online Establishment 
Workers Because of the Relocation of 
Online Inspection Program Personnel 
and Online Sorters—Annual Cost 
Associated With the Voluntary 
Component 
FSIS expects, based on information 
provided by establishments 
participating in the HIMP pilot program, 
that young chicken and turkey 
establishments initially would expand 
their labor resources by employing 
about 0.8 staff-years of online sorters 
and carcass-inspection helpers that 
substitute for every 1.0 staff-year of FSIS 
online inspection program personnel. 
For example, in one shift, an 
establishment that had ten FSIS online 
inspection program personnel would 
add eight online sorters and carcass- 
inspection helpers in response to the 
proposal. This substitution rate is based 
on survey results of young chicken and 
turkey establishments that are in the 
HIMP pilot program. As the line speed 
is increased, however, the substitution 
rate is expected to increase to 1.0 FTE 
or even higher. 
In the 219 establishments that will 
slaughter young chickens and turkeys 
under the new inspection system, FSIS 
expects between 663 and 750 FSIS 
online inspection program personnel 
will be shifted from online inspection to 
verification inspection activities and 
online inspection of carcasses (carcass 
inspection, after the final wash and 
before the chiller). FSIS estimates that 
this shifted number of 750 FSIS online 
inspection program personnel is the 
upper bound of the expected range for 
the 219 establishments that would 
transition to the new inspection system, 
if the proposed rule is put into effect. 
Using the expected substitution rate 
of 0.8 (8 for 10), the 219 establishments 
would initially need about 600 (750 × 
.8) additional trained personnel to do 
the online sorting of young chickens 
and turkeys, and helping carcass 
inspection program personnel for all 
shifts. This implies that about 750 
inspection program personnel would be 
reassigned to other inspection activities 
within the establishment (e.g. carcass 
inspection, verification inspection, and 
relief coverage). The 750 inspection 
program personnel, however, may be an 
over estimate, because of attrition. 
The Bureau of Labor Statistics 
indicated that the expected standard 
rate for establishment labor is about 
$13.95 per hour,23 and including 
benefits and related costs, the wage cost 
is taken for this analysis to be about 
$27,900 per staff-year (for about 2000 
hours 24 per staff-year). Therefore, the 
average cost to 219 establishments for 
the initial additional 600 staff-years of 
online sorter labor is about $16.7 
million annually (600 × $27,900). The 
cost is expected to decrease on a per- 
bird basis, because of the expected labor 
productivity increase associated with 
increased line speed and more cost- 
effective evisceration equipment. 
2. Training Online Sorters, Under the 
New Inspection System—One-Time 
Cost Associated With the Voluntary 
Component 
Initial training costs are expected, 
based on information provided by 
establishments participating in the 
HIMP pilot program, to be about $200 to 
$600 per employee (sorter), or an 
average cost of about $400 per 
employee. Additional training costs 
accrue for the extra establishment 
employees (sorters) needed to cover for 
task rotation patterns and scheduled 
and unscheduled leave of trained 
establishment employees. FSIS projects, 
based on information provided by 
establishments participating in the 
HIMP pilot program, that rotation 
schedules would be about three times 
per shift. FSIS did not report costs in 
the official HIMP Report. FSIS, 
however, obtained information on 
establishment costs and practices from 
site visits to the HIMP project 
establishments and non-HIMP 
establishments that slaughter poultry. 
The HIMP establishments (20 young 
chickens and 5 turkeys, as shown in 
Table 11) reported a range of costs for 
their implementation of the FSIS’s 
requirements of the HIMP inspection 
system. Based on this information, FSIS 
made assumptions on costs and 
practices of the poultry establishments 
that would be affected by this proposed 
rule. We are requesting information on 
the expected costs to the plants that will 
be affected by the proposal. 
FSIS assumes that the 219 
establishments will need about 3.5 to 4 
times the replacement staff-hours, or 
about 2,100 (600 × 3.5) to 2,400 (600 × 
4) establishment employees who are 
trained to perform online sorting and CI 
helper activities. Therefore, initially, an 
average of about 2,250 establishment 
employees will need to be trained at a 
one-time average cost of about $400 
each, or a total for 219 establishments, 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:33 Jan 26, 2012 Jkt 226001 PO 00000 Frm 00034 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\27JAP2.SGM 27JAP2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
4V
PT
VN
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
4441 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 18 / Friday, January 27, 2012 / Proposed Rules 
of about $0.9 million (2,250 × $400). 
FSIS is requesting comments on these 
assumptions for staff turnover in the 
official establishments. 
3. Training, Annually—for Replacement 
Sorters Due to Labor Turnover—Annual 
Cost Associated With the Voluntary 
Component 
Annual labor costs are estimated 
based on information provided by 
establishments participating in the 
HIMP pilot program, in order to account 
for the expected labor turnover rates in 
young chicken and turkey 
establishments and the need to train and 
educate replacement establishment 
personnel for sorting young chickens 
and turkeys. 
FSIS projects that if the annual 
turnover rate of trained sorters is taken 
to be between 5 and 20 percent, or an 
average of 12.5 percent over a five-year 
period, then about 281 (.125 × 2250) 
new establishment sorters will need to 
be trained annually. FSIS projects that 
the initial training costs are expected to 
be about $200 to $600, or an average of 
about $400 per employee (sorter), then 
the additional training costs will 
average about $0.11 million (281 × 
$400), annually. 
4. Continuing Education & Training, 
Annually—for Existing Sorter Labor— 
Annual Cost Associated With the 
Voluntary Component 
After the initial training, the 
establishments will have additional 
costs to provide ongoing annual 
education and training (formalized). 
This education and training is for the 
knowledgeable establishment staff 
(sorters) of an average of about 2,250 
persons who need to maintain a 
sufficiently high correlation of 
agreement with FSIS on regulatory 
compliance for dressing performance 
standards. The annual training cost, 
based on information provided by 
establishments participating in the 
HIMP pilot program, was about $150 to 
$200 per sorter, or an average of $175 
per sorter, then the total average cost 
would be about $0.39 million (2250 × 
$175), annually. 
5. Additional Facilities: Online Carcass 
and Offline Inspection Stations, Avian 
Leukosis Inspection Area, and 
Underline Troughs Associated With the 
Voluntary Component 
Under the proposal, all of the poultry 
establishments participating in the new 
poultry slaughter inspection system will 
need to add capital investments to 
install a carcass inspection station 
except for the establishments 
participating in the HIMP pilot. 
Establishments operating under SIS, 
NELS, and NTIS are currently required 
to have an underline trough but they 
will need an additional new trough at 
the end of the evisceration line. The 25 
establishments (20 young chicken and 5 
turkey) that operate under HIMP will 
not need new trough installations under 
the proposed new rule. This means that 
of the 219 establishments projected to 
adopt the proposed new system, 194 
will need installations that will require 
inspection stations that will cost about 
$5,000 to $6,000, or an average of about 
$5,500, for most establishments, based 
on information provided by 
establishments participating in the 
HIMP pilot program. FSIS assumes 
installations will require a stainless 
steel underline trough (or equivalent) 
that will cost about $8,000 to $12,000, 
or an average of about $10,000, for most 
establishments, based on information 
provided by commercial construction 
guidelines of costs for purchasing (or 
constructing) and installing such 
systems. 
For the carcass inspection station, this 
cost is for the construction of a stainless 
steel elevated stand that has stairs and 
a surrounding guardrail. This carcass 
inspection stand must have a floor area 
large enough to allow sufficient space to 
accommodate the carcass inspection 
program person and an establishment 
employee, that is, a helper for removal 
of defective or rejected birds from the 
line. This inspection station would 
contain plumbing for hot and cold 
water, and a stainless steel hand- 
washing basin. 
Furthermore, electrical service must 
be installed for powering bright lights 
(200 foot-candles of illumination at the 
level of the bird) required for 
inspection, and control switches must 
be installed to allow the starting and 
stopping of the eviscerating line. The 
verification inspection station typically 
is already in place in most young 
chicken and turkey, and other poultry 
slaughter establishments. Therefore, in 
most cases, there would be no 
additional cost for a verification 
inspection station near the end of the 
eviscerating line. The verification 
inspection station is typically a stainless 
steel table illuminated with bright lights 
(200 foot-candles). 
These capital investments for the 
carcass inspection stations are necessary 
for each of the about 566 eviscerating 
lines now installed in the 194 non- 
HIMP establishments that will 
implement the new inspection system. 
Therefore, the calculated cost for adding 
carcass and verification inspection 
stations for the 194 establishments is 
about $8.8 million (566 × $15,500). 
6. Carcass Dressing for Meeting the 
Definition of Ready-to-Cook (RTC) 
Poultry and the Removal of the Finished 
Product Standards (FPS) Under the New 
Inspection System Associated With the 
Voluntary Component 
FSIS is proposing to remove the 
existing Finished Product Standards 
(FPS) and replacing them with a 
requirement that establishments 
maintain documentation to demonstrate 
that the products resulting from their 
slaughter operations meet the definition 
of ready-to-cook poultry. Establishments 
will have the flexibility to design and 
implement measures for producing 
ready-to-cook poultry that are best 
suited to their operations. FSIS on-line 
carcass inspectors will inspect each 
carcass for defects that are important for 
food safety, such as septicemia and 
toxemia, as well as for defects that are 
less important to food safety but that 
may render carcasses or parts 
unwholesome or adulterated, such as 
persistent, unattended removable 
animal diseases and trim and dressing 
defects. 
FSIS seeks comments on these carcass 
dressing issues—products resulting 
from their slaughter operations would 
meet the definition of ready-to-cook 
poultry. Based on meeting the definition 
of ready-to-cook poultry, how many 
additional birds would go to the salvage 
and reprocessing area? How many 
additional establishment employees 
would be added to the eviscerating line 
to do online trimming and reprocessing? 
What are the relationships between 
salvage and reprocessing activities 
(online and offline) and eviscerating 
line speeds? For example, for every 20 
to 25 percent increase in line speed, 
would the establishment require a five 
percent increase in labor time for extra 
trimming and cleaning activities (online 
and offline)? FSIS also seeks comments 
on the requirement that establishments 
maintain documentation to demonstrate 
that the products resulting from their 
slaughter operations meet the definition 
of ready-to-cook poultry. 
7. Elimination of Some Line Speed 
Restrictions—Annual Cost Savings 
Associated With the Voluntary 
Component 
Based on information provided by 
establishments participating in the 
HIMP pilot program, establishments 
will marginally increase their line 
speeds given the opportunity to take 
advantage of the flexibility provided by 
the proposal and relocation of 
inspection program personnel. This will 
reduce their dressing costs, as discussed 
in the benefits section above. To 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:33 Jan 26, 2012 Jkt 226001 PO 00000 Frm 00035 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\27JAP2.SGM 27JAP2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
4V
PT
VN
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
4442 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 18 / Friday, January 27, 2012 / Proposed Rules 
25 Samples are assumed to be collected for every 
26,700 chickens and every 3,000 turkeys. The 
sampling event refers to sampling at pre-chill and 
post-chill. This ensures that sampling is based on 
volume of output and does not impose unnecessary 
burdens on small businesses. 
26 The baseline sampling has less labor for 
collection because it is done in a relatively short 
period of time (a few sampling events) versus 
ongoing sampling that extends over a year with 
multiple sampling events. Therefore, the cost per 
sample for the one-time baseline is lower than for 
the ongoing sampling. The baseline was calculated 
by multiplying 150 samples collected for the 
baseline by the prorated hourly pay of $29.03 for 
a QC technician for 25 minutes needed to collect 
the samples and a cost of $33.75 for analytical cost 
of the samples. This was done for all 289 firms. For 
annual costs, the same salary and analytical costs 
applied and were multiplied by the estimated 
number of samples assuming 1 for each 26,700 
chickens and 3,000 turkeys. 
gradually increase line speeds, some 
establishments will not need to 
purchase additional equipment, until 
they reach their slaughter and 
eviscerating-line system capacity limit 
(i.e., re-hang, chilling, or cold (chilled 
and frozen) storage capacity). Some 
establishments will need to purchase 
more automated evisceration and 
dressing equipment, or eliminate 
bottlenecks. Eliminating bottlenecks of 
production could include the 
establishment’s additional capital 
investments (facilities or equipment) of 
upgrading the capacity of transfer and 
re-hang stations; straightening the run of 
slaughter and eviscerating lines; 
increasing cut-up or deboning capacity; 
adding chillers or increasing chilling 
capacity; or increasing cold (chilled and 
frozen) storage capacity. 
FSIS solicits information on how the 
elimination of some line speed 
restriction in the proposed rule would 
affect cost saving per dressed carcass, 
such with greater throughput of dressed 
carcasses and a lower unit cost per 
dressed carcass or per pound of product 
for labor, materials, water, and energy 
per bird or per pound of dressed poultry 
carcass. FSIS also solicits information 
on planned investments in the domestic 
poultry industry in order to increase 
evisceration line speed within the next 
few years. 
The estimated costs and costs savings 
to establishments from the voluntary 
portion of the proposed regulation are 
summarized in Table 14a. Annualized 
costs are calculated using a discount 
rate of 7% over a ten year planning 
period. 
TABLE 14a—ESTIMATED ANNUAL COST (COST SAVINGS) OF THE PROPOSED RULE TO ESTABLISHMENTS: ELEMENTS 
ASSOCIATED WITH THE VOLUNTARY COMPONENT OF THE PROPOSED NEW RULE (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 
One-time 
costs 
Recurring 
annual 
costs 
Additional annual sorting labor ........................................................................................................................................ .................... 16.7 
Additional knowledge costs (human capital): 
Initial one-time training of sorting workers ............................................................................................................... 0.9 ....................
Training annual sorting labor-turnover rate of 12.5% .............................................................................................. .................... 0.11 
Continuing annual education and training ................................................................................................................ .................... 0.39 
Additional one-time capital expenditure for inspection stations and underline troughs .................................................. 8.8 ....................
Total costs to establishments from voluntary component ................................................................................ 9.7 17.2 
Average cost to establishments from voluntary component ........................................................................................... 18.49 
Items 8–13 are costs and cost savings 
associated with the mandatory 
component of the proposed new rule: 
8. Sampling and Analysis for Microbial 
Organisms Pre-Chill and Post-Chill to 
monitor Process Control for Enteric 
Pathogens—One-Time and Annual Cost 
Associated With the Mandatory 
Component 
New sampling is required for a one- 
time baseline and for recurring 
microbial testing to monitor process 
control for enteric pathogens. Such 
testing is required as part of the written 
procedures to prevent contamination of 
carcasses and parts by enteric pathogens 
and fecal contamination throughout the 
entire slaughter and dressing operation. 
FSIS is proposing that establishments 
incorporate these procedures into their 
HACCP plan, or sanitation SOP, or other 
prerequisite program, and that they 
maintain records sufficient to document 
the implementation and monitoring of 
these procedures. 
The baseline sampling would be done 
in a relatively short period of time and 
only sample a few events. Thus it would 
require less labor for collection 
compared to the ongoing sampling that 
would extend over a year with multiple 
sampling events. Therefore, the 
estimated cost per sample for the one- 
time baseline is lower than for the 
ongoing sampling. The baseline was 
calculated by multiplying 150 samples 
collected for the baseline by the 
prorated hourly pay of $29.03 for a QC 
technician for 25 minutes needed to 
collect the samples and a cost of $33.75 
for analytical cost of the samples. This 
was done for all 289 firms. 
For annual costs, the same salary and 
analytical costs were applied and 
multiplied by the estimated number of 
samples, which was calculated by 
assuming 319,332 chicken samples 
(8.526 billion chickens divided by 
26,700 chickens for the number of 
sampling events) plus 83,929 turkey 
samples (251.787 million turkeys 
divided by 3,000 for sampling events 
number) multiplied by a wage rate of 
$29.03 times 5/60.25 
FSIS projects this cost for testing 
samples and collection of the samples to 
be about $2.0 million one-time for the 
baseline and about $12.6 million 
annually for the poultry industry.26 
Furthermore, FSIS expects costs for 
the ‘‘ready-to-cook’’ proposed 
requirements would be offset by the 
present costs to industry for the 
Finished Product Standards, and that 
additional cost, if any, to industry 
would be minimal. Thus FSIS did not 
include costs associated with the 
requirement. 
9. Additional Labor Due to Increased 
Line Speed Associated With the 
Mandatory Component 
Young chicken and turkey, and other 
poultry slaughter establishments that 
can increase line speed with their 
existing eviscerating line equipment, 
would probably also need to add 
additional labor to the line in order to 
handle the additional birds per minute 
that need to be sorted and trimmed, 
salvaged, or reprocessed, online and 
offline. In this scenario, the 
establishment does not replace its 
existing eviscerating line equipment 
with newer technology. More labor is 
applied to the line but the labor per bird 
would decrease due to the increase in 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:33 Jan 26, 2012 Jkt 226001 PO 00000 Frm 00036 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\27JAP2.SGM 27JAP2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
4V
PT
VN
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
4443 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 18 / Friday, January 27, 2012 / Proposed Rules 
27 Calculated by assuming 319,332 chicken 
samples (8.526 billion chickens divided by 26,700 
chickens for the number of sampling events) plus 
83,929 turkey samples (251.787 million turkeys 
divided by 3,000 for sampling events number) 
multiplied by a wage rate of $29.03 times 5/60. For 
eliminated E. coli recordkeeping, 470,000 samples 
were recorded in 2.5 minutes at $29.03 per hour. 
throughput from the increase in the line 
speed. 
FSIS solicits information on the 
additional labor that might be needed. 
10. Additional Recordkeeping, 
Monitoring, and Record Storage 
Associated With the Mandatory 
Component 
Establishments are required to 
maintain written documentation of 
sample results for verifying their 
process controls. The proposal that all 
poultry slaughter establishments 
monitor their systems through microbial 
testing and recordkeeping implies more 
information than presently required to 
be monitored. Thus, FSIS includes only 
recurring costs associated with record 
keeping. FSIS assumed that the time 
spent for a QC technician salaried at 
$29.03 per hour for recording results 
keeping (including review) for each 
sample event is 5 minutes. FSIS 
estimates the time spent presently is 
about 2.5 minutes. From these, FSIS 
estimated recordkeeping costs for this 
proposed requirement to be $975,600 
per year, based on an assumption of 5 
minutes to record each of the over 
403,300 samples 27 under the new 
system. This replaces $568,500 for 
recordkeeping for the generic E. coli 
testing, based on an estimate of 2.5 
minutes per sample for recording. Since 
FSIS does not specify required testing 
frequencies, establishments may test 
with lower frequency than the one 
assumed and would therefore have 
lower costs. FSIS does not dictate the 
frequency of testing that is assumed in 
the cost estimates. A lower frequency 
would result in lower costs. 
11. a. Modification of the HACCP Plans 
and Process Control Plans—One-Time 
Cost Associated With the Mandatory 
Component 
The establishments would need to 
modify their HACCP plans, Sanitation 
SOPs, or other Pre-requisite programs so 
as to address septicemic and toxemic 
carcasses and food safety hazards that 
are reasonably likely to occur. 
Establishments would also be required 
to maintain records to document that 
their product meet the definition for 
ready-to-cook poultry. Under the 
proposed rule, establishments will have 
the flexibility to design and implement 
measures to address OCP defects that 
are best suited to their operations. They 
will also be responsible for determining 
the type of records that will best 
document that they are meeting the 
ready-to-cook poultry definition. The 
FSIS estimates based on information 
provided by establishments 
participating in the HIMP pilot program, 
that these initial costs (for developing 
and verifying the plan) would average 
about $5,000 for a HACCP small and 
about $9,000 for a HACCP large 
establishment; and FSIS projected about 
$2,000 for a HACCP very small 
establishment for process control 
implementation costs in response to the 
requirements for the new inspection 
system in the first year; or a one-time 
average cost of about $1.9 million ((83 
× $5000) + (151 × $9000) + (55 × $2000)) 
in total for 289 establishments. 
11. b. Written Procedures To Ensure 
That Carcasses and Parts With Visible 
Fecal Contamination Do Not Enter the 
Chiller, After Evisceration Operations 
Associated With the Mandatory 
Component 
FSIS is proposing that all of the 289 
federally inspected establishments that 
slaughtered poultry other than ratites in 
2010 develop, implement, and maintain, 
as part of their HACCP plans, or 
sanitation SOPs, or other prerequisite 
programs, written procedures to ensure 
that carcasses and parts with visible 
fecal contamination do not enter the 
chiller, after evisceration operations. 
The one-time cost to develop the plan 
and ongoing cost of implementation and 
maintenance of the plan are included in 
the costs of changing the HACCP system 
as discussed in cost item number 5 
above. FSIS solicits information on 
added costs that are associated with the 
proposed requirement for written 
procedures, and then the 
implementation and maintenance costs 
of the procedures to ensure that 
carcasses and parts with visible fecal 
contamination do not enter the chiller, 
after evisceration operations. 
11. c. Written Procedures To Ensure 
That Young Chicken and Turkey 
Carcasses Contaminated With 
Septicemic and Toxemic Conditions Do 
Not Enter the Chilling Tank, for the New 
Inspection System Associated With the 
Mandatory Component 
FSIS is proposing that the 219 
federally inspected establishments that 
would slaughter young chickens and 
turkeys under the new inspection 
system develop, implement, and 
maintain written procedures to ensure 
that poultry carcasses contaminated 
with septicemic and toxemic conditions 
do not enter the chilling tank. 
Establishments must incorporate these 
procedures into their HACCP plans, or 
sanitation SOPs, or other prerequisite 
programs. The one-time cost to develop 
the plan and ongoing cost of 
implementation and maintenance of the 
plan are included in the costs of 
changing the HACCP system as 
discussed in cost item number 5 above. 
FSIS solicits information on added costs 
that are associated with this proposed 
requirement. 
12. Elimination of Generic E. Coli 
Standards—Annual Cost Savings 
Associated With the Mandatory 
Component 
FSIS proposes the removal of the 
current requirement that poultry 
establishments test for generic E. coli 
and to remove the codified Salmonella 
pathogen reduction performance 
standards for poultry. For the poultry 
industry, this would mean about 77,000 
fewer samples collected and tested for 
generic E. coli. FSIS projects that this 
action would affect about 289 official 
federally inspected establishments that 
slaughter all poultry other than ratites. 
FSIS projects that this would have a cost 
savings of approximately $11.71 million 
per year for the 289 official federally 
inspected establishments that slaughter 
all poultry other than ratites. This is the 
cost saving of labor for sampling event 
collection; materials; shipping; and 
laboratory testing from eliminating 
about 470,000 E. coli samples and 
testing. The estimated cost per sampling 
avoided is about $57.10 per sampling 
event. For 470,000 sampling events at 
$30, the annual total would be about 
$11.71 million. 
13. Elimination of Carcass Cooling 
Standards—Possible Cost Savings 
Associated With the Mandatory 
Component 
FSIS projects that the proposed 
elimination of carcass cooling standards 
will remove some of the ‘‘bottleneck’’ 
restrictions of the chilling system. FSIS 
projects that the birds may take less 
time to cool to meet this new 
requirement of no microbial growth. 
FSIS projects that the establishments 
will be able to increase the output from 
the chiller in order to accommodate 
increased line speed. FSIS solicits 
information on any added costs and any 
cost saving associated with the 
proposed elimination of carcass cooling 
standards. 
Table 14b shows the considered 
additional one-time, first-year, and 
annual average expenditures for the 
proposed rule for the 289 affected 
poultry establishments of complying 
with the mandatory actions of the 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:33 Jan 26, 2012 Jkt 226001 PO 00000 Frm 00037 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\27JAP2.SGM 27JAP2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
4V
PT
VN
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
4444 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 18 / Friday, January 27, 2012 / Proposed Rules 
proposal. Again, annualized costs are calculated using a discount rate of 7% 
over a ten year planning period. 
TABLE 14b—ESTIMATED ANNUAL COST (COST SAVINGS) OF THE PROPOSED RULE TO ESTABLISHMENTS: ELEMENTS 
ASSOCIATED WITH THE MANDATORY COMPONENT OF THE PROPOSED NEW RULE (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 
One-time 
costs 
Recurring 
annual 
costs 
Additional PC microbial testing—plate counts, collection, packaging, shipping .................... ....................
One-time baseline .................................................................................................................................................... 2 ....................
Annual recurring testing ........................................................................................................................................... .................... 12.6 
Additional annual recordkeeping, monitoring, and record storage ................................................................................. .................... 0.98 
Eliminated generic E. coli testing recordkeeping ............................................................................................................ .................... ¥0.57 
Additional one-time HACCP system plans (additions and modifications) and ProcessControl (PC) plan development 1.9 ....................
Reduced annual microbial testing—generic E. coli plate counts, collection, packaging, and shipping ......................... .................... ¥11.7 
Total costs to establishments from mandatory component .............................................................................. 3.9 1.3 
Average costs to establishments from mandatory component ....................................................................................... 1.82 
For the poultry industry, as shown in 
Tables 14a and 14b, the one-time costs 
are about $13.6 million, consisting of 
$9.7 million in one-time costs incurred 
by the establishments that adopt the 
proposed new inspection system and 
$3.9 million in one-time costs for all 
firms in the industry with the 
requirements of the proposed new rule. 
The on-going annual average net 
expenditure to the poultry industry 
would be about $18.5 million, with 
$17.2 million from adopting the 
proposed new rule and $1.3 million in 
costs for all firms with this proposed 
rule. These cost figures annualize to 
$20.3 million over 10 years at 7%. In 
addition, however, FSIS projects a cost 
savings for the poultry industry. FSIS 
projects that the dressing costs per bird 
will be lowered for about 99.9 percent 
of the RTC young chicken and turkey 
production of the poultry industry. FSIS 
projects a net cost savings with the 
proposed regulation of about $258.9 
million annually for companies that 
slaughter poultry (see Table 16 below). 
The initial one-time expenditure and 
on-going annual expenditures are more 
than offset by these savings due to the 
increased line speed. These net savings 
are included in the expected benefits. 
The proposed new rule will have 
mandatory costs for all firms, whether 
they adopt the proposed new rule or go 
to the revised traditional inspection 
system. FSIS expects the 51 very small 
establishments that slaughter young 
chicken and turkey to adopt the revised 
traditional inspection system instead of 
the proposed rule yet still incur the 
mandatory costs listed in Table 14b. To 
assess the impact on these very small 
establishments, Table 14c lists these 
estimated mandatory costs. 
As mentioned, the baseline was 
calculated by multiplying 150 samples 
collected for the baseline by the 
prorated hourly pay of $29.03 for a QC 
technician for 25 minutes needed to 
collect the samples and a cost of $33.75 
for analytical cost of the samples for all 
289 establishments. This comes to about 
$6,900 per firm and $351,000 for the 51 
very small establishments. For annual 
recurring costs, the same salary and 
analytical costs applied and were 
multiplied by the estimated number of 
samples, as before, and adjusted for 
volume so that the cost of annual 
recurring testing for very small 
establishments is 0.1 percent of the cost 
for recurring testing in Table 14b. For 
annual recording and storage, the 
samples are based on volume and this 
is adjusted to 0.1 percent of the costs in 
Table 14b, or about $1,000 annually, to 
be balanced by the savings from 
eliminated generic E. coli testing 
recordkeeping of 0.1 percent of the 
estimated $568,500 annually. The cost 
of the additions and modifications to 
the HACCP plans and the process 
control (PC) plan development are 
estimated at $2,000 per very small 
establishment, for a total cost of 
$102,000 for the 51 very small 
establishments. The cost savings for 
very small establishments from reduced 
annual microbial testing is volume- 
based and is 0.1 percent of the $11.7 
million in annual savings to the 
industry. 
TABLE 14c—ESTIMATED ANNUAL COST (COST SAVINGS) OF THE PROPOSED RULE TO VERY SMALL ESTABLISHMENTS: 
ELEMENTS ASSOCIATED WITH THE MANDATORY COMPONENT OF THE PROPOSED NEW RULE (MILLIONS) 
One-time 
costs 
Recurring 
annual 
costs 
Additional PC microbial testing—plate counts, collection, packaging, shipping: 
One-time baseline .................................................................................................................................................... 0.351 
Annual recurring testing ........................................................................................................................................... .................... 0.013 
Additional annual recordkeeping, monitoring, and record storage ................................................................................. .................... 0.001 
Eliminated generic E. coli testing recordkeeping ............................................................................................................ .................... ¥0.001 
Additional one-time HACCP system plans (additions and modifications) and ProcessControl (PC) plan development 0.102 
Reduced annual microbial testing—generic E. coli plate counts, collection, packaging, and shipping ......................... .................... ¥0.012 
Total costs to establishments from mandatory component .............................................................................. 0.453 0.001 
Average costs to very small establishments from mandatory component ..................................................................... 0.061 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:33 Jan 26, 2012 Jkt 226001 PO 00000 Frm 00038 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\27JAP2.SGM 27JAP2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
4V
PT
VN
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
4445 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 18 / Friday, January 27, 2012 / Proposed Rules 
28 First year cost savings are lower than for the 
following years because the rule will not be in effect 
for the full first year. 
These costs are estimated at about 
$0.453 million in one-time costs and 
about $0.001 million for annual costs. 
This is over $8900 per very small 
establishment in one-time costs, 
primarily for establishing the baseline 
testing required for all firms under the 
proposed rule, and very low costs per 
very small establishment in annual 
costs. These costs are based on the 
mandatory elements of the proposed 
new rule that apply to all 
establishments that slaughter young 
chicken and turkey, whether they adopt 
the proposed new rule or move to the 
revised traditional system of inspection. 
These estimates include the reduction 
in costs from the elimination of the 
generic E. coli testing. The annualized 
costs of these requirements for very 
small establishments are $0.061 million, 
or about $1,200 per establishment for 
the 51 very small establishments. This 
represents an average annual cost per 
bird of less than 0.9 cents (and less than 
0.25 cents per pound), based on the 
assumption that very small 
establishments slaughter one-tenth of 
one percent of the nearly 9 billion birds 
slaughtered annually. 
These costs are estimated at about 
$0.45 million in one-time costs and 
about $0.02 million for annual costs. 
This is over $8800 per very small 
establishment in one-time costs, 
primarily for establishing the baseline 
testing required for all firms under the 
proposed rule, and about $400 per very 
small establishment in annual costs. 
These costs are based on the mandatory 
elements of the proposed new rule that 
apply to all establishments that 
slaughter young chicken and turkey, 
whether they adopt the proposed new 
rule or move to the revised traditional 
system of inspection. These estimates 
include the reduction in costs from the 
elimination of the generic E. coli testing. 
The annualized costs of these 
requirements for very small 
establishments are $0.08 million, or 
about $1,600 per establishment for the 
51 very small establishments. This 
represents an average annual cost per 
bird of less than 0.9 cents (and less than 
0.25 cents per pound), based on the 
assumption that very small 
establishments slaughter one-tenth of 
one percent of the nearly 9 billion birds 
slaughtered annually. 
Expected FSIS Budgetary Effects: 
Table 15 shows the expected FSIS 
budgetary net savings effects from the 
proposed rule for the slaughter of all 
poultry other than ratites and including 
the new inspection system for the 
slaughter of young chickens and 
turkeys. 
FSIS used the following scenario 
assumptions in its financial cost model 
to project the FSIS budgetary effects of 
the proposed rule: 
• 175 establishments (150 young 
chicken establishments and 25 turkey 
establishments) 
• 1,498 food inspector grade increases 
(from GS7 to GS8) (1,436 inspectors in 
young chicken establishments and 62 
inspectors in turkey establishments) 
• 375 CSI (Consumer Safety 
Inspector) upgrades (from GS8 to GS9) 
(354 in young chicken establishments 
and 21 in turkey establishments) 
• A reduction in the number of 
inspector positions (between 
approximately 500 and 800) through 
managing vacancy or refill rates, a 
reduction of approximately 190 
positions will be affected in the 
following way: 
Æ Of the 190 positions, 100 will be 
relocated to livestock slaughter 
establishments 
Æ 90 inspectors will be relocated to 
jobs in the Agency for which their skills 
and experience qualify them. 
• A reduction of approximately 140 
SCSI (Slaughter Consumer Safety 
Inspector) positions—potentially all of 
the personnel involved to be relocated 
• 150 fewer OTP staff years required 
for relief—no severance or relocation 
impact 
• Training costs for approximately 
3,300 employees 
• Relocation costs for approximately 
350 CSI employees 
• Travel savings with fewer number 
of relief inspectors 
FSIS projects that the 25 young 
chicken and turkey establishments 
currently under HIMP inspections 
would switch to the new inspection 
system. The equipment used in the 
HIMP, as well as in the other current 
non-traditional inspection systems, can 
be used in the proposed new inspection 
system. Furthermore, FSIS projects that 
about 19 other poultry establishments 
may enter the program under the SIP 
waiver. FSIS projects that these 
establishments will choose to make the 
capital and labor investment, when they 
see that their economic competitiveness 
may diminish. FSIS did not include the 
impact from these additional 
establishments in the financial cost 
model of Table 15 that projects the FSIS 
budgetary effects of the proposed rule 
because we expect it to be very small. 
Establishments that change operations 
but continue to produce will continue to 
have FSIS inspectors. 
TABLE 15—ESTIMATED ANNUAL COST (COST SAVINGS) OF THE PROPOSED RULE TO FSIS: ELEMENTS ASSOCIATED WITH 
THE VOLUNTARY COMPONENT OF THE PROPOSED NEW RULE (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 
First year 
costs (cost 
savings) 28 
Recurring 
costs (cost 
savings) 
after first 
year 
Cost from Grade Increases (Salary & Benefits) .............................................................................................................. $5.1 $8.26 
Training Costs .................................................................................................................................................................. 4.78 0 
Relocation Costs .............................................................................................................................................................. 3.79 0 
Savings From Position Elimination .................................................................................................................................. (26.4) (47.62) 
Savings from reduced Relief Inspector Travel ................................................................................................................ (.14) (.22) 
Total Costs (Savings) ............................................................................................................................................... (12.9) (39.58) 
The expected FSIS budgetary savings 
effects are cost savings to the FSIS 
related to position elimination of about 
$47.6 million, after the first year of 
implementation. Furthermore, FSIS 
projects cost savings annually from 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:33 Jan 26, 2012 Jkt 226001 PO 00000 Frm 00039 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\27JAP2.SGM 27JAP2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
4V
PT
VN
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
4446 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 18 / Friday, January 27, 2012 / Proposed Rules 
expected reduction in travel expenses 
for relief IPP. FSIS projected total Relief 
Inspector travel savings of about 
$223,000, after the first year of 
implementation. FSIS, however, 
projects an annual cost increase for the 
FSIS IPP upgrade increases from GS–7 
to GS–8 and GS–8 to GS–9 that would 
total about $8.3 million, after the first 
year of implementation. In addition, 
FSIS projects a one-time training cost 
for the FSIS IPP that would total about 
$4.8 million, and a one-time relocation 
cost for the FSIS IPP that would total 
about $3.8 million, in the first year of 
implementation. 
Furthermore, possible IPP health 
improvement effects are expected to be 
associated with lower recruitment costs, 
lower medical and worker 
compensation costs, and fewer 
unscheduled leaves. 
In summary, budgetary benefits in 
cost savings will accrue to FSIS from the 
more effective utilization of its 
inspection program personnel (IPP) to 
focus on activities that affect food 
safety. Based on FSIS projections of its 
budget cost-savings analysis, the 
expected benefit to FSIS would be the 
net savings of about $14.6 million, in 
the first full year of implementation in 
FY 2013. Then, in subsequent years, the 
projected net savings would average 
about $39.6 million. 
Summary of Net Social Benefits 
Considering the social benefits and 
costs discussed, FSIS expects the 
average net benefits to the public health, 
the poultry industry and consumers is 
about $377.7 million annually. The 
costs outlined in Table 16 below are 
annualized over 10 years at 7% to $20.3 
million. Annual net benefits, therefore 
are $357.4 million. 
TABLE 16—EXPECTED NET SOCIAL BENEFITS FROM THE PROPOSED RULE (MILLIONS OF DOLLARS) STARTING WITH THE 
FIRST FULL YEAR OF IMPLEMENTATION 
Primary 
estimate 
Minimum 
estimate 
Maximum 
estimate 
Benefits: 
Annual public health benefits ........................................................................................................... 79.2 27.3 144.2 
Annual FSIS net savings .................................................................................................................. 39.6 .................... ....................
Annual cost savings for establishments * ......................................................................................... 258.9 .................... ....................
Annual total benefits .................................................................................................................. 377.7 325.8 442.7 
Unquantified benefits ............................................................................................................................... Additional public health benefits from 
documentation and testing 
Costs: 
Annual cost to establishments ......................................................................................................... 20.3 .................... ....................
Annual net benefits ........................................................................................................................... 357.4 305.5 422.4 
Note: These cost savings will not all be enjoyed by the establishments. A portion of these savings will be passed on to consumers in the form 
of lower prices. 
Analysis of Considered Alternatives 
FSIS considered several alternatives 
to the proposed rule. Table 17 
summarizes these alternatives and 
presents the annual net benefits 
associated with each alternative. 
A. Taking No Action 
FSIS considered maintaining the 
current inspection system and finished 
product standards requirements for the 
289 establishments that slaughtered 
young chickens and turkeys, and other 
poultry in 2010. That is, FSIS 
considered taking no action. 
Consequently, poultry establishments 
slaughtering young chickens and 
turkeys, and other poultry would not 
benefit from increased flexibility, 
productivity, or opportunity for 
innovation. FSIS would not be able to 
focus its inspection activities on 
verification of process controls for 
product safety and OCPs or on 
additional offline activities (such as 
unscheduled sanitary procedures, for 
example). Under this alternative, 
establishments would be restricted to 
the current regulated eviscerating line 
speeds that in most cases are operated 
below the capability of their currently 
installed eviscerating equipment. This 
action will have zero net benefits. 
TABLE 17—COMPARISONS OF THE CONSIDERED ALTERNATIVES TO THE PROPOSED POULTRY SLAUGHTER RULE 
Considered alternatives Benefits Costs Net benefits 
A. Take No Action .......................... No change in the existing inspec-
tion systems for poultry. FSIS 
does not need significantly 
more resources. 
Establishments would be re-
stricted to the current regulated 
eviscerating line speeds that in 
most cases are operated below 
the capability of their currently 
installed eviscerating equip-
ment. 
Zero Net Benefits. 
B. Intensifying the Present Inspec-
tion Systems by Allocating Addi-
tional FSIS Resources to Elimi-
nate FSIS Inspection Personnel 
(IPP) Vacancies.
Annual benefits of about $258.9 
million from reducing dressing 
costs. 
$32.76 million per year for FSIS 
to add extra inspectors. FSIS 
resources are limited for expan-
sion of its workforce and these 
costs may be prohibitive. 
Annual net benefits of $225.0 mil-
lion. 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:33 Jan 26, 2012 Jkt 226001 PO 00000 Frm 00040 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\27JAP2.SGM 27JAP2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
4V
PT
VN
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
4447 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 18 / Friday, January 27, 2012 / Proposed Rules 
TABLE 17—COMPARISONS OF THE CONSIDERED ALTERNATIVES TO THE PROPOSED POULTRY SLAUGHTER RULE— 
Continued 
Considered alternatives Benefits Costs Net benefits 
C. Mandatory Use of Dressing 
Performance Standards and the 
New Poultry Inspection System 
for All Establishments that 
Slaughter Young Chickens and 
Turkeys.
About $259.2 million from reduc-
ing dressing costs added to 
public health benefits and re-
duced FSIS costs for total ben-
efits of $378.0 million annually. 
Annualized costs of $20.4 million, 
of which about $0.06 million an-
nually borne by very small es-
tablishments under this alter-
native. 
This alternative would have net 
benefits equal to $357.6 million. 
D. The Proposed Rule: the Re-
quirement of a New Inspection 
System for Young Chickens and 
Turkeys; a Revised Traditional 
Inspection System for All Poultry 
other than Ratites; Requirement 
of Three Locations for Sampling 
to monitor process control for 
enteric pathogens; and other Ac-
tions (see Table 8 above)..
Public health benefits from re-
duced illnesses, reduced dress-
ing costs, and FSIS savings 
add to total benefits of $377.7 
million annually. Additional 
unquantified public health bene-
fits from the mandatory compo-
nent of the proposed rule. 
Annualized costs equal $20.3 mil-
lion. See Tables 14a and 14b 
below for explanation of these 
costs. 
Selected Alternative 
Annual net benefits equal $357.4 
million, from $377.7 million in 
benefits less the costs to indus-
try of $20.3 million. 
E. Voluntary component only ......... $377.7 million in benefits. No ad-
ditional unquantified benefits, 
as detailed in section titled 
‘‘other public health benefits re-
sulting from the mandatory 
component of the proposed 
rule.’’ 
Annualized costs of $18.5 million. $359.2 million annually. 
B. Intensifying the Present Inspection 
Systems by Allocating Additional FSIS 
Resources To Allow Establishments To 
Increase the Line Speed and Maintain 
the Same Level of Food Safety 
FSIS considered intensifying the 
present inspection system by allocating 
additional FSIS resources to 
accommodate the demand of the 
industry for additional IPP on high- 
speed evisceration systems that the 
poultry industry is adopting in order to 
produce safe poultry products and 
reduce dressing costs per bird. Annual 
benefits of this alternative equal 
approximately $258.9 million from 
reducing dressing costs by 3 cents per 
bird for 99.9 percent of 8.64 billion 
birds slaughtered annually. No 
additional public health benefits result 
from this alternative because FSIS staff 
will not be doing additional offline 
inspection activities. 
This alternative does not change the 
existing inspection system, no 
additional training is needed for FSIS or 
establishment staff. This alternative, 
however, requires an extra FSIS 
inspector at each of the 573 high-speed 
non-HIMP chicken and turkey line 
shifts at $57,153 year for $32.76 million 
in annual costs. Resource constraints 
would not allow for this option. These 
additional costs (to FSIS) will not be 
offset by increased safety as the newly 
hired inspectors will not be performing 
additional offline tasks. This alternative 
has net benefits of $225.0 million. 
C. Requiring Mandatory Use of Dressing 
Performance Standards and the New 
Poultry Inspection System for All 
Establishments That Slaughter Young 
Chickens and Turkeys 
FSIS considered proposing the 
mandatory use of dressing performance 
standards and a New Poultry Inspection 
System in all federally inspected 
establishments that slaughter young 
chickens and turkeys. This alternative is 
the same as the proposed regulation 
except that this alternative would be 
mandatory for the young chicken and 
turkey industry, while the proposed 
regulation s a choice between the new 
inspection system and the revised 
traditional inspection system. This 
alternative would result in a 
replacement of existing choices among 
other (traditional, SIS, NELS, and NTIS) 
types of inspection systems within the 
RTC young chicken and turkey industry. 
For the projected 270 federally 
inspected establishments that would 
slaughter young chickens and turkeys 
under the new inspection system, this 
alternative has the costs to the poultry 
industry of replacing online FSIS IPP 
with trained establishment personnel 
for sorting birds. As a result, the poultry 
industry annual labor costs and labor 
training costs would be higher due to 
the extra labor and training necessary to 
take over the sorting and to maintain 
personnel proficiency in the sorting of 
young chickens and turkeys, in the 
establishments that would not 
voluntarily choose the new inspection 
system. These establishments are the 
very small establishments that do not 
have large enough volume to make up 
for the additional costs imposed by this 
proposed rule. 
This alternative has total annual 
benefits of 378.0 million. This includes 
benefits of $259.2 million from reducing 
costs by 3 cents per bird for 100 percent 
of the 8.64 billion birds slaughtered 
annually, and public health benefits of 
about $79.19 million, and FSIS budget 
savings, which may exceed the estimate 
of $39.6 million as establishment 
personnel replace FSIS inspectors. 
These benefits are slightly higher than 
those of the proposed alternative 
because this alternative covers 100 
percent of plants and production. Costs 
to very small establishments are $0.453 
million in initial one-time costs and 
$0.001 million in annual costs, 
primarily for underline troughs for one- 
time costs and additional sorter labor 
and training for ongoing costs. 
Annualizing the one-time costs for 10 
years at 7 percent brings the annualized 
cost to $0.061 million. These costs for 
very small establishments are in 
addition to the $20.3 million annually 
calculated for the other establishments, 
bringing the annual cost of the 
alternative to $20.4 million. The net 
benefits of this alternative equal $357.6 
million annually. 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:33 Jan 26, 2012 Jkt 226001 PO 00000 Frm 00041 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\27JAP2.SGM 27JAP2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
4V
PT
VN
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
4448 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 18 / Friday, January 27, 2012 / Proposed Rules 
29 Martinez, Steve et al., Local Food Systems: 
Concepts, Impacts, and Issues, ERR 97, U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Economic Research 
Service, May 2010, discusses consumers’ 
willingness to pay a price premium (p. 29) for such 
characteristics as traceabililty (p. 26) offered by 
local producers. 
30 Please see the FDA’s preliminary regulatory 
impact analysis of the Preventive Controls rule for 
a similar discussion of recordkeeping benefits. 
D. The Proposed Rule: the Requirement 
of a New Inspection System for Young 
Chickens and Turkeys; a Revised 
Traditional Inspection System for All 
Poultry Other Than Ratites; 
Requirement That All Poultry Slaughter 
Establishments Develop, Implement, 
and Maintain Written Procedures To 
Prevent Contamination of Carcasses and 
Parts by Enteric Pathogens and Fecal 
Material Throughout the Entire 
Slaughter and Dressing Process; 
Requirement That Procedures To 
Prevent Contamination Include Three 
Locations for Sampling To Monitor 
Process Control for Enteric Pathogens; 
and Other Actions (See Table 8 Above) 
FSIS’s preferred alternative is the 
proposed rule as discussed above. The 
Proposed Rule has the requirement of a 
new inspection system for young 
chickens and turkeys; a revised 
traditional inspection system for all 
poultry other than ratites; requirement 
that establishments develop, implement, 
and maintain written procedures to 
prevent contamination of carcasses with 
enteric pathogens and fecal material 
contamination, and that these 
procedures include, at a minimum, 
three locations for sampling for 
microbial organisms to monitor process 
control for enteric pathogens; and other 
actions (see Table 8). 
The proposed rule gives the 
individual establishment the choice 
between the new inspection system and 
the revised tradition inspected system. 
An establishment will choose the new 
inspection system if the benefits, 
primarily from the expected increased 
flexibility of operations and lower 
dressing costs per RTC bird, exceeds the 
costs of implementation of this 
proposed new inspection system. While 
this would probably be true for the 
HACCP large and HACCP small 
establishments that slaughtered young 
chickens and turkeys in 2010, the 
HACCP very small establishments 
would find that the initial capital 
investment in additional facilities and 
equipment, additional labor for sorting 
and training sorters costs, and other 
additional annual costs for maintaining 
the additional facilities and equipment 
would not lower their average cost of 
dressing a RTC bird. FSIS rejected this 
alternative (alternative C above) in order 
to minimize the impact on small 
businesses and to allow them the 
flexibility to choose the proposed 
revised traditional inspection system, if 
they stand to lose from the proposed 
new slaughter inspection system. 
Public health benefits (discussed in 
detail in the next section) of the 
proposed rule include a reduction in 
illnesses attributed to young chicken 
and turkey. The monetized value of this 
reduction is $79.19 million annually. 
Industry cost reductions from the 
proposed rule are about $258.9 million 
annually from reducing dressing costs 
by 3 cents per bird for 99.9 percent of 
8.64 billion birds. FSIS savings under 
the proposed rule are expected to equal 
$39.58 million annually, bringing total 
benefits to $377.7 million annually. 
Costs of the proposed rule include a 
one-time expenditure of about $13.6 
million and net variable expenditures of 
$18.5 million annually (see Tables 14a 
and b). Annualizing the costs at 7 
percent for 10 years brings the annual 
cost total to $20.3 million. Net benefits 
of the proposed rule are $357.4 million 
annually. 
While Alternative C, mandating 
uniform standards for all 
establishments, provides net benefits 
greater in value to the net benefits of the 
proposed rule, in the interest of 
regulatory flexibility requirements for 
small businesses, FSIS proposes in the 
preferred alternative to make 
compliance with the proposed new 
system voluntary. Not adopting the 
system under the proposed rule will not 
disadvantage very small establishments 
that have niche markets and local 
markets because the expected market 
price reduction from the proposed rule 
is 0.6 to 1 cent per bird which, for an 
average bird weight of 3.94 lbs., means 
a price reduction of around 0.15 to 0.25 
cents per pound. Evidence of a 
willingness of consumers to pay a 
premium for the local food products 
exists,29 suggesting that this reduction 
in price for the output of the firms that 
adopt the proposed new rule is not 
expected to disadvantage these 
establishments that slaughter for local, 
niche markets. 
E. Requiring Only the Voluntary 
Component of the Proposed Rule 
The benefits from this alternative 
include, as under the proposed rule, the 
budgetary savings to FSIS from 
reallocation of personnel and the lower 
costs per bird from the increased line 
speeds and public health benefits of 
$79.19 million annually from reduced 
illnesses. 
As shown in Table 14a, the costs to 
firms that adopt the proposed new rule 
are $9.7 million in one-time costs and 
$17.2 million in annual costs. These 
costs annualize to $18.5 million over 10 
years at 7%. 
This alternative eliminates the 
mandatory costs to all firms, whether 
they adopt the proposed new inspection 
system or not, under the proposed rule. 
Under the proposed rule, all firms, 
including the very small firms that FSIS 
expects will not adopt the proposed 
rule, must adopt some measures, as 
listed in Table 14b. These costs are from 
plan development, recordkeeping, and 
testing. The benefits 30 of these activities 
include the conduct of business in a 
manner more accountable to the public; 
the support and document of 
production safety decision-making; and 
the facilitation of oversight and 
transparency activities like audits and 
inspections. The proposed 
recordkeeping requirements are 
designed to help operators of facilities 
and the Agency to identify potential 
sources of contamination and contain 
and mitigate the adverse health effects 
of contaminated food. While many of 
these benefits are social and not 
captured by the firms, the lower 
probability of recall, the lower costs of 
indentifying contaminated product if a 
recall occurs, and enhanced product 
reputation when a product is not subject 
to recall, all benefit the implementing 
firms. Table 14c lists the mandatory 
costs that FSIS expects for the 51 very 
small establishments that FSIS projects 
will not adopt the proposed new 
inspection system. 
With annual benefits estimated at 
$377.7 million and costs at $18.5 
million, the annual net benefits of this 
alternative are $359.2 million. FSIS did 
not select this alternative even though it 
has higher quantified net benefits 
(compared to the proposed rule) because 
the net benefits of the proposed rule are 
expected to be higher due to additional 
benefits (disc used in section titled 
‘‘Other public health benefits resulting 
from the mandatory component of the 
proposed rule’’). from the voluntary 
component of the proposed rule. 
VI. Initial Regulatory Flexibility 
Analysis 
In accordance with the Regulatory 
Flexibility Act, FSIS reviewed the 
proposed rule for its effects on small 
businesses. The Administrator has 
determined that, for the purposes of the 
Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 
601–612); this proposed rule would not 
have a significant economic impact on 
a substantial number of small 
companies or small entities. 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:33 Jan 26, 2012 Jkt 226001 PO 00000 Frm 00042 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\27JAP2.SGM 27JAP2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
4V
PT
VN
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
4449 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 18 / Friday, January 27, 2012 / Proposed Rules 
31 Ollinger, M., J. MacDonald & M. Madison, 
Structural Change in U.S. Chicken and Turkey 
Slaughter. USDA Economic Research Service, 
Agricultural Economics Report 787. 2000. 
32 Please see Martinez, Steve et al., Local Food 
Systems: Concepts, Impacts, and Issues, ERR 97, 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Economic Research 
Service, May 2010 for a discussion of consumers’ 
willingness to pay a price premium (p. 29) for such 
characteristics as traceability (p. 26, p. 70) offered 
by local producers. 
FSIS considered proposing the 
mandatory use of dressing performance 
standards and the New Poultry 
Inspection System in all federally 
inspected establishments that slaughter 
young chickens and turkeys. (See Table 
17 for a list of all alternatives 
considered.) This alternative is the same 
as the proposed rule except that this 
alternative would make the new 
inspection system mandatory for the 
young chicken and turkey industry, 
while the proposed rule is a choice 
between the new inspection system and 
the revised traditional inspection 
system. 
This alternative would result in a 
replacement of existing choices among 
other (traditional, SIS, NELS, and NTIS) 
types of inspection systems within the 
RTC young chicken and turkey industry. 
The poultry industry would not have a 
choice between the proposed new 
inspection system and the revised 
traditional inspection system for 
establishments that slaughter the young 
chickens and turkeys. 
The preferred alternative (the 
proposed rule) has the choice that is 
given to the individual establishment to 
determine if it is beneficial for the 
establishment to choose the new 
inspection system (if the expected 
increased flexibility of operations and 
lower dressing costs per RTC bird 
results in benefits that would exceed the 
costs of implementation of this 
inspection system). 
While this would probably be true for 
the HACCP large and HACCP small 
establishments that slaughtered young 
chickens and turkeys in 2010, and the 
HACCP very small establishments could 
find that the initial capital investment 
in additional facilities and equipment, 
additional labor for sorting and training 
sorters costs, and other additional 
annual costs for maintaining the 
additional facilities and equipment a 
burdensome change. FSIS expects 
dressing costs to decrease by about $2.6 
million for very small establishments 
with the proposed new inspection 
system while expenditures would 
increase by an annualized amount of 
$0.28 million for 10 years at 7% to 
comply with the system. These costs are 
already in addition to those outlined in 
Table 14c, which annualize to $0.13 
million at 7% over 10 years. 
This alternative of mandatory 
adoption by all establishments was not 
selected because of its expected 
economic burden on small businesses 
and to allow small producers the 
flexibility to choose the proposed 
revised traditional inspection system, if 
they stand to lose from the proposed 
new slaughter inspection system. 
Expected Effects on Small Entities or 
Small Companies 
There are economies of size and scale 
with the evisceration and dressing of 
young chickens and turkeys.31 A 
possible result of these economies of 
size and scale is that there are only 
about 54 HACCP very small 
establishments owned by 54 small 
companies under Federal Inspection 
that slaughter poultry. These very small 
companies slaughtered only about one- 
tenth of one percent of the young 
chickens, turkeys, and other poultry 
slaughtered, in 2010 (ADRS, 2010). 
Further, about 34, or about 63 percent, 
of these 54 very small companies 
slaughtered other livestock such as 
cattle, calves, swine, sheep, and goats, 
in 2010, according to FSIS’s ADRS. 
These 34 companies often operate 
seasonally for slaughtering poultry, yet 
slaughter livestock during the entire 
year. 
The proposed rule is expected to 
result in a cost reduction of about 3 
cents per bird and a reduction of the 
price of poultry of about 0.6 to 1 cent 
per bird (or about 0.15 to 0.25 cents per 
pound) for those establishments that 
choose to operate under the new poultry 
inspections system. All of the very small 
establishments that slaughter poultry 
are expected to choose to operate under 
the revised traditional inspection 
system rather than the New Poultry 
Inspection System. However, the 
reduction in price per bird for 
establishments operating under the 
proposed new rule is not expected to 
impose a burden on very small 
establishments because they generally 
slaughter birds that are sold in local, 
niche markets, where consumers have 
shown a willingness to pay more for a 
food product that is of local origin.32 An 
ability to charge a higher price for 
product differentiation based on origin 
enables the very small establishments to 
compete in the market even with the 
cost advantage that other producers will 
have with the proposed new rule. 
Under the proposed rule, the 
mandatory costs on very small 
establishments (shown in Table 14c) 
annualize at 7% over 10 years to $0.130 
million, or about $2,500 per 
establishment. With the assumption that 
very small establishments account for 
one-tenth of one percent of the total 
number of the nearly 9 billion birds 
slaughtered annually, the annualized 
costs of the mandatory portion of the 
proposed rule amount to less than 1.5 
cents per bird or less than 0.4 cents per 
pound. 
There are about 109 small companies 
that slaughter small quantities of 
federally inspected poultry. FSIS 
expects that none of the very small 
companies would choose to participate 
in the new inspection system for the 
slaughter of young chickens and turkeys 
because of the one-time set-up costs 
associated with the new system, but 
would slaughter young chickens, 
turkeys, and other poultry under the 
revised traditional inspection system. 
The revised traditional inspection 
system is designed to minimize costs on 
these small entities while preserving the 
social benefits from testing and 
recordkeeping. Using the estimated cost 
per very small establishment from the 
Table 14c figures, the annual burden to 
small entities that do not adopt the rule 
because the additional fixed costs 
required by the rule is $1,500. With an 
estimated cost of establishment labor of 
$13.95 per hours, this represents about 
100 staff hours annually. The return for 
this expenditure is the benefits from 
better testing and recordkeeping, such 
as greater ability to fulfill mandatory 
oversight requirements, which cost an 
unspecified number of staff-hours under 
the current inspection system, and 
lower insurance premiums. FSIS 
believes that a Regulatory Flexibility 
analysis would not be necessary to 
evaluate the effects of the proposal on 
small companies. In making this 
determination, the Agency considered 
alternatives (see table 17) to the 
proposed rule, including one alternative 
rejected for its small business impact: 
Taking no action, intensifying the 
current system, mandatory standards for 
all firms that slaughter young chickens 
and turkeys, and the voluntary 
component only. Taking no action 
would prevent the increased utilization 
of capacity by firms that FSIS expects to 
voluntarily choose the proposed new 
system. For this reason, FSIS rejected 
this alternative. The second alternative 
was to intensify the present system but 
this would require more FSIS resources 
and was therefore not feasible. FSIS 
rejected the third option of mandatory 
requirements for all firms that slaughter 
young chickens and turkeys because of 
the burden that this alternative would 
place on small establishments. The last 
option of the voluntary component of 
the proposed new rule only (as shown 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:33 Jan 26, 2012 Jkt 226001 PO 00000 Frm 00043 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\27JAP2.SGM 27JAP2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
4V
PT
VN
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
4450 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 18 / Friday, January 27, 2012 / Proposed Rules 
in Table 14a) would eliminate the 
public health benefits of the mandatory 
requirements. 
Public health safeguards are a cost of 
entering commerce and FSIS believes 
that product differentiation, based on 
the growing preference for local 
produce, will enable very small 
establishments to effectively compete 
for market share against the larger firms 
that will enjoy the cost reduction from 
the proposed new rule. 
FSIS assumes that some of the small 
companies may choose the new 
inspection system under the proposed 
rule. With this choice, these small 
businesses will incur the costs 
associated with the rule, including the 
documentation requirements for HACCP 
systems and sanitation SOPs. These 
documentation requirements represent 
fixed costs that small establishments 
will allocate to fewer sales units when 
compared to the number of sales units 
available for the same purpose for large 
establishments. With the choice of the 
revised traditional system, however, 
FSIS believes that small firms that adopt 
the new system under the proposed rule 
will do so only when estimates of the 
benefits exceed the costs, meaning that 
small companies that adopt the new 
system will expect net benefits. 
The proposed PSR limits the number 
of on-line inspectors for the revised 
traditions inspection system to two. 
However, plants that are currently 
operating with more than two on-line 
inspectors per line will be permitted to 
continue to do so after the rule goes into 
effect. Thus, small and very small plants 
that currently operate with more than 
two inspectors will not need to modify 
their operations based on a reduction in 
inspectors. 
Table 18 shows the capacity 
comparisons for SBA small and large 
companies. FSIS shows in this table that 
SBA small companies have a relatively 
small share of the capacity, 4.7 percent, 
to slaughter poultry. 
TABLE 18—CAPACITY COMPARISONS FOR SMALL AND LARGE COMPANIES 
Company size (SBA definition) Number of companies 
Number of 
facilities 
Share of 
facilities 
(in percent) 
Small ................................................................................................................................ 109 110 38.10 
Large ................................................................................................................................ 49 179 61.90 
Total .......................................................................................................................... 158 289 100.00 
Source: ADRS. 
Table 19 shows the capacity 
comparisons for HACCP very small, 
small, and large establishments. 
TABLE 19—CAPACITY COMPARISONS FOR VERY SMALL, SMALL, AND LARGE ESTABLISHMENTS 
Establishment size (HACCP definition) Number of facili-ties Share of facilities 
Very Small ....................................................................................................................................................... 54 18.70 
Small ................................................................................................................................................................ 84 29.00 
Large ................................................................................................................................................................ 151 52.30 
Total .......................................................................................................................................................... 289 100.00 
Source: ADRS. 
TABLE 20—ACCOUNTING SUMMARY FOR PROPOSED RULE 
Category Primary estimate Minimum estimate Maximum estimate Source citation 
BENEFITS: 
Annualized monetized 
benefits.
$377.7 million .................... $325.8 million .................... $442.7 million .................... RA, PRIA. 
Unquantified benefits Public health benefits from documentation and revised testing. 
COSTS: 
Annualized monetized 
costs.
$20.3 million ...................... ........................................... ........................................... PRIA. 
VII. E–Government Act 
FSIS and USDA are committed to 
achieving the purposes of the E– 
Government Act (44 U.S.C. 3601, et 
seq.) by, among other things, promoting 
the use of the Internet and other 
information technologies and providing 
increased opportunities for citizen 
access to government information and 
services, and for other purposes. 
VIII. Executive Order 13175 
This proposed rule has been reviewed 
in accordance with the requirements of 
Executive Order 13175, Consultation 
and Coordination with Indian Tribal 
Governments. The review reveals that 
this regulation will not have substantial 
and direct effects on Tribal governments 
and will not have significant Tribal 
implications. 
IX. USDA Nondiscrimination Statement 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture 
(USDA) prohibits discrimination in all 
its programs and activities on the basis 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:33 Jan 26, 2012 Jkt 226001 PO 00000 Frm 00044 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\27JAP2.SGM 27JAP2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
4V
PT
VN
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
4451 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 18 / Friday, January 27, 2012 / Proposed Rules 
of race, color, national origin, gender, 
religion, age, disability, political beliefs, 
sexual orientation, and marital or family 
status. (Not all prohibited bases apply to 
all programs.) 
Persons with disabilities who require 
alternative means for communication of 
program information (Braille, large 
print, audiotape, etc.) should contact 
USDA’s Target Center at 202–720–2600 
(voice and TTY). 
To file a written complaint of 
discrimination, write USDA, Office of 
the Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights, 
1400 Independence Avenue SW., 
Washington, DC 20250–9410 or call 
202–720–5964 (voice and TTY). USDA 
is an equal opportunity provider and 
employer. 
X. Environmental Impact 
Summary: Each USDA agency is 
required to comply with 7 CFR part 1b 
of the Departmental regulations, which 
supplements the National 
Environmental Policy Act regulations 
published by the Council on 
Environmental Quality. Under these 
regulations, actions of certain USDA 
agencies and agency units are 
categorically excluded from the 
preparation of an Environmental 
Assessment (EA) or an Environmental 
Impact Statement (EIS) unless the 
agency head determines that an action 
may have a significant environmental 
effect (7 CFR 1b.4(b)). FSIS is among the 
agencies categorically excluded from the 
preparation of an EA or EIS (7 CFR 
1b.4(b)(6)). 
Evaluation: Under this proposed rule, 
young chicken and turkey slaughter 
establishments that operate under the 
proposed New Poultry Inspection 
System will be able to slaughter and 
process birds more efficiently because 
they will be permitted to operate faster 
line speeds. In the Preliminary 
Regulatory Impact Analysis (PRIA) of 
this proposed rule, FSIS predicted that, 
because of the efficiencies in the 
proposed new poultry inspections 
system, the price of chicken products 
would decrease by two cents per bird. 
FSIS projected that the predicted price 
reduction could lead to an increase in 
sales of poultry products of about a 
quarter of one percent or less. With the 
slight increase in sales of poultry 
products, some establishments may 
choose to increase the number of birds 
that they slaughter, which could result 
in an increase in the number of 
condemned carcasses and parts that 
must be disposed of. However, because 
the predicted increase in sales is very 
small, FSIS has determined that the 
increase in the number of birds 
slaughtered, as well as the number of 
condemned carcasses and parts that will 
need to be disposed of, will also be very 
small and thus will not have a 
significant individual or cumulative 
effect on the human environment. 
Expected sales of poultry products 
will determine the number of birds that 
poultry establishments slaughter. 
Allowing establishments to operate at 
faster lines speeds will allow them to 
slaughter the birds more efficiently. It 
will also allow them to reduce their 
hours of operation while maintaining 
production at a rate necessary to meet 
market demands. Thus, by allowing 
establishments to reduce their hours of 
operations, the faster line speeds 
permitted under this proposed rule will 
result in a small, if any, increase in 
water use or runoff by establishments 
that operate under the New Poultry 
Inspection System. In addition, poultry 
slaughter establishments are required to 
meet all local, State, and Federal 
environmental requirements. Thus, FSIS 
has determined that allowing 
establishments to operate under faster 
line speeds provided in the proposed 
PSR will not have a not have a 
significant individual or cumulative 
effect on the human environment. 
FSIS also considered the potential 
environmental effects of the provision 
in the proposed rule that would permit 
poultry slaughter establishments to use 
approved online reprocessing (OLR) 
antimicrobial systems. One 
antimicrobial agent used in OLR 
systems, trisodium phosphate (TSP), 
can result in high levels of phosphorus 
as a byproduct, which, if untreated, 
could overcome local municipal water 
systems. FSIS estimates that 
approximately 5–7 of the 144 
establishments operating under 
regulatory waivers for OLR are using 
TSP as an antimicrobial agent. As noted 
above, regardless of the substance that 
an establishment chooses to use for its 
OLR system, it is required to meet all 
local, State, and Federal environmental 
requirements. The waste water from the 
few poultry establishments that use TSP 
is handled routinely by existing water 
treatment systems or recycled as by- 
products without entering the plant’s 
systems, municipal water systems, or 
the ground water. Thus, FSIS has 
determined that allowing establishment 
to use approved OLR antimicrobial 
systems will not have a significant 
individual or cumulative effect on the 
human environment. 
Conclusion: For the reasons discussed 
above, FSIS has determined that the 
proposed PSR will not have individual 
or cumulative effect on the human 
health environment. Therefore, this 
regulatory action is appropriately 
subject to the categorical exclusion from 
the preparation of an EA or EIS 
provided under 7 CFR 1b.4(b)(6) of the 
USDA regulations. 
XI. Paperwork Reduction Act 
In accordance with section 3507(d) of 
the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995, 
the information collection or 
recordkeeping requirements included in 
this proposed rule have been submitted 
for approval to the Office of 
Management and Budget (OMB). 
Title: Poultry Slaughter Inspection. 
Type of Collection: New. 
Abstract: Under this proposed rule, 
each official poultry slaughter 
establishment would need to maintain 
as part of its HACCP plan, or sanitation 
SOP, or other prerequisite program, 
written procedures addressing (1)the 
prevention, throughout the entire 
slaughter and dressing operation, of 
contamination of carcasses and parts by 
enteric pathogens (e.g. Salmonella and 
Campylobacter) and by fecal material, 
and (2) the prevention of carcasses and 
parts contaminated by visible fecal 
material from entering the chiller. Each 
establishment operating under the 
proposed new inspection system would 
also have to maintain written 
procedures to prevent caracasses 
affected with septicemia and toxemia 
from entering the chiller. The 
procedures addressing prevention of 
contamination by enteric pathogens 
would need to include, at a minimum, 
microbial testing at pre-chill and at 
post-chill. In addition, each 
establishment operating under the 
proposed inspection system would need 
to maintain records that document that 
the products resulting from its slaughter 
operations meet the definition of ready- 
to-cook poultry. 
The proposed regulations that would 
require poultry slaughter establishments 
to have written procedures in their 
HACCP plans, or sanitation SOPs, or 
prerequisite programs is already covered 
under an approved information 
collection, Pathogen Reduction/Hazard 
Analysis and Critical Control Point 
Systems (OMB control number 0583– 
0103). 
The proposal that poultry slaughter 
establishments monitor their systems 
through microbial testing and 
recordkeeping creates a new 
information collection burden. FSIS 
estimates that large establishments will 
test and record microbial results at the 
2 prescribed locations (pre-chill and 
post-chill) 15 times a day, small 
establishments 7 times a day, and very 
small establishments 3 times a day. 
Estimate of Burden: FSIS estimates 
that it will take 5 minutes per response. 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:33 Jan 26, 2012 Jkt 226001 PO 00000 Frm 00045 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\27JAP2.SGM 27JAP2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
4V
PT
VN
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
4452 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 18 / Friday, January 27, 2012 / Proposed Rules 
Respondents: Poultry Slaughter 
Establishments. 
Estimated Number of Respondents: 
289. 
Estimated Number of Responses per 
Respondent: Large establishments 
15,300; small establishments 7,140; very 
small establishments 1,800. 
Estimated Total Annual Burden on 
Respondents: 250,160 hours. 
Copies of this information collection 
assessment can be obtained from John 
O’Connell, Paperwork Reduction Act 
Coordinator, Food Safety and Inspection 
Service, USDA, 1400 Independence 
Avenue SW., Room 6083, South 
Building, Washington, DC 20250. 
Comments are invited on: (a) Whether 
the proposed collection of information 
is necessary for the proper performance 
of FSIS’s functions, including whether 
the information will have practical 
utility; (b) the accuracy of FSIS’s 
estimate of the burden of the proposed 
collection of information, including the 
validity of the methodology and 
assumptions used; (c) ways to enhance 
the quality, utility, and clarity of the 
information to be collected; and (d) 
ways to minimize the burden of the 
collection of information on those who 
are to respond, including through the 
use of appropriate automated, 
electronic, mechanical, or other 
technological collection techniques or 
other forms of information technology. 
Comments may be sent to both John 
O’Connell, Paperwork Reduction Act 
Coordinator, at the address provided 
above, and the Desk Officer for 
Agriculture, Office of Information and 
Regulatory Affairs, Office of 
Management and Budget, Washington, 
DC 20253. To be most effective, 
comments should be sent to OMB 
within 60 days of the publication date 
of this proposed rule. 
XII. Additional Public Notification 
Public awareness of all segments of 
rulemaking and policy development is 
important. Consequently, in an effort to 
ensure that the public and in particular 
minorities, women, and persons with 
disabilities, are aware of this proposed 
rule, FSIS will announce it on-line 
through the FSIS Web page located at 
http://www.fsis.usda.gov/ 
regulations_&_policies/Proposed_Rules/ 
index.asp. FSIS also will make copies of 
this Federal Register publication 
available through the FSIS Constituent 
Update, which is used to provide 
information regarding FSIS policies, 
procedures, regulations, Federal 
Register notices, FSIS public meetings, 
and other types of information that 
could affect or would be of interest to 
our constituents and stakeholders. The 
Update is communicated via Listserv, a 
free email subscription service 
consisting of industry, trade, and farm 
groups, consumer interest groups, allied 
health professionals, scientific 
professionals, and other individuals 
who have requested to be included. The 
Update also is available on the FSIS 
Web page. Through Listserv and the 
Web page, FSIS is able to provide 
information to a much broader, more 
diverse audience. 
In addition, FSIS offers an email 
subscription service which provides 
automatic and customized access to 
selected food safety news and 
information. This service is available at 
http://www.fsis.usda.gov/ 
news_&_events/email_subscription/. 
Options range from recalls to export 
information to regulations, directives 
and notices. Customers can add or 
delete subscriptions themselves, and 
have the option to password protect 
their accounts. 
XIII. Proposed Regulatory Amendments 
List of Subjects 
9 CFR Part 381 
Poultry inspection, Poultry products, 
Recordkeeping requirements. 
9 CFR Part 500 
Administrative practice and 
procedure, Meat inspection, Poultry and 
poultry products. 
For the reasons stated in the 
preamble, FSIS is proposing to amend 9 
CFR Chapter III as follows: 
PART 381—POULTRY PRODUCTS 
INSPECTION REGULATIONS 
1. The authority citation for part 381 
continues to read as follows: 
Authority: 7 U.S.C. 138f, 450; 21 U.S.C. 
451–470; 7 CFR 2.7, 2.18, 2.53. 
2. Section 381.36 is amended as 
follows: 
a. Paragraph (c) is revised. 
b. Paragraphs (d) and (e) are removed. 
The revisions read as follows: 
§ 381.36 Facilities required. 
* * * * * 
(c) Facilities for post-mortem 
inspection under the New Poultry 
Inspection System. The following 
facilities requirements apply to 
establishments operating under the New 
Poultry Inspection System and are in 
addition to the requirements for 
obtaining a grant of inspection. 
(1) The following provisions apply to 
the online carcass inspection station: 
(i) On each production line, at a point 
before the chiller and after the 
establishment has completed all sorting, 
trimming, and reprocessing activities 
necessary to comply with § 381.76(d)(2) 
of this part, at least 4 feet of floor space 
along the conveyor line must be 
provided for one online carcass 
inspection station. 
(ii) The conveyor line must be level 
for the entire length of the online 
carcass inspection station. The vertical 
distance from the bottom of the shackles 
to the top of the platform (paragraph 
(c)(1)(iii) of this section) must not be 
less than 60 inches. 
(iii) Each online carcass inspection 
station must have a platform that is slip- 
resistant and can be safely accessed by 
the inspector. The platform must be a 
minimum length of 4 feet and have a 
minimum width of 2 feet. The platform 
must be designed with a 42-inch high 
rail on the back side and with 1⁄2-inch 
foot bumpers on both sides and front to 
allow safe working conditions. The 
platform must be large enough for the 
inspector to sit on a stool and to change 
stations during breaks or station 
rotation. 
(iv) Conveyor line stop/start switches 
must be located within easy reach of the 
online carcass inspector. 
(v) A minimum of 200-foot candles of 
shadow-free lighting with a minimum 
color rendering index value of 85 must 
be provided where the birds are 
inspected to facilitate online carcass 
inspection. 
(vi) Hand rinsing facilities must be 
provided for use by and within easy 
reach of the online carcass inspector. 
The hand rinsing facilities must have a 
continuous flow of water or be capable 
of being immediately activated and 
deactivated in a hands-free manner, 
must minimize any splash affect, and 
must otherwise operate in a sanitary 
manner that prevents contamination of 
carcasses and inspector clothing. The 
hand rinsing facilities must provide 
water at a temperature between 65 and 
120 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(vii) A separate clipboard holder for 
holding recording sheets must be 
provided for and within easy reach of 
the online carcass inspector. 
(viii) Receptacles for condemned 
carcasses and parts that comply with the 
performance standards in § 416.3(c) of 
this chapter must be provided at each 
online carcass inspection station. 
(ix) Hangback racks designed to hold 
at least 10 carcasses must be provided 
and positioned within easy reach of the 
online carcass inspector. 
(x) A buzzer switch shall be located 
within easy reach of the online carcass 
inspector to be used by the carcass 
inspector to alert the inspector-in- 
charge, offline inspectors, or 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:33 Jan 26, 2012 Jkt 226001 PO 00000 Frm 00046 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\27JAP2.SGM 27JAP2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
4V
PT
VN
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
4453 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 18 / Friday, January 27, 2012 / Proposed Rules 
establishment management of 
conditions that require their attention. 
(2) The following provisions apply to 
pre-chill and post-chill offline 
verification inspection stations: 
(i) One or more offline verification 
inspection stations must be located at 
the end of the line or lines prior to the 
chiller; one or more offline verification 
inspection stations must also be located 
after the chiller or chillers. The Agency 
will determine the number of stations 
needed in establishments having more 
than one processing line or more than 
one chiller. 
(ii) Floor space for all offline 
verification inspection stations must 
consist of a minimum of 3 feet along 
each conveyor line and after each 
chiller, as applicable, to allow carcasses 
to be removed for evaluation by the 
verification inspector. The space must 
be level and protected from all traffic 
and overhead obstructions. 
(iii) At the pre-chill location, the 
vertical distance from the bottom of the 
shackles to the floor must not be less 
than 48 inches. 
(iv) At each offline verification 
inspection station, a table designed to be 
readily cleanable and drainable must be 
provided for offline verification 
inspectors to conduct offline 
verification activities. At turkey 
slaughter establishments, the table must 
be at least 3 feet wide, 2 feet deep, and 
3 feet high. At all other poultry 
slaughter establishments, the table must 
be at least 2 feet wide, 2 feet deep, and 
3 feet high. 
(v) A minimum of 200-footcandles of 
shadow-free lighting with a minimum 
color rendering index of 85 on the table 
surface must be provided. 
(vi) The establishment must provide a 
separate clipboard holder for holding 
recording sheets; or alternatively, the 
establishment may provide electronic 
means for the offline verification 
inspector to record inspection results. 
(vii) Hangback racks designed to hold 
at least 10 carcasses must be provided 
and positioned within easy reach of the 
offline verification inspector. 
(viii) Hand washing facilities must be 
provided within easy access of all 
offline verification inspection stations. 
(3) Each establishment operating 
under the New Poultry Inspection 
System must provide a location at a 
point along the production line after the 
carcasses are eviscerated at which an 
inspector may safely and properly 
inspect for leukosis the first 300 
carcasses of each flock together with 
associated viscera either uniformly 
trailing or leading, or otherwise 
identified with the corresponding 
carcass. The leukosis inspection area 
must provide a minimum of 200- 
footcandles of shadow-free lighting on 
the surface where the viscera are 
inspected. 
(4) A trough or other similar drainage 
facility must extend beneath the 
conveyor at all places where processing 
operations are conducted from the point 
where the carcass is opened to the point 
where trimming has been performed. 
The trough must be of sufficient width 
to preclude trimmings, drippage, and 
debris from accumulating on the floor or 
platforms. The clearance between 
suspended carcasses and the trough 
must be sufficient to preclude 
contamination of carcasses by splashing. 
3. Section 381.65 is amended as 
follows: 
a. Paragraphs (e) and (f) are 
redesignated as paragraphs (f) and (e) 
respectively. 
b. Newly redesignated as paragraph (f) 
is revised. 
c. A new paragraph (g) is added. 
d. A new paragraph (h) is added. 
The revisions and additions read as 
follows: 
§ 381.65 Operations and procedures, 
generally. 
* * * * * 
(f) Procedures for controlling visible 
fecal contamination. Official poultry 
slaughter establishments must develop, 
implement, and maintain written 
procedures to ensure that poultry 
carcasses contaminated with visible 
fecal material do not enter the chilling 
tank. Establishments must incorporate 
these procedures into their HACCP 
plans, or sanitation SOPs, or other 
prerequisite programs. 
(g) Procedures for controlling 
contamination throughout the slaughter 
and dressing process. Official poultry 
slaughter establishments must develop, 
implement, and maintain written 
procedures to prevent contamination of 
carcasses and parts by enteric pathogens 
(e.g., Salmonella and Campylobacter) 
and fecal contamination throughout the 
entire slaughter and dressing operation. 
Establishments must incorporate these 
procedures into their HACCP plans, or 
sanitation SOPs, or other prerequisite 
programs. At a minimum, these 
procedures must include sampling and 
analysis for microbial organisms at the 
pre-chill and post-chill points in the 
process. The sampling frequency must 
be adequate to monitor the 
establishment’s ability to maintain 
process control for enteric pathogens. 
Establishments must maintain accurate 
records of all test results and retain 
these records as provided in paragraph 
(h) of this section. 
(h) Recordkeeping requirements. 
Official poultry slaughter establishment 
must maintain daily records sufficient 
to document the implementation and 
monitoring of the procedures required 
under paragraph (g) of this section. 
Records required by this section may be 
maintained on computers provided that 
the establishment implements 
appropriate controls to ensure the 
integrity of the electronic data. Records 
require by this section must be 
maintained for at least one year and 
must be accessible to FSIS. 
4. Section 381.66 is amended as 
follows: 
a. Paragraph (b) is revised. 
b. Paragraphs (c)(3) and (c)(4) are 
removed. 
c. Paragraph (e) is revised. 
The revisions read as follows: 
§ 381.66 Temperatures and chilling and 
freezing procedures. 
* * * * * 
(b) Chilling performance standards, 
except for ratites. 
(1)(i) Each official poultry slaughter 
establishment must ensure that all 
poultry carcasses, parts, and giblets are 
chilled immediately after slaughter 
operations so that there is no outgrowth 
of pathogens, unless such poultry is to 
be frozen or cooked immediately at the 
official establishment. 
(ii) Previously chilled poultry 
carcasses and major portions must be 
kept chilled so that there is no 
outgrowth of the pathogens, unless such 
poultry is to be packed and frozen 
immediately at the official 
establishment. 
(2) After product has been chilled, the 
establishment must prevent the 
outgrowth of pathogens on the product 
as long as the product remains at the 
establishment. 
(3) The establishment must develop, 
implement, and maintain written 
procedures for chilling that address, at 
a minimum, the potential for pathogen 
outgrowth, the conditions affecting 
carcass chilling, and when its chilling 
process is completed. The establishment 
must incorporate these procedures into 
its HACCP plan, or sanitation SOP, or 
other prerequisite program. 
* * * * * 
(e) Air chilling. Air chilling is the 
method of chilling raw poultry carcasses 
and parts exclusively with air. No water, 
including mists or sprays, may be used 
to help chill the product. However, an 
anti-microbial intervention that is 
applied with water may be used for a 
short duration if its use does not result 
in any pick-up of water or moisture and 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:33 Jan 26, 2012 Jkt 226001 PO 00000 Frm 00047 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\27JAP2.SGM 27JAP2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
4V
PT
VN
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
4454 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 18 / Friday, January 27, 2012 / Proposed Rules 
if it does not assist the chilling process 
by lowering the product temperature. 
* * * * * 
5. Section 381.67 is amended as 
follows: 
a. The section heading is revised. 
b. The first sentence of the 
introductory text is amended by 
removing the words ‘‘young chicken 
and squab’’ and adding in their place 
the word ‘‘poultry.’’ 
c. The second to the last sentence of 
the introductory text is removed. 
d. The last sentence of the 
introductory text is revised. 
e. The table is revised. 
f. A new table is added after the first 
table. 
The revisions read as follows: 
§ 381.67 Poultry slaughter inspection rate 
maximums under traditional inspection 
procedure. 
* * * Section 381.76(b) specifies 
when the traditional inspection 
procedure can or must be used. 
MAXIMUM PRODUCTION LINE RATES—POULTRY OTHER THAN TURKEYS AND RATITES—TRADITIONAL INSPECTION 
PROCEDURES 
Line configuration 1 
Number of 
inspection 
stations 
Birds per 
inspector per 
minute 
6–1 ................................................................................................................................................................... 1 25 
12–1 ................................................................................................................................................................. 2 23 
12–2 ................................................................................................................................................................. 2 21 
1 Birds are suspended on the slaughter line at 6-inch intervals. The first number indicates the interval in inches between the birds that each in-
spector examines, i.e., 6 or 12 inches. The second number indicates how many of the birds presented, the inspector is to inspect, i.e., ‘‘1’’ 
means inspect every bird and ‘‘2’’ means inspect every second bird. 
MAXIMUM PRODUCTION LINE RATES—TURKEYS—TRADITIONAL INSPECTION PROCEDURES 
Line configuration1 Number of in-spection stations 
Birds per 
inspector per 
minute for light 
birds 
(<16 lbs) 
Birds per 
inspector per 
minute for heavy 
birds 
(>16 lbs) 
12–1 ................................................................................................................................. 1 20 16 
24–2 ................................................................................................................................. 2 34 26 
1 Birds are suspended on the slaughter line at 12-inch intervals. The first number indicates the interval in inches between the birds that each 
inspector examines, i.e., 12 or 24 inches. The second number indicates how many of the birds presented, the inspector is to inspect, i.e., ‘‘1’’ 
means inspect every bird and ‘‘2’’ means inspect every second bird. 
6. Section 381.68 is revised to read as 
follows: 
§ 381.68 Maximum line speed rates under 
the New Poultry Inspection System. 
(a) The maximum line speed for 
young chicken slaughter establishments 
that operate under the New Poultry 
Inspection System is 175 birds per 
minute. 
(b) The maximum line speed for 
turkey slaughter establishments that 
operate under the New Poultry 
Inspection System is 55 birds per 
minute. 
(c) Notwithstanding paragraphs (a) 
and (b) of this Section, establishments 
that operate under the New Poultry 
Inspection System must reduce their 
line speed as directed by inspectors-in- 
charge. Inspectors-in-charge are 
authorized to direct establishments to 
operate at a reduced line speed when in 
his or her judgment a carcass-by-carcass 
inspection cannot be adequately 
performed within the time available due 
to the manner in which the birds are 
presented to the online carcass 
inspector, the health conditions of a 
particular flock, or factors that may 
indicate a loss of process control. 
7. Section 381.76 is revised to read as 
follows: 
§ 381.76 Post-mortem inspection under 
Traditional Inspection, the New Poultry 
Inspection System, and Ratite Inspection. 
(a) A post-mortem inspection shall be 
made on a bird-by-bird basis on all 
poultry eviscerated in every official 
establishment. Each carcass, or all parts 
comprising such carcass, must be 
examined by an inspector, except for 
parts that are not needed for inspection 
purposes and are not intended for 
human food and are condemned. Each 
carcass eviscerated shall be prepared as 
ready-to-cook poultry. 
(b) There are three systems of post- 
mortem inspection: New Poultry 
Inspection System, which may be used 
for young chickens and turkeys; 
Traditional Inspection, which may be 
used for all poultry, except for ratites; 
and ratite inspection. Traditional 
Inspection must be used for young 
chickens and turkeys if the New Poultry 
Inspection System is not used. 
(c) Official establishments that 
operate under traditional inspection 
must meet the following requirements: 
(1) No viscera or any part thereof may 
be removed from any poultry processed 
in any official establishment, except at 
the time of post-mortem inspection, 
unless its identity with the rest of the 
carcass is maintained in a manner 
satisfactory to the inspector until such 
inspection is made; 
(2) Each carcass to be eviscerated 
must be opened so as to expose the 
organs and the body cavity for proper 
examination by the inspector. 
(3) If a carcass is frozen, it must be 
thoroughly thawed before being opened 
for examination by an inspector. 
(d) The New Poultry Inspection 
System may be used for young chickens 
and turkeys if the official establishment 
requests to use it and meets or agrees to 
meet the requirements of this paragraph 
(d) and the Administrator approves the 
establishment’s request. The 
Administrator may permit 
establishments that slaughter classes of 
poultry other then young chickens and 
turkeys to operate under the New 
Poultry Inspection System under a 
waiver from the provisions of the 
regulations as provided in § 381.3(b) of 
this part. 
(1) Facilities: The establishment must 
comply with the facilities requirements 
in § 381.36(c) of this part. 
(2) Carcass Sorting and Disposition: 
(i) The establishment must conduct 
carcass with associated viscera sorting 
activities, dispose of carcasses and parts 
exhibiting condemnable conditions, and 
conduct appropriate trimming and 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 18:32 Jan 26, 2012 Jkt 226001 PO 00000 Frm 00048 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\27JAP2.SGM 27JAP2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
4V
PT
VN
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
4455 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 18 / Friday, January 27, 2012 / Proposed Rules 
reprocessing activities before carcasses 
are presented to the online carcass 
inspector. 
(ii) Any carcasses removed from the 
line for reprocessing activities or salvage 
must be returned to the line before the 
online carcass inspection station. The 
establishment must include in its 
written HACCP plan, or sanitation 
standard operating procedure, or other 
prerequisite program a process by which 
parts, other than parts identified as 
‘‘major portions’’ as defined in 9 CFR 
381.170(b)(22), are available for 
inspection offline after reprocessing or 
salvage. 
(iii) The establishment must develop, 
implement, and maintain written 
procedures to ensure that poultry 
carcasses contaminated with septicemic 
and toxemic conditions do not enter the 
chilling tank. Establishments must 
incorporate these procedures into their 
HACCP plans, or sanitation SOPs, or 
other prerequisite programs. These 
procedures must cover, at a minimum, 
establishment sorting activities required 
under paragraph (d)(2)(i) of this section. 
(iv) The establishment must maintain 
records to document that the products 
resulting from their slaughter operations 
meet the definition of ready-to-cook 
poultry in § 381.1 of this part. 
(v) If there is evidence that a flock 
may be affected by avian visceral 
leukosis, the inspector-in-charge is 
authorized to adjust inspection 
procedures as needed to ensure 
adequate inspection of each carcass and 
viscera for that condition. The 
inspector-in-charge is also authorized to 
require the establishment to adjust its 
processing operations as needed to 
accommodate the adjusted inspection 
procedures. 
(3) Presentation for Online Carcass 
Inspection: To ensure the online carcass 
inspector may properly inspect every 
carcass, the establishment must present 
carcasses as follows: 
(i) Each carcass, except carcasses and 
parts identified as ‘‘major portions’’ 
under 9 CFR 381.179(b)(22), must be 
held by a single shackle; 
(ii) Both hocks of each carcass must 
be held by the shackle; 
(iii) The back side of the carcass must 
be faced toward the inspector; 
(iv) There must be minimal carcass 
swinging motion; and 
(v) Establishments that slaughter 
young chickens must notify the 
inspector-in-charge prior to the 
slaughter of each new flock to allow the 
inspection of viscera as provided in 
§ 381.36(c)(3) of this part. The 
establishment must ensure that it can 
sufficiently identify viscera and parts 
corresponding with each carcass 
inspected by the online carcass 
inspector so that if the carcass inspector 
condemns a carcass all corresponding 
viscera and parts are also condemned. 
8. Section 381.91 is amended by 
revising paragraph (b) to read as follows: 
§ 381.91 Contamination. 
* * * * * 
(b) Any carcass of poultry 
accidentally contaminated during 
slaughter with digestive tract contents 
need not be condemned if promptly 
under the supervision of an inspector 
and thereafter found not to be 
adulterated. Contaminated surfaces that 
are cut must be removed only by 
trimming. Contaminated inner surfaces 
that are not cut may be cleaned by 
trimming alone or may be re-processed 
as provided in subparagraph (b)(1) or 
(b)(2) of this section. 
(1) Online. Poultry carcasses 
accidentally contaminated with 
digestive tract contents may be cleaned 
by applying an online antimicrobial 
intervention to all carcasses after 
evisceration and before the carcasses 
enter the chiller if the parameters for 
use of the antimicrobial intervention 
system have been approved by the 
Administrator. Establishments must 
incorporate procedures for the use of 
any online reprocessing antimicrobial 
intervention system into their HACCP 
plans, Sanitation Standard Operating 
Procedures, or other prerequisite 
programs. 
(2) Offline reprocessing. 
Contaminated inner surfaces that are not 
cut may be cleaned at an approved 
reprocessing station away from the main 
processing line by any method that will 
remove the contamination, such as 
vacuuming, washing, and trimming, 
singly or in combination. All visible 
specks of contamination must be 
removed, and if the inner surfaces are 
reprocessed other than solely by 
trimming, all surfaces of the carcass 
must be treated with chlorinated water 
containing 20 ppm to 50 ppm available 
chlorine or another approved 
antimicrobial substance in accordance 
with the parameters approved by 
Administrator . Establishments must 
incorporate procedures for the use of 
any offline reprocessing into their 
HACCP plans, Sanitation Standard 
Operating Procedures, or other 
prerequisite programs. 
9. Section 381.94 is removed. 
10. Section 381.129 is amended by 
adding a new paragraph (b)(6)(v) to read 
as follows: 
§ 381.129 False or misleading labeling or 
containers. 
* * * * * 
(b) * * * 
(6) * * * 
(v) Ready-to-cook chicken may bear 
the claim ‘‘air chilled’’ or ‘‘air chilling’’ 
on its label only if the product was 
chilled under a process that meets the 
definition of air chilling in § 381.66(e) of 
this part. 
* * * * * 
PART 500—RULES OF PRACTICE 
11. The authority citation for part 500 
continues to read as follows: 
Authority: 21 U.S.C. 451–470, 601–695; 7 
U.S.C. 450, 1901–1906; 7 CFR 2.18, 2.53. 
§ 500.6 [Amended] 
12. Section 500.6 is amended to 
remove and reserve paragraph (f). 
Done in Washington, DC, on January 20, 
2012. 
Alfred V. Almanza, 
Administrator. 
Note: The following Appendix will not 
appear in the Code of Federal Regulations. 
APPENDIX A—HIMP PERFORMANCE 
STANDARDS 
Establishments operating under HIMP are 
required to meet performance standards for 
food safety and non-food-safety related 
defects and to maintain process control plans 
to meet those performance standards. The 
following is a description of the HIMP 
performance standards. 
FSIS has a zero tolerance for visible fecal 
contamination and septicemic and toxemic 
animal diseases (see 9 CFR 381.83 and 
381.65(e)). Notwithstanding this zero 
tolerance policy, there are two categories of 
food safety related performance standards 
under HIMP for these conditions: ‘‘FS–1’’ 
addresses septicemic and toxemic animal 
diseases and ‘‘FS–2’’ addresses visible fecal 
material. The Agency developed performance 
standards for FS–1 and FS–2 conditions to 
compare the performance of HIMP and non- 
HIMP establishments in meeting the zero 
tolerance for septicemic and toxemic animal 
diseases and visible fecal contamination. 
To develop the performance standards, a 
private contractor, the Research Triangle 
Institute (RTI), conducted a study of 16 
young chicken establishments operating 
under the existing poultry inspection systems 
to establish baseline organoleptic and 
microbial levels at young chicken slaughter 
establishments operating under the 
inspection systems provided for under the 
current regulations. The baseline studies 
were conducted between 1998 and 2000, 
prior to young chicken slaughter 
establishments beginning to operate under 
HIMP. The performance standards for the 
FS–1 and FS–2 conditions were set at the 
75th percentile of what was achieved under 
the RTI baseline study. The young chicken 
performance standards for each food safety 
defect category are presented in Table 1. 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:33 Jan 26, 2012 Jkt 226001 PO 00000 Frm 00049 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\27JAP2.SGM 27JAP2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
4V
PT
VN
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
4456 Federal Register / Vol. 77, No. 18 / Friday, January 27, 2012 / Proposed Rules 
TABLE A–1—FOOD SAFETY PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR YOUNG CHICKEN SLAUGHTER ESTABLISHMENTS * 
Defect categories 
Performance standards 
based on existing 
inspection systems 
(% of carcasses) 
Food Safety 1: 
Condition—Infectious (e.g., Septicemia, toxemia) ....................................................................................................... 0.1 * 
Food Safety 2: 
Contamination—Digestive Content (e.g., fecal material) ............................................................................................. 1.5 * 
* FSIS has a zero tolerance for Food Safety 1 and 2 defects. 
As noted above, the FS–1 and FS–2 HIMP 
performance standards were developed for 
purposes of comparison. Therefore, FSIS 
inspection personnel in HIMP establishments 
are responsible for enforcing the zero 
tolerance for visible fecal contamination and 
septicemic and toxemic animal diseases. If 
the online carcass inspector in a HIMP 
establishment identifies a carcass with FS–1 
or FS–2 conditions, he or she stops the 
evisceration line and notifies the 
establishment to hang the affected carcass 
back for condemnation or reprocessing. The 
carcass inspector does not restart the line 
until the contaminated carcass is removed. 
Non-food-safety related performance 
standards are referred to as ‘‘Other Consumer 
Protection’’ standards, or ‘‘OCPs,’’ under 
HIMP. There are five categories of OCPs 
various types of trim and dressing defects 
that mainly affect the quality of products. 
Examples include removable non-septicemic 
and non-toxemic animal diseases, breast 
blisters, bruises, fractures, and feathers. 
Together, the five OCP categories account for 
29 specific defects addressed under the 
current regulations by the FPS, codified at 9 
CFR 381.76. The OCP categories are logically 
grouped and simpler to apply than the FPS. 
Under the FPS, defects are weighted and a 
complex numerical system is applied to each 
sample group of carcasses. In contrast, to 
determine compliance with the OCP 
categories, an individually sampled carcass 
with any defect in one of the five categories 
is counted as ‘‘defective.’’ A carcass with 
more than one category of defects is counted 
in both (or more) categories. The performance 
standard for each category is expressed as the 
maximum percentage of sampled carcasses 
that may contain one or more defects from 
that category. The young chicken 
performance standards for each OCP category 
are presented in Table A–2. 
TABLE A–2—OCP PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR YOUNG CHICKEN SLAUGHTER ESTABLISHMENTS 
Nonconformance category Performance standard (% carcasses) 
OCP–1: 
Condition—Animal Diseases—non-septicemic or non-toxemic (e.g., airsacculitis, arthritis, ascites, skin leukosis, 
avian tuberculosis, cadaver, enteritis, erysipelas, inflammatory process, nephritis, osteomyelitis, other tumors— 
carcinoma, sarcoma, etc., pericarditis, pneumonia, reportable disease, salpingitis, tenosynovitis ......................... 1.7 
OCP–2: 
Condition—Miscellaneous (e.g., breast blister, bruises, external mutilation, fractures, overscald, sores, scabs, and 
localized inflammatory process) ............................................................................................................................... 52.5 
[FR Doc. 2012–1516 Filed 1–20–12; 4:15 pm] 
BILLING CODE 3410–DM–P 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:33 Jan 26, 2012 Jkt 226001 PO 00000 Frm 00050 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 9990 E:\FR\FM\27JAP2.SGM 27JAP2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
4V
PT
VN
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
