9714 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 36 / Friday, February 22, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
involved in the individual case under 
consideration. The burden is on the 
employee to demonstrate that the 
applicable waiver standard has been 
met. 
§ 309.20 Compromise. 
Peace Corps may attempt to effect 
compromise in accordance with the 
standards set forth in the FCCS (31 CFR 
part 902). 
§ 309.21 Suspension of collection. 
Suspension of collection action shall 
be made in accordance with the 
standards set forth in the FCCS (31 CFR 
903.1–903.2). 
§ 309.22 Termination of collection. 
Termination of collection action shall 
be made in accordance with the 
standards set forth in the FCCS (31 CFR 
903.1 and 903.3–903.4). 
§ 309.23 Discharge. 
Once a debt has been closed out for 
accounting purposes and collection has 
been terminated, the debt is discharged. 
Peace Corps will report discharged debt 
as income to the debtor to the Internal 
Revenue Service per 26 U.S.C. 6050P 
and 26 CFR 1.6050P–1. 
§ 309.24 Bankruptcy. 
Peace Corps generally terminates 
collection activity on debts that have 
been discharged in bankruptcy unless 
otherwise provided for by bankruptcy 
law. The CFO will seek legal advice by 
the General Counsel’s office if there is 
the belief that any claims or offset may 
have survived the discharge of a debtor. 
Dated: February 15, 2008. 
Tyler S. Posey, 
General Counsel. 
[FR Doc. E8–3268 Filed 2–21–08; 8:45 am] 
BILLING CODE 6015–01–P 
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND 
HUMAN SERVICES 
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid 
Services 
42 CFR Part 440 
[CMS–2232–P] 
RIN 0938–A048 
Medicaid Program; State Flexibility for 
Medicaid Benefit Packages 
AGENCY: Centers for Medicare & 
Medicaid Services (CMS), HHS. 
ACTION: Proposed rule. 
SUMMARY: This proposed rule would 
implement provisions of section 6044 of 
the Deficit Reduction Act of 2005, Pub. 
L. 109–171, which amends the Social 
Security Act by adding a new section 
1937 related to the coverage of medical 
assistance under approved State plans. 
Under this new section, States have 
increased flexibility under an approved 
State plan to define the scope of covered 
medical assistance by offering coverage 
of benchmark or benchmark-equivalent 
benefit packages to certain Medicaid 
recipients. 
DATES: To be assured consideration, 
comments must be received at one of 
the addresses provided below, no later 
than 5 p.m. March 24, 2008. 
ADDRESSES: In commenting, please refer 
to file code CMS–2232–P. Because of 
staff and resource limitations, we cannot 
accept comments by facsimile (FAX) 
transmission. 
You may submit comments in one of 
four ways (no duplicates, please): 
1. Electronically. You may submit 
electronic comments on specific issues 
in this regulation to http:// 
www.cms.hhs.gov/eRulemaking. Click 
on the link ‘‘Submit electronic 
comments on CMS regulations with an 
open comment period.’’ (Attachments 
should be in Microsoft Word, 
WordPerfect, or Excel; however, we 
prefer Microsoft Word.) 
2. By regular mail. You may mail 
written comments (one original and two 
copies) to the following address ONLY: 
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid 
Services, Department of Health and 
Human Services, Attention: CMS–2232– 
P, P.O. Box 8016, Baltimore, MD 21244– 
8016. 
Please allow sufficient time for mailed 
comments to be received before the 
close of the comment period. 
3. By express or overnight mail. You 
may send written comments (one 
original and two copies) to the following 
address ONLY: Centers for Medicare & 
Medicaid Services, Department of 
Health and Human Services, Attention: 
CMS–2232–P, Mail Stop C4–26–05, 
7500 Security Boulevard, Baltimore, MD 
21244–1850. 
4. By hand or courier. If you prefer, 
you may deliver (by hand or courier) 
your written comments (one original 
and two copies) before the close of the 
comment period to one of the following 
addresses. If you intend to deliver your 
comments to the Baltimore address, 
please call telephone number (410) 786– 
7195 in advance to schedule your 
arrival with one of our staff members. 
Room 445–G, Hubert H. Humphrey 
Building, 200 Independence Avenue, 
SW., Washington, DC 20201; or 7500 
Security Boulevard, Baltimore, MD 
21244–1850. 
(Because access to the interior of the 
HHH Building is not readily available to 
persons without Federal Government 
identification, commenters are 
encouraged to leave their comments in 
the CMS drop slots located in the main 
lobby of the building. A stamp-in clock 
is available for persons wishing to retain 
a proof of filing by stamping in and 
retaining an extra copy of the comments 
being filed.) 
Comments mailed to the addresses 
indicated as appropriate for hand or 
courier delivery may be delayed and 
received after the comment period. 
Submission of comments on 
paperwork requirements. You may 
submit comments on this document’s 
paperwork requirements by mailing 
your comments to the addresses 
provided at the end of the ‘‘Collection 
of Information Requirements’’ section in 
this document. 
For information on viewing public 
comments, see the beginning of the 
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION section. 
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: 
Donna Schmidt, (410) 786–5532. 
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 
Submitting Comments: We welcome 
comments from the public on all issues 
set forth in this rule to assist us in fully 
considering issues and developing 
policies. You can assist us by 
referencing the file code CMS–2232–P 
and the specific ‘‘issue identifier’’ that 
precedes the section on which you 
choose to comment. 
Inspection of Public Comments: All 
comments received before the close of 
the comment period are available for 
viewing by the public, including any 
personally identifiable or confidential 
business information that is included in 
a comment. We post all comments 
received before the close of the 
comment period on the following Web 
site as soon as possible after they have 
been received: http://www.cms.hhs.gov/ 
eRulemaking. Click on the link 
‘‘Electronic Comments on CMS 
Regulations’’ on that Web site to view 
public comments. 
Comments received timely will also 
be available for public inspection as 
they are received, generally beginning 
approximately 3 weeks after publication 
of a document, at the headquarters of 
the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid 
Services, 7500 Security Boulevard, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21244, Monday 
through Friday of each week from 8:30 
a.m. to 4 p.m. To schedule an 
appointment to view public comments, 
phone 1–800–743–3951. 
I. Background 
Under title XIX of the Social Security 
Act (the Act), the Secretary is 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 16:29 Feb 21, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00006 Fmt 4702 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\22FEP1.SGM 22FEP1ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 P
R
O
D1
PC
66
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
9715 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 36 / Friday, February 22, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
authorized to provide funds to assist 
States in furnishing medical assistance 
to needy individuals whose income and 
resources are insufficient to meet the 
costs of necessary medical services, 
including families with dependent 
children and individuals who are aged, 
blind, or disabled. To be eligible for 
funds under this program, States must 
submit a State plan, which must be 
approved by the Secretary. Programs 
under title XIX are jointly financed by 
Federal and State governments. Within 
broad Federal guidelines, each State 
determines the design of its program, 
eligible groups, benefit packages, 
payment levels for coverage and 
administrative and operating 
procedures. 
Before the passage of the Deficit 
Reduction Act (DRA), States were 
required to offer at minimum a standard 
benefit package to eligible populations 
identified in section 1902(a)(10)(A) of 
the Act (with some specific exceptions, 
for example, for certain pregnant 
women, who could be limited to 
pregnancy-related services). Under 
section 1902(a)(10)(A) of the Act, this 
standard benefit package had to include 
certain specific benefits identified in the 
definition of ‘‘medical assistance’’ at 
section 1905(a) of the Act. These 
identified benefits include inpatient and 
outpatient hospital services, physician 
services, medical and surgical services 
furnished by a dentist, rural health 
clinic services, federally qualified 
health center services, laboratory and X- 
ray services, nursing facility services, 
early and periodic screening, diagnostic 
and treatment services for individuals 
under age 21, family planning services 
to individuals of child-bearing age, 
nurse-midwife services, certified 
pediatric nurse practitioner, and 
certified family nurse practitioner 
services. Under section 1902(a)(10)(D) of 
the Act, the standard benefit package is 
also required to include home health 
services. 
Section 6044 of the Deficit Reduction 
Act of 2005 (DRA) (Pub. L. 109–171, 
enacted on February 8, 2006), amended 
the Act by adding a new section 1937 
that allows States to amend their 
Medicaid State plans to provide for the 
use of benefit packages other than the 
standard benefit package, namely 
benchmark benefit packages or 
benchmark-equivalent packages, for 
certain populations. The statute 
delineates what benefit packages qualify 
as benchmark packages and what would 
constitute a benchmark-equivalent 
package. The statute also specifies those 
exempt populations that may not be 
included or mandated in the benchmark 
coverages. To be eligible for funds under 
this new provision, States must submit 
a State plan amendment, which must be 
approved by the Secretary. 
This proposed rule would incorporate 
and integrate into Centers for Medicare 
& Medicaid Services (CMS) regulations 
the statutory framework for alternative 
benchmark packages. 
II. Provisions of the Proposed Rule 
[If you choose to comment on issues 
in this section, please include the 
caption ‘‘PROVISIONS OF THE 
PROPOSED RULE’’ at the beginning of 
your comments.] 
By creating section 1937 of the Act, 
we believe the Congress intended to 
provide States unprecedented flexibility 
within Medicaid State Plans to provide 
health benefits coverage. This authority, 
created by section 6044 of the DRA, 
allows States broad flexibility to 
develop innovative health coverage 
plans for Medicaid recipients. States 
may create more mainstream packages 
like those found in the private insurance 
market by implementing health benefit 
packages mirroring employer sponsored 
group health plans. 
These flexibilities give States new 
opportunities to provide benefit plans to 
meet the health care needs of Medicaid 
populations while maintaining the 
sustainability of the program. For the 
first time in the State plan, States may 
create innovative Medicaid programs 
that further strengthen and support the 
overall health care system. States now 
have the tools they need to provide 
person-centered care to maximize health 
outcomes for individuals. These tools 
may be used in conjunction with other 
title XIX and XXI authorities and other 
programs, to strategically align the 
Medicaid Program with today’s 
healthcare environment to expand 
access to affordable mainstream 
coverage; to promote personal 
responsibility for health and accessing 
health care; and to improve quality and 
coordination of care. 
The enactment of this provision of the 
DRA gave States new options to create 
programs that are more aligned with the 
needs of today’s Medicaid populations 
and the health care environment. States 
may use this flexibility to capitalize on 
the strengths of their existing health 
care systems by incorporating and 
building upon the private insurance 
market. Additionally, we encourage 
States to use these flexibilities to shape 
innovations in the health care 
marketplace. The authority under this 
provision creates great opportunities for 
States to focus the health care system on 
delivering person-centered health care 
for all individuals. States will be able to 
reconnect families receiving health care 
through Medicaid to the larger 
insurance system that serves most 
Americans and promote continuity of 
coverage. This in turn will strengthen 
the private market and assist in creating 
better access to health care in the State. 
Section 1937 of the Act gives States 
greater control over the administration 
of their Medicaid programs by moving 
innovative programs into State plans. 
This in turn, provides States with ease 
in leveraging the private market forces 
to provide care to Medicaid recipients 
in much the same way this care is 
provided to those with benefits through 
private insurance. 
We began issuing guidance about the 
new flexibilities available to States 
within months of the enactment of the 
DRA. For example, on March 31, 2006, 
we issued a State Medicaid Director 
letter providing guidance on the 
implementation of section 6044 of the 
DRA. This proposed rule is consistent 
with that guidance. 
Under section 1937 of the Act, a State 
may require that medical assistance to 
individuals, within one or more groups 
of individuals specified by the State, be 
provided through enrollment in a 
benchmark or benchmark-equivalent 
benefit coverage package. A State has 
the option to amend its State plan to 
provide benchmark or benchmark- 
equivalent coverage without regard to 
comparability, statewideness, freedom 
of choice, the assurance of 
transportation to medically necessary 
services and other requirements in order 
to tailor and provide the coverage to the 
individuals. The purpose of this section, 
as indicated in the title of section 6044 
of the DRA, was to provide States with 
increased flexibility. In order to 
maximize that flexibility, we are 
proposing to interpret the statutory 
clause ‘‘notwithstanding any other 
provision of this title’’ to relieve States 
of the responsibility to assure 
transportation to and from providers, 
which is the regulatory requirement at 
42 CFR 431.53 that is based on sections 
1902(a)(4) and 1902)(a)(19) of the Act. 
The statute provides benchmark options 
available to States that are equivalent to 
those found in the private health 
insurance market. Generally, private 
health insurance plans do not offer non- 
emergency medical transportation as a 
benefit to enrollees. It would be a strong 
disincentive for States to offer 
benchmark coverage through private 
health insurance plans if States had to 
supplement benchmark benefit plans 
with additional transportation benefits. 
We are therefore proposing to exempt 
States that elect benchmark coverage 
from the transportation assurance 
requirement. This provides maximum 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 16:29 Feb 21, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00007 Fmt 4702 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\22FEP1.SGM 22FEP1ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 P
R
O
D1
PC
66
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
9716 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 36 / Friday, February 22, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
flexibility to states and is consistent 
with the stated purpose of section 6044. 
Populations Affected. Benchmark or 
benchmark-equivalent coverage 
packages may only be offered to 
individuals whose eligibility is based on 
an eligibility category of the Act that 
would have been covered under the 
State’s plan on or before the enactment 
of the DRA on February 8, 2006. We are 
interpreting the statutory term 
‘‘eligibility category’’ in this rule to 
mean an eligibility category listed under 
section 1905(a) of the Act, in order to 
maximize State flexibility. All recipients 
within a covered category would be 
eligible to participate in a benchmark 
plan at the State’s option, unless 
specifically exempted by statute as 
discussed below, even when the State 
makes modifications to the income and 
resource eligibility levels for a group or 
groups under such an eligibility 
category after February 8, 2006. 
A State may require recipients to 
obtain benefits by enrolling in 
benchmark or benchmark-equivalent 
coverage only if they are ‘‘full benefit 
eligibles.’’ A full benefit eligible is an 
individual who would otherwise be 
eligible to receive the standard full 
Medicaid benefit package under the 
approved Medicaid State plan, but does 
not include individuals determined 
eligible by the State for medical 
assistance under section 1902(a)(10)(C) 
of the Act, or by reason of section 
1902(f) of the Act, or otherwise eligible 
based on a reduction of income based 
on costs incurred for medical or other 
remedial care (medically needy and 
spend-down populations). 
The statute also specifies other 
individuals who are also exempt from 
being required to enroll in benchmark or 
benchmark-equivalent benefit coverage. 
These individuals include: 
• A pregnant woman who is required 
to be covered under the State plan 
under section 1902(a)(10)(A)(i) of the 
Act; 
• A recipient qualifying for medical 
assistance under the State plan on the 
basis of being blind or disabled (or being 
treated as being blind or disabled) 
without regard to whether the 
individual is eligible for Supplemental 
Security Income (SSI) benefits under 
title XVI on the basis of being blind or 
disabled and including an individual 
who is eligible for medical assistance on 
the basis of section 1902(e)(3) of the Act; 
• A recipient entitled to benefits 
under any part of Medicare; 
• A terminally ill recipient receiving 
benefits for hospice care under title XIX; 
• A recipient who is an inpatient in 
a hospital, nursing facility, intermediate 
care facility for the mentally retarded, or 
other medical institution, and is 
required, as a condition of receiving 
services in such institution under the 
State plan, to spend for costs of medical 
care all but a minimal amount of the 
individual’s income required for 
personal needs; 
• A recipient who is medically frail 
or otherwise an individual with special 
medical needs (as described by the 
Secretary); 
• A recipient qualifying based on 
medical condition for medical 
assistance for long-term care services 
described in section 1917 (c)(1)(C) of the 
Act; 
• A recipient with respect to whom 
aid or assistance is made available 
under part B of title IV to children in 
foster care or with respect to whom 
adoption or foster care assistance is 
made available under part E of title IV, 
without regard to age; 
• A recipient qualifying for medical 
assistance on the basis of eligibility to 
receive assistance under a State plan 
funded under part A of title IV (as in 
effect on or after welfare reform effective 
date defined in section 1931(i) of the 
Act); 
• Recipients eligible based on the 
diagnosis of breast or cervical cancer by 
virtue of the application of sections 
1902(a)(10)(ii)(XVIII) and 1902(aa) of the 
Act; and 
• Recipients who receive limited 
services because they are eligible only 
under section 1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(XII) of 
the Act because they are TB-infected, or 
because they are not qualified aliens (as 
defined in section 431 of the Personal 
Responsibility and Work Opportunity 
Reconciliation Act (PRWORA) of 1996 
(Pub. L. 104–193, enacted on August 22, 
1996) and receive only the care and 
services necessary for the treatment of 
an emergency medical condition in 
accordance with section 1903(v) of the 
Act. 
For purposes of the exempted 
populations under section 1937 of the 
Act, the Secretary is proposing in 
§ 440.315(f) to define individuals with 
special medical needs to include those 
groups defined by Federal regulations at 
42 CFR 438.50(d)(1) and §438.50(d)(3) 
of the managed care regulations. These 
groups are: dual eligibles and certain 
children under age 19 who are eligible 
for Supplemental Security Income (SSI); 
children eligible under section 
1902(e)(3) of the Act/Tax Equity and 
Fiscal Responsibility Act of 1982 
(TEFRA) children; individuals in foster 
care or other out of home placement; 
individuals receiving foster care or 
adoption assistance; or individuals 
receiving services through a family- 
centered, community-based, 
coordinated care system that receives 
grant funds under section 501(a)(1)(D) of 
title V, as defined by the State in terms 
of either program participation or 
special health care needs. 
There may be instances when an 
exempted individual may benefit from 
enrolling in a benchmark or benchmark- 
equivalent benefit package. States are 
permitted to offer these individuals a 
benchmark or benchmark-equivalent 
package, but may not require them to 
enroll in one. In any case in which a 
State offers an individual the option to 
enroll in a benchmark or benchmark- 
equivalent benefit package, the State 
must inform the individual that the 
enrollment is voluntary and that he or 
she may opt out at any time. In addition, 
the State must inform the individual of 
the benefits available under the 
benchmark or benchmark-equivalent 
benefit package, provide a comparison 
of how they differ from the benefits 
available under the regular Medicaid 
program, and must document that the 
individual was informed. 
Generally, we would expect that the 
benchmark or benchmark equivalent 
plan would have sufficient enrollment 
capacity for eligible individuals. 
However, there may be circumstances 
when it is beneficial for the State to 
limit enrollment or when the 
benchmark or benchmark-equivalent 
plan would not have the capacity to 
enroll all interested and eligible 
individuals. In these instances, the State 
would maintain selection criteria for 
such plans based on factors such as 
geography or date of application that are 
not related to health status. The State 
would provide otherwise available 
benefits to individuals under the State 
plan, which may include the option of 
enrolling in another benchmark or 
benchmark-equivalent plan. And, if 
applicable, the State would have a 
system under which recipients already 
enrolled in the benchmark or 
benchmark equivalent plan are given 
priority to continue enrollment if the 
plan does not have the capacity to 
accept all those seeking enrollment 
under the program. 
Benefit Packages. Under section 1937 
of the Act, benchmark coverage is either 
Federal Employees Health Benefit Plan 
Equivalent Health Insurance Coverage; 
State Employee Coverage; a Health 
Maintenance Organization (HMO) plan 
that has the largest insured commercial, 
non-Medicaid enrollment in the State; 
or Secretary approved coverage. 
Secretary approved coverage is any 
other health benefits coverage that the 
Secretary determines, upon application 
by a State, provides appropriate 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 16:29 Feb 21, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00008 Fmt 4702 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\22FEP1.SGM 22FEP1ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 P
R
O
D1
PC
66
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
9717 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 36 / Friday, February 22, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
coverage for the population proposed to 
be provided this coverage. 
In determining the coverage available 
under a benchmark coverage package, 
we do not consider cost sharing to be a 
limitation on the coverage (even when 
the benchmark plan itself does so). 
Thus, for example, if the selected 
benchmark plan document indicates 
that it provides coverage for only half of 
the cost of mental health services, we 
view that as a coinsurance requirement 
rather than as a limitation on coverage. 
Cost sharing and premiums for 
recipients may not exceed cost sharing 
limits under the State’s plan with 
respect to sections 1916 and 1916A of 
the Act. The State would assure that all 
out of pocket costs for the recipients do 
not exceed the applicable limits. 
However, benchmark and benchmark- 
equivalent benefit packages may include 
annual coverage limitations on the 
numbers and types of particular 
services. 
In determining whether a proposed 
health benefits coverage package should 
be Secretary approved because it 
provides appropriate health benefits 
coverage for the proposed population, 
we would require that States submit full 
descriptions of the proposed coverage, 
including comparisons to one of the 
benchmark plans or to the State’s 
standard full Medicaid coverage 
package under section 1905(a) of the 
Act. In addition, the State would submit 
any other information that would be 
relevant to a determination that the 
proposed health benefits coverage 
would be appropriate for the proposed 
population. The scope of a Secretary- 
approved health benefits package will 
be limited to benefits within the scope 
of the categories available under a 
benchmark coverage package or the 
standard full Medicaid coverage under 
section 1905(a) of the Act. 
In determining Secretary approved 
coverage, a State may consider a benefit 
package for a specific population that 
excludes a certain category of service. 
For example, a State may utilize a 
Secretary approved package that is 
benchmarked to the State employees 
benefit package which does not include 
pregnancy-related services. This would 
be appropriate where the targeted 
population is a population group that 
does not require such category of 
service—for instance non-pregnant 
adults. If an individual within the 
targeted population group enrolled in 
the Secretary approved benefit was 
initially eligible through a category 
targeted for the Secretary approved 
coverage, but later qualified for 
Medicaid through a group excluded 
from mandatory enrollment (e.g., non- 
pregnant female enrolled in the 
Secretary approved benefit becomes 
pregnant and qualifies under the State 
plan under section 1902(a)(10)(A)(i)), 
such individual must have the 
opportunity to receive state plan 
services not available through the 
benchmark and must be given the 
choice to remain in the Secretary 
approved benchmark or revert to 
traditional Medicaid. In either event, the 
individual must be provided the State 
plan services not available through the 
benchmark through either wrap around 
coverage to the Secretary approved 
benefit or by virtue of reverting back to 
traditional Medicaid. 
A State may elect to offer one or more 
benchmark coverage options. The State 
may also specify in the State plan 
criteria establishing the benchmark 
options, if any, available for any specific 
group of recipients. For example, the 
State plan may identify groups of 
recipients who receive benefits through 
a Federal Employees Health Benefit 
Plan (FEHBP) benchmark coverage plan 
and may identify other groups who 
receive benefits through a State 
Employee Coverage benchmark coverage 
plan. 
A State may also elect to offer 
benchmark-equivalent benefit coverage. 
Coverage would be considered 
benchmark-equivalent coverage if it has 
an aggregate actuarial value equivalent 
to a benchmark plan described above, 
and it includes the following basic 
categories of service: inpatient and 
outpatient hospital services; physicians’ 
surgical and medical services; 
laboratory and x-ray services; well-baby 
and well-child care, including age- 
appropriate immunizations; and other 
appropriate preventive services. 
In addition to the categories of 
services set forth above, benchmark- 
equivalent coverage may include 
coverage of additional health benefits in 
categories of services included in the 
benchmark package or described in 
section 1905(a) of the Act. If the 
benchmark coverage package used by 
the State as a basis for comparison in 
establishing the aggregate actuarial 
value of the benchmark-equivalent 
package includes the following four 
categories of services: prescription 
drugs; mental health services; vision 
services; and hearing services; then the 
actuarial value of the coverage for each 
of these categories of service in the 
benchmark-equivalent coverage package 
must be at least 75 percent of the 
actuarial value of the coverage for that 
category of service in the benchmark 
plan used for comparison by the State. 
If the benchmark coverage package does 
not cover one of the additional four 
categories of services, then the 
benchmark-equivalent coverage package 
may, but is not required to, include 
coverage for that category of service. 
As a condition of approval of 
benchmark-equivalent coverage, the 
State must provide an actuarial report 
with an actuarial opinion that the 
benchmark-equivalent coverage meets 
the actuarial requirements. 
Benchmark or benchmark-equivalent 
benefit coverage may be offered through 
employer sponsored health plans for 
individuals with access to private health 
insurance. For example, if an individual 
has access to employer sponsored 
coverage and that coverage is 
determined by the State to offer a 
benchmark or benchmark-equivalent 
benefit package (either alone or with the 
addition of wrap-around services 
covered separately under Medicaid), a 
State may elect to provide premium 
payments on behalf of the recipient to 
purchase the employer coverage. The 
State may also provide premium 
payments on behalf of the recipient to 
purchase private health insurance 
coverage. The premium payments 
would be considered medical 
assistance, the State could require the 
recipient to enroll in the group health 
plan, and the resulting coverage would 
comprise the Medicaid benefit. In 
addition, cost sharing for recipients 
should not exceed cost sharing limits 
under the State’s plan with respect to 
sections 1916 and 1916A of the Act. 
The State must make available to 
recipients under age 19 who are covered 
under the State plan under section 
1902(a)(10)(A) of the Act benefits 
consisting of Early and Periodic 
Screening, Diagnostic, and Treatment 
(EPSDT) services which are medically 
necessary for that individual as defined 
in section 1905(r) of the Act. For those 
individuals who are enrolled in 
benchmark coverage, the individual 
must seek coverage through the 
benchmark plan before seeking wrap- 
around benefits from the State. As 
always, medical necessity as determined 
by the State guides the delivery of 
EPSDT services. A State must also 
assure that individuals in a benchmark 
or benchmark-equivalent plan have 
access, through that coverage or 
otherwise, to rural health clinic services 
and federally qualified health center 
(FQHC) services. 
Under section 1937(a)(1)(C) of the 
Act, States have the option to provide 
additional or wrap-around services to 
the benchmark or benchmark-equivalent 
plans. The wrap-around services do not 
need to include all State plan services. 
However, the State plan must describe 
the populations covered and the 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 16:29 Feb 21, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00009 Fmt 4702 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\22FEP1.SGM 22FEP1ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 P
R
O
D1
PC
66
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
9718 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 36 / Friday, February 22, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
procedures for assuring those services. 
We interpret the term ‘‘additional or 
wrap-around services’’ to mean health 
benefits that are of the same type as 
those covered under the benchmark or 
considered to be health benefits under 
the Medicaid statute. We propose in 
§ 440.360 that additional or wrap- 
around services must be within the 
scope of categories of services covered 
under the benchmark plan, or described 
in section 1905(a) of the Act. 
Generally, we would expect that the 
benchmark or benchmark equivalent 
plan would have sufficient enrollment 
capacity for eligible individuals. 
However, because benchmark and 
benchmark equivalent plans are not 
bound by comparability, statewideness, 
freedom of choice, the assurance of 
transportation to medically necessary 
services and other requirements of title 
XIX of the Act, there may be a 
circumstance, particularly in rural areas, 
when a plan is not capable of enrolling 
all interested and eligible individuals. 
In this instance, the State must have a 
process for enrolling the individual in 
an alternate option. If applicable, the 
State must have a system under which 
recipients already enrolled in the 
benchmark or benchmark equivalent 
plan are given priority to continue 
enrollment if the plan does not have the 
capacity to accept all those seeking 
enrollment under the program. 
Program Integrity. We propose to 
establish in § 440.370 of this regulation 
that States are required to implement 
benchmark coverage in a cost effective 
and efficient manner. While section 
1937 of the Act is premised with a 
provision that states notwithstanding 
any other provision of this title, we do 
not believe that the Congress intended 
to permit States to bypass efficiency and 
effectiveness rules that were tightened 
up in other sections of title XIX. 
Therefore, we are clarifying that States 
must deliver benchmark benefits in a 
manner that is cost effective and 
efficient. States may not use this 
provision to recycle funds or deliver 
services to the detriment of the Federal/ 
State partnership. Benchmark or 
benchmark-equivalent coverage and any 
additional benefits must be provided in 
accordance with economy and 
efficiency principles that would 
otherwise be applicable to the services 
or delivery system through which the 
coverage and benefits are obtained. In 
other words, if benchmark coverage is 
provided on a fee-for-service basis, the 
same upper payment limits would apply 
to each service as to these services 
under standard full Medicaid coverage. 
Similarly, the same procurement 
requirements, or other economy or 
efficiency principles would apply to 
this coverage as would apply to the 
purchase of managed care coverage as 
under the managed care rules at part 
438 of our regulations. 
To achieve economy and efficiency, 
States may use a variety of delivery 
systems for benchmark and benchmark- 
equivalent coverage. States may furnish 
benefits using one or more of the 
following: a fee-for-service delivery 
system, a fee-for-service delivery system 
operated with a primary care case 
management system, a managed care 
delivery system, or through premium 
assistance. 
The State may use a selective 
procurement process to restrict the 
managed care entity or other provider 
from (or through) whom a recipient can 
obtain services, except in emergency 
situations. The selected provider must 
meet the reimbursement, quality and 
utilization standards under the State 
Plan. If a State chooses to selectively 
contract for the provider of the 
benchmark or benchmark equivalent 
plan services, it can do so without any 
waiver authority, but only to the extent 
that: (1) The selected provider complies 
with the reimbursement, quality, and 
utilization standards under the State 
plan; (2) the selection process does not 
discriminate among classes of providers 
on grounds unrelated to their 
demonstrated effectiveness and 
efficiency in providing the benchmark 
benefit package; and (3) all providers are 
paid on a timely basis in the same 
manner as health care practitioners 
must be paid under § 447.45. To the 
extent that these conditions are met, the 
State does not need to obtain a waiver 
under the authority of section 1915(b)(4) 
of the Act in order to selectively 
contract. 
Requirements Not Applicable. In 
authorizing implementation of section 
1937 of the Act ‘‘notwithstanding any 
other provision of this title,’’ we believe 
that the Congress intended to permit 
States to bypass the comparability, 
statewideness, freedom of choice, the 
assurance of transportation to medically 
necessary services and other 
requirements of title XIX of the Act in 
order for States to tailor benefit 
packages appropriate to specified 
groups of Medicaid recipients. 
We believe that the Congress intended 
for States to have a great amount of 
flexibility in crafting programs for those 
populations which may be mandated 
into a benchmark or benchmark- 
equivalent plan. We also believe that the 
Congress intended for those individuals 
to have health coverage which mirrored 
that of the coverage millions of 
Americans receive through employer 
sponsored plans in the private health 
insurance market. 
Therefore, we propose in § 440.375, 
§ 440.380, § 440.385, and § 440.390 to 
provide States this flexibility by 
allowing them to amend their State 
plans to provide benchmark or 
benchmark-equivalent coverage without 
regard to comparability, statewideness, 
freedom of choice, the assurance of 
transportation to medically necessary 
services, and/or other requirements in 
order to tailor and provide benefits. 
Changes to Regulations Text. We 
propose to add a new subpart C 
beginning with § 440.300. 
Subpart C—Benchmark Packages: 
General Provisions 
Sections 440.300, 440.305, and 440.310 
Basis, Scope, and Applicability 
At proposed § 440.300 (Basis), 
§ 440.305 (Scope), and § 440.310 
(Applicability), the regulations would 
reflect the new statutory authority for 
States to provide medical assistance to 
recipients, within one or more groups of 
Medicaid eligible recipients specified by 
the State, through enrollment in 
benchmark coverage or benchmark- 
equivalent coverage. A State may only 
require that individuals obtain benefits 
by enrolling in that coverage if they are 
a ‘‘full benefit eligible’’ whose eligibility 
is based on an eligibility category under 
section 1905(a) of the Act that would 
have been covered under the State’s 
plan on or before February 8, 2006, and 
are not within exempted categories 
under the statute. The proposed 
regulatory definition of full benefit 
eligible individuals would include 
individuals who would otherwise be 
eligible to receive the standard full 
Medicaid benefit package under the 
approved Medicaid State plan, but 
would not include individuals within 
the statutory exceptions for individuals, 
who are determined eligible by the State 
for medical assistance under section 
1902(a)(10)(C) of the Act, or by reason 
of section 1902(f) of the Act, or 
otherwise eligible based on a reduction 
of income based on costs incurred for 
medical or other remedial care (other 
medically needy and spend-down 
populations). 
Section 440.315 Exempt Individuals 
Proposed § 440.315 would reflect 
statutory limitations on mandatory 
enrollment of specified categories of 
individuals. A State may not require 
enrollment in a benchmark or 
benchmark-equivalent benefit plan by 
the following individuals: 
• The recipient who is a pregnant 
woman who is required to be covered 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 16:29 Feb 21, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00010 Fmt 4702 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\22FEP1.SGM 22FEP1ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 P
R
O
D1
PC
66
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
9719 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 36 / Friday, February 22, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
under the State plan under section 
1902(a)(10)(A)(i) of the Act. 
• The recipient who qualifies for 
medical assistance under the State plan 
on the basis of being blind or disabled 
(or being treated as being blind or 
disabled) without regard to whether the 
individual is eligible for SSI benefits 
under title XVI on the basis of being 
blind or disabled and including an 
individual who is eligible for medical 
assistance on the basis of section 
1902(e)(3) of the Act. 
• The recipient who is entitled to 
benefits under any part of Medicare. 
• The recipient who is terminally ill 
and is receiving benefits for hospice 
care under title XIX. 
• The recipient who is an inpatient in 
a hospital, nursing facility, intermediate 
care facility for the mentally retarded, or 
other medical institution, and is 
required, as a condition of receiving 
services in such institution under the 
State plan, to spend for costs of medical 
care all but a minimal amount of the 
individual’s income required for 
personal needs. 
• The recipient who is medically frail 
or otherwise an individual with special 
medical needs (as described by the 
Secretary in section 440.315(f)). For 
purposes of this section, we would 
propose that individuals with special 
needs includes those groups defined by 
Federal regulations at § 438.50(d)(1) and 
§ 438.50(d)(3) of the managed care 
regulations (that is, dual eligibles and 
certain children under age 19 who are 
eligible for SSI; eligible under section 
1902(e)(3) of the Act, TEFRA children; 
in foster care or other out of home 
placement; or receiving foster care or 
adoption assistance). We are not 
proposing a definition for medically 
frail populations but we invite public 
comments to assist us in defining this 
term in the final regulation. 
• The recipient who qualifies based 
on medical condition for medical 
assistance for long-term care services 
described in section 1917(c)(1)(C) of the 
Act. 
• The recipient who receives aid or 
assistance under part B of title IV for 
children in foster care or an individual 
with respect to whom adoption or foster 
care assistance is made available under 
part E of title IV, without regard to age. 
• The recipient who qualifies for 
medical assistance on the basis of 
eligibility to receive assistance under a 
State plan funded under part A of title 
IV (as in effect on or after welfare reform 
effective date defined in section 1931(i) 
of the Act). This provision relates to 
those individuals who qualify for 
Medicaid solely on the basis of 
qualification under the Temporary 
Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) 
rules (that is, the State links Medicaid 
eligibility to TANF eligibility). 
• The recipient is a woman who is 
receiving medical assistance by virtue of 
the application of sections 
1902(a)(10)(ii)(XVIII) and 1902(a) of the 
Act. This provision relates to those 
individuals who are eligible for 
Medicaid based on the breast or cervical 
cancer eligibility provisions. 
• The recipient qualifies for medical 
assistance as a TB-infected individual 
on the basis of section 
1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(XII) of the Act. 
• The recipient is not a qualified 
alien (as defined in section 431 of the 
Personal Responsibility and Work 
Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996) 
and receives only care and services 
necessary for the treatment of an 
emergency medical condition in 
accordance with section 1903(v) of the 
Act. 
Section 440.320 State Plan 
Requirements: Optional Enrollment for 
Exempt Individuals 
At proposed § 440.320, we would 
allow States to offer exempt individuals 
specified in § 440.315 the option to 
enroll into a benchmark or benchmark- 
equivalent benefit plan. The State plan 
must identify in its State plan the 
exempt groups for which this coverage 
is available. There may be instances in 
which an exempted individual may 
benefit from enrolling in a benchmark or 
benchmark-equivalent benefit package. 
States are permitted to elect in the State 
plan to offer exempted individuals a 
benchmark or benchmark-equivalent 
package, but States may not require 
them to enroll in one. For example, in 
some States the State employee 
benchmark coverage may be more 
generous than the State Medicaid plan. 
Secretary-approved coverage may offer 
the opportunity for disabled individuals 
to obtain integrated coverage for acute 
care and community-based long-term 
care services. Additionally, States may 
be able to better integrate disease 
management programs to provide better 
coordinated care which targets the 
specific needs of individuals with 
special health needs. 
Section 440.325 State Plan 
Requirements: Coverage and Benefits 
At proposed § 440.325, we set forth 
the conditions under which a State may 
offer enrollment to exempt recipients 
specified in § 440.315. When a State 
offers exempt recipients the option to 
enroll in a benchmark or benchmark- 
equivalent benefit package, the State 
must inform the recipients that 
enrollment is voluntary and that the 
individual may opt out of the 
benchmark or benchmark-equivalent 
benefit package at any time and regain 
immediate eligibility for the standard 
full Medicaid program under the State 
plan. The State must inform the 
recipient of the benefits available under 
the benchmark or benchmark-equivalent 
benefit package and provide a 
comparison of how they differ from the 
benefits available under the standard 
full Medicaid program. The State must 
document in the individual’s eligibility 
file that the individual was informed in 
accordance with this paragraph and 
voluntarily chose to enroll in the 
benchmark or benchmark-equivalent 
benefit package. 
At proposed § 440.325, a State would 
have the option to choose to specify the 
benchmark or benchmark-equivalent 
coverage packages offered under the 
State’s Medicaid plan. A State may 
select one or all of the benchmark plans 
described in § 440.330 or establish 
benchmark-equivalent plans described 
in § 440.335, respectively. 
Section 440.330 Benchmark Health 
Benefits Coverage 
At proposed § 440.330, benchmark 
coverage is described as any one of the 
following: 
• Federal Employees Health Benefit 
Plan Equivalent Coverage (FEHBP— 
Equivalent Health Insurance Coverage). 
A benefit plan equivalent to the 
standard Blue Cross/Blue Shield 
preferred provider option service benefit 
plan that is described in and offered to 
Federal employees under 5 U.S.C. 
8903(1). 
• State employee coverage. A health 
benefits plan that is offered and 
generally available to State employees 
in the State involved. 
• Health Maintenance Organization 
(HMO) plan. A health insurance plan 
that is offered through an HMO (as 
defined in section 2791(b)(3) of the 
Public Health Service Act) that has the 
largest insured commercial, non- 
Medicaid enrollment in the State. 
• Secretary approved coverage. Any 
other health benefits coverage that the 
Secretary determines, upon application 
by a State, provides appropriate 
coverage for the population proposed to 
be provided that coverage. States 
wishing to opt for Secretarial approved 
coverage should submit a full 
description of the proposed coverage 
and include a benefit-by-benefit 
comparison of the proposed plan to one 
or more of the three benchmark plans 
specified above or to the State’s 
standard full Medicaid coverage 
package under section 1905(a) of the 
Act, as well as a full description of the 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 16:29 Feb 21, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00011 Fmt 4702 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\22FEP1.SGM 22FEP1ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 P
R
O
D1
PC
66
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
9720 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 36 / Friday, February 22, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
population that would be receiving the 
coverage. In addition, the State should 
submit any other information that 
would be relevant to a determination 
that the proposed health benefits 
coverage would be appropriate for the 
proposed population. The scope of a 
Secretary-approved health benefits 
package will be limited to benefits 
within the scope of the categories 
available under a benchmark coverage 
package or the standard full Medicaid 
coverage package under section 1905(a) 
of the Act. 
A State may select one or more 
benchmark coverage plan options. The 
State may also specify the benchmark 
plan for any specific recipient. For 
example, one recipient may be enrolled 
in the FEHBP and another may be 
enrolled into State Employee Coverage 
at the option of the State. 
Section 440.335 Benchmark- 
Equivalent Health Benefits Coverage 
At proposed § 440.335, we would 
provide that if a State designs or selects 
a benchmark plan other than those 
specified in § 440.330, the State must 
provide coverage that is equivalent to 
benchmark coverage. Coverage that 
meets the following requirements will 
be considered to be benchmark- 
equivalent coverage: 
• Required Coverage. Benchmark- 
equivalent coverage includes benefits 
for items and services within each of the 
following categories of basic services 
and must include coverage for the 
following categories of basic services: 
+ Inpatient and outpatient hospital 
services. 
+ Physicians’ surgical and medical 
services. 
+ Laboratory and x-ray services. 
+ ‘‘Well-baby’’ and ‘‘well-child’’ care, 
including age-appropriate 
immunizations. 
+ Other appropriate preventive 
services, as designated by the Secretary. 
• Aggregate actuarial value equivalent 
to benchmark coverage. Benchmark- 
equivalent coverage must have an 
aggregate actuarial value, determined in 
accordance with proposed § 440.340 
that is at least equivalent to coverage 
under one of the benchmark packages 
outlined in § 440.330. 
• Additional coverage. In addition to 
the categories of services set forth above, 
benchmark-equivalent coverage may 
include coverage for any additional 
services included in the benchmark 
plan or described in section 1905(a) of 
the Act. 
• Application of actuarial value for 
benchmark-equivalent coverage that 
includes prescription drugs, mental 
health, vision, and hearing services. 
Where the benchmark coverage package 
used by the State as a basis for 
comparison in establishing the aggregate 
actuarial value of the benchmark- 
equivalent package includes any or all 
of the following four categories of 
services: prescription drugs; mental 
health services; vision services; and 
hearing services; then the actuarial 
value of the coverage for each of these 
categories of service in the benchmark- 
equivalent coverage package must be at 
least 75 percent of the actuarial value of 
the coverage for that category of service 
in the benchmark plan used for 
comparison by the State. 
If the benchmark coverage package 
does not cover one of the four categories 
of services mentioned above, then the 
benchmark-equivalent coverage package 
may, but is not required to, include 
coverage for that category of service. 
Section 440.340 Actuarial Report for 
Benchmark-Equivalent Health Benefit 
Coverage 
In accordance with 1937(a)(3) of the 
Act, at proposed § 440.340, we would 
require a State as a condition of 
approval of benchmark-equivalent 
coverage, to provide an actuarial report, 
with an actuarial opinion that the 
benchmark-equivalent coverage meets 
the actuarial requirements of § 440.335. 
At proposed § 440.340, we would 
require the actuarial report to obtain 
approval for benchmark-equivalent 
health benefit coverage and to meet all 
the provisions of the statute. The 
actuarial report must state: 
• The actuary issuing the opinion is 
a member of the American Academy of 
Actuaries (AAA) (and meets Academy 
standards for issuing an opinion). 
• The actuary used generally 
accepted actuarial principles and 
methodologies of the AAA, standard 
utilization and price factors and a 
standardized population representative 
of the population involved. 
• The same principles and factors 
were used in analyzing the value of 
different coverage (or categories of 
services) without taking into account 
differences in coverage based on the 
method of delivery or means of cost 
control or utilization used. 
• The report should also state if the 
analysis took into account the State’s 
ability to reduce benefits because of the 
increase in actuarial value of health 
benefits coverage offered under the State 
plan that results from the limitations on 
cost sharing (with the exception of 
premiums) under that coverage. 
• The actuary preparing the opinion 
must select and specify the standardized 
set of utilization and pricing factors as 
well as the standardized population. 
• The actuary preparing the opinion 
must provide sufficient detail to explain 
the basis of the methodologies used to 
estimate the actuarial value or, if 
requested by CMS, to replicate the 
State’s result. 
Section 440.345 EPSDT Services 
Requirement 
At proposed § 440.345, we would 
require States to make available EPSDT 
services as defined in section 1905(r) of 
the Act that are medically necessary for 
those individuals under age 19 who are 
covered under the State plan. We expect 
that most benchmark or benchmark 
equivalent plans will offer the majority 
of EPSDT services. To the extent that 
any medically necessary EPSDT services 
are not covered through the benchmark 
or benchmark-equivalent plan, States 
are required to supplement the 
benchmark or benchmark-equivalent 
plan in order to ensure access to these 
services. Individuals mandated into a 
benchmark or benchmark-equivalent 
plan and entitled to have access to 
EPSDT services cannot opt out of the 
benchmark or benchmark equivalent 
plan just to receive these services. While 
individuals are required to have access 
to such medically necessary services 
first under the benchmark or 
benchmark-equivalent plan, the State 
may provide wrap-around or additional 
coverage for medically necessary 
services not covered under such plan. 
Any wrap-around benefits must be 
sufficient so that, in combination with 
the benchmark or benchmark-equivalent 
benefits package, an individual would 
have coverage for his or her medically 
necessary services consistent with the 
requirements under 1905(r) of the Act. 
The State plan must include a 
description of how wrap-around 
benefits or additional services will be 
provided to ensure that these recipients 
have access to full EPSDT services 
under 1905(r) of the Act. 
In addition, individuals must first 
seek coverage of EPSDT services 
through the benchmark or benchmark 
equivalent plan before seeking coverage 
of such through wrap-around benefits. 
Section 440.350 Employer Sponsored 
Insurance Health Plans 
At proposed § 440.350, the use of 
benchmark or benchmark-equivalent 
benefit coverage would be at the 
discretion of the State and may be used 
in conjunction with employer 
sponsored health plans as a coverage 
option for individuals with access to 
private health insurance. Additionally, 
the use of benchmark or benchmark- 
equivalent coverage may be used for 
individuals with access to private health 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 16:29 Feb 21, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00012 Fmt 4702 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\22FEP1.SGM 22FEP1ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 P
R
O
D1
PC
66
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
9721 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 36 / Friday, February 22, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
insurance coverage. For example, if an 
individual has access to employer 
sponsored coverage and that coverage is 
determined by the State to be 
benchmark or benchmark-equivalent, a 
State may, at its option, provide 
premium payments on behalf of the 
recipient to purchase the employer 
coverage. Additionally, a State could 
create a benchmark or benchmark- 
equivalent plan combining employer 
sponsored insurance and wrap-around 
benefits to that employer sponsored 
insurance benefit package. The 
premium payments would be 
considered medical assistance and the 
State could require the recipient to 
enroll in the group health plan. 
Section 440.355 Payment of Premiums 
At proposed § 440.355, payment of 
premiums by the State, net of 
beneficiary contributions, to obtain 
benchmark or benchmark-equivalent 
benefit coverage on behalf of 
beneficiaries under this section will be 
treated as medical assistance under 
1905(a) of the Act. 
Section 440.360 State Plan 
Requirement for Providing Additional 
Wrap-Around Services 
At proposed § 440.360, a State may at 
its option provide additional wrap- 
around services to the benchmark or 
benchmark-equivalent plans. The wrap- 
around services do not need to include 
all State plan services. However, the 
State plan must describe the 
populations covered and the payment 
methodology for assuring those services. 
Such additional or wrap-around 
services must be within the scope of 
categories of services covered under the 
benchmark plan, or described in section 
1905(a) of the Act. 
Section 440.365 Coverage of Rural 
Health Clinic and Federally Qualified 
Health Center (FQHC) Services 
At proposed § 440.365, a State that 
provides benchmark or benchmark- 
equivalent coverage to individuals must 
assure that the individual has access, 
through that coverage or otherwise, to 
rural health clinic services and FQHC 
services as defined in subparagraphs (B) 
and (C) of section 1905(a)(2) of the Act. 
Payment for these services must be 
made in accordance with the payment 
provisions of section 1902(bb) of the 
Act. 
Section 440.370 Cost Effectiveness 
At proposed § 440.370, benchmark or 
benchmark-equivalent coverage and any 
additional benefits must be provided in 
accordance with Federal upper payment 
limits, procurement requirements and 
other economy and efficiency principles 
that would otherwise be applicable to 
the services or delivery system through 
which the coverage and benefits are 
obtained. 
Section 440.375 Comparability 
At proposed § 440.375, a State may at 
its option amend its State plan to 
provide benchmark or benchmark- 
equivalent coverage to recipients 
without regard to comparability. 
Section 440.380 Statewideness 
At proposed § 440.380, a State may at 
its option amend its State plan to 
provide benchmark or benchmark- 
equivalent coverage to recipients 
without regard to statewideness. 
Section 440.385 Freedom of Choice 
At proposed § 440.385, a State may at 
its option amend its State plan to 
provide benchmark or benchmark- 
equivalent coverage to recipients 
without regard to freedom of choice. 
States may restrict recipients to 
obtaining services from (or through) 
selectively procured provider plans or 
practitioners that meet, accept, and 
comply with reimbursement, quality 
and utilization standards under the 
State Plan, to the extent that the 
restrictions imposed meet the following 
requirements: 
(+) Do not discriminate among classes 
of providers on grounds unrelated to 
their demonstrated effectiveness and 
efficiency in providing the benchmark 
benefit package. 
(+) Do not apply in emergency 
circumstances. 
(+) Require that all provider plans are 
paid on a timely basis in the same 
manner as health care practitioners 
must be paid under § 447.45 of the 
chapter. 
Section 440.390 Assurance of 
Transportation 
At proposed § 440.390, a State may at 
its option amend its State plan to 
provide benchmark or benchmark- 
equivalent coverage to recipients 
without regard to the assurance of 
transportation to medically necessary 
services requirement specified in 
section 42 CFR 431.53. 
III. Collection of Information 
Requirements 
While the following requirements are 
subject to the PRA, they are currently 
approved under OMB# 0938–0993 with 
an expiration date of October 31, 2009. 
Section 440.320 State Plan 
Requirements: Optional Enrollment for 
Exempt Individuals 
Section 440.320(a)requires a State to: 
(1) Inform the individuals that the 
enrollment is voluntary and that the 
individual may opt out of the 
benchmark or benchmark-equivalent 
coverage at any time and regain 
immediate access to standard full 
Medicaid coverage under the State plan; 
(2) Inform the exempt recipient of the 
benefits available under the benchmark 
or benchmark-equivalent benefit 
package and provide a comparison of 
how they differ from the benefits 
available under the standard full 
Medicaid program; and, (3) Document 
in the exempt recipient’s eligibility file 
that the recipient was informed in 
accordance with this section and 
voluntarily chose to enroll in the 
benchmark or benchmark-equivalent 
benefit package. 
Section 440.330 Benchmark Health 
Benefits Coverage 
Section 440.330(d) requires States 
wishing to opt for Secretarial-approved 
coverage to submit a full description of 
the proposed coverage and include a 
benefit-by-benefit comparison of the 
proposed plan to one or more of the 
three other benchmark plans specified. 
Section 440.340 Actuarial Report for 
Benchmark-Equivalent Coverage 
Section 440.340 requires a State trying 
to obtain approval for benchmark- 
equivalent health benefits coverage 
described in 440.335 to submit, as part 
of its State Plan Amendment, an 
actuarial report. The report must 
provide sufficient detail to explain the 
basis of the methodologies used to 
estimate the actuarial value or, if 
requested by CMS, to replicate the 
State’s result. 
Section 440.345 Requirement to 
Provide EPSDT Services 
Section 440.345(a)(2) requires a State 
to include a description in their State 
Plan of how the wrap-around benefits or 
additional services will be provided to 
ensure that recipients receive full 
EPSDT services. The description must 
describe the populations covered and 
the procedures for assuring those 
services. 
Section 440.350 Employer-Sponsored 
Insurance Health Plans 
Section 440.350(b) requires a State to 
set forth in the State plan the criteria it 
will use to identify individuals who 
would be required to enroll in an 
available group health plan to receive 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 16:29 Feb 21, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00013 Fmt 4702 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\22FEP1.SGM 22FEP1ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 P
R
O
D1
PC
66
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
9722 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 36 / Friday, February 22, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
benchmark or benchmark-equivalent 
coverage. 
Section 440.360 State Plan 
Requirement for Providing Additional 
Wrap-Around Services 
This section requires States opting to 
provide additional services to the 
benchmark-equivalent plans, to describe 
the populations covered and the 
payment methodology for these services 
in their State plan. 
IV. Response to Comments 
Because of the large number of public 
comments we normally receive on 
Federal Register documents, we are not 
able to acknowledge or respond to them 
individually. We will consider all 
comments we receive by the date and 
time specified in the DATES section of 
this preamble, and, when we proceed 
with a subsequent document, we will 
respond to the comments in the 
preamble to that document. 
V. Regulatory Impact Analysis 
A. Overall Impact 
We have examined the impacts of this 
rule as required by Executive Order 
12866 (September 1993, Regulatory 
Planning and Review), the Regulatory 
Flexibility Act (RFA) (September 19, 
1980, Pub. L. 96–354), section 1102(b) of 
the Social Security Act, the Unfunded 
Mandates Reform Act of 1995 (Pub. L. 
104–4), and Executive Order 13132. 
Executive Order 12866 (as amended by 
Executive Order 13258, which merely 
reassigns responsibility of duties) 
directs agencies to assess all costs and 
benefits of available regulatory 
alternatives and, if regulation is 
necessary, to select regulatory 
approaches that maximize net benefits 
(including potential economic, 
environmental, public health and safety 
effects, distributive impacts, and 
equity). A regulatory impact analysis 
(RIA) must be prepared for major rules 
with economically significant effects 
($100 million or more in any 1 year). 
We issued a State Medicaid Director’s 
letter on March 31, 2006 providing 
guidance on the new flexibilities 
available to States as a result of the 
enactment of the Deficit Reduction Act 
of 2005. This proposed rule simply 
codifies that guidance. States have 
already begun implementing this 
provision well in advance of this 
proposed rule. As a result, while we 
anticipate that implementation of this 
flexibility would be economically 
significant, the significance is based on 
the changes authorized by statute and 
not based on discretionary policies 
contained in the rule itself. The impact 
of the rule would be limited to ensuring 
uniform policies for States that 
implement the flexibility afforded under 
section 1937 of the Social Security Act, 
as added by the Deficit Reduction Act 
of 2005. The aggregate amount of 
Federal savings is estimated to be $2.3 
billion from FY 2006 through FY 2010. 
We have estimated the impact of this 
rule by analyzing the potential Federal 
savings related to lower per capita 
spending that may be achieved if States 
choose to enroll beneficiaries in eligible 
populations in plans that are less costly 
than projected Medicaid costs. To do 
this, we developed estimates based on 
the following assumptions: 
• The number of eligible beneficiaries 
and the Federal Medicaid costs of these 
beneficiaries are based on 2003 
Medicaid Statistical Information System 
(MSIS) data; 
• Projections of the number of eligible 
beneficiaries and their associated 
Federal Medicaid costs were made using 
assumptions from the President’s 
Budget 2007, including enrollment 
growth rates and per capita spending 
growth rates; 
• The relative costs of the new plans 
allowed under this rule to current 
Medicaid spending were estimated 
based on reviews of Medicaid spending 
data and the plans described in this 
rule. Additionally, we have assumed 
that not all States would immediately 
use the options made available through 
this rule; therefore, we assume that State 
use of these plans would continue to 
increase through 2011. We assume that 
use in 2006 will be about 10% of 2011- 
level of use; 40% in 2007; 60% in 2008; 
80% in 2009; and 90% in 2010.’’ 
These estimates assume that there 
will be a negligible impact on State 
administration costs. As States already 
have experience in dealing with 
alternative plan designs, including 
through waivers or managed care plans, 
we have assumed States are equipped to 
implement these plans and will be part 
of their normal administrative spending. 
These estimates are subject to a 
substantial amount of uncertainty and 
actual experience may be significantly 
different. The range of possible 
experience is greater than under most 
other rules for the following two 
reasons. First, this rule provides the 
option for States to use alternative 
plans; to the extent that States 
participate more or less than assumed 
here (both the number of States that 
participate and the extensiveness of 
States’ use of these plans), Federal 
savings may be greater than or less than 
estimated. Second, this rule also 
provides a wide range of options for 
States in designing these plans; to the 
extent that States use plans that are 
relatively more or less costly than 
assumed here, Federal savings may be 
less than or greater than estimated. 
ESTIMATED ANNUAL FEDERAL SAVINGS DISCOUNTED AT 0%, 3% AND 7%—FROM FY 2006 TO FY 2010 
[In millions] 
Discount rate 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 Total 2006–2010 
0% ............................................................................................................................ $70 $280 $460 $660 $810 $2,280 
3% ............................................................................................................................ 68 264 421 586 699 2,038 
7% ............................................................................................................................ 65 245 375 504 578 1,767 
We anticipate that States would phase 
in alternative benefit programs, and 
changes would not be fully realized 
until 2010. The majority of savings 
would be achieved through cost 
avoidance of future anticipated costs by 
providing appropriate benefits based on 
a population’s health care needs, 
appropriate utilization of services, and 
through gains in efficiencies through 
contracting. States would be able to take 
greater advantage of marketplace 
dynamics within their State. We also 
anticipate that a number of States will 
use this flexibility to create programs 
that are more similar to their SCHIP 
programs. Because States are no longer 
tied to statewideness and comparability 
rules for non-disabled, non-aged, and 
non-blind populations, they would be 
able to offer individuals and families 
different types of plans consistent with 
their needs and available delivery 
systems. 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 16:29 Feb 21, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00014 Fmt 4702 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\22FEP1.SGM 22FEP1ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 P
R
O
D1
PC
66
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
9723 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 36 / Friday, February 22, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
ESTIMATED ANNUAL STATE SAVINGS DISCOUNTED AT 0%, 3% AND 7%—FROM FY 2006 TO FY 2010 
[In millions] 
Discount rate 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 Total 2006–2010 
0% ............................................................................................................................ $50 $210 $350 $500 $610 $1,720 
3% ............................................................................................................................ 49 198 320 444 526 1,537 
7% ............................................................................................................................ 47 183 286 381 435 1,332 
The RFA requires agencies to analyze 
options for regulatory relief of small 
businesses. For purposes of the RFA, 
small entities include small businesses, 
nonprofit organizations, and small 
governmental jurisdictions. Most 
hospitals and most other providers and 
suppliers are small entities, either by 
nonprofit status or by having revenues 
of $6.5 million to $30.5 million in any 
1 year. Individuals and States are not 
included in the definition of a small 
entity. We have determined, and the 
Secretary certifies, that this provision 
applies to States only and would not 
affect small entities. 
In addition, section 1102(b) of the Act 
requires us to prepare a regulatory 
impact analysis if a rule may have a 
significant impact on the operations of 
a substantial number of small rural 
hospitals. This analysis must conform to 
the provisions of section 603 of the 
RFA. For purposes of section 1102(b) of 
the Act, we define a small rural hospital 
as a hospital that is located outside of 
a Core-Based Statistical Area and has 
fewer than 100 beds. We have 
determined, and the Secretary certifies, 
that this proposed rule would not have 
a significant impact on the operations of 
a substantial number of small rural 
hospitals. 
Section 202 of the Unfunded 
Mandates Reform Act of 1995 (Pub. L. 
104–4) also requires that agencies assess 
anticipated costs and benefits before 
issuing any rule that may result in 
expenditures in any 1 year by State, 
local, or tribal governments, in the 
aggregate, or by the private sector, of 
$100 million, updated annually for 
inflation. That threshold level is 
currently approximately $127 million. 
Because this rule does not mandate 
State participation in using these 
benchmark plans, there is no obligation 
for the State to make any change to their 
Medicaid program. Therefore, there is 
no mandate for the State. 
We believe this proposed rule would 
not mandate expenditures in that 
amount. 
Executive Order 13132 establishes 
certain requirements that an agency 
must meet when it promulgates a 
proposed rule (and subsequent final 
rule) that imposes substantial direct 
requirement costs on State and local 
governments, preempts State law, or 
otherwise has Federalism implications. 
This proposed rule would not impose 
direct cost on States or local government 
or preempt State law. The rule would 
provide States the option to implement 
alternative Medicaid benefits through a 
Medicaid State plan amendment. 
B. Anticipated Effects 
Before section 6044 of the DRA 
became effective on March 31, 2006, 
State Medicaid programs generally were 
required to offer at minimum the same 
standard benefit package to each 
recipient, regardless of income, 
eligibility category, or geographic 
location. Some States offered alternative 
benefit packages to certain recipients 
under section 1115 demonstration 
waivers approved by the Centers for 
Medicare & Medicaid Services. This 
provision allows for similar program 
alternatives under the State plan 
without the constraints of a waiver. 
Moreover, Medicaid families would gain 
continuity in coverage as family 
members move together from Medicaid 
and the State Children’s Health 
Insurance Program (SCHIP) to, 
eventually, private coverage. Today, 
because of the lack of flexibility in 
Medicaid, one child may be receiving 
Medicaid, another in SCHIP, and the 
parent has access to private coverage. 
With benefit flexibility in State 
Medicaid programs, families could 
enroll under the same plan, with the 
same providers and one set of 
administrative rules. Administrative 
simplification can help families 
maintain health insurance coverage and 
give them experience with private 
insurance coverage that would become 
important when their income rises 
above Medicaid and SCHIP eligibility 
levels and to mitigate the need for 
dependence. States with strong 
employer-based coverage may 
emphasize family coverage premium 
assistance. States may form larger pools 
by combining Medicaid recipients with 
their public employees. 
C. Alternatives Considered 
This rule proposes requirements for 
States to elect alternative Medicaid 
benefit programs through the adoption 
of a Medicaid State plan amendment. 
The proposed requirements in this rule 
were designed to maximize State 
flexibility while assuring that 
beneficiaries will get quality care that 
meets their needs. Under this rule, we 
would permit States to define the 
alternative benefit packages only by 
reference to the benchmark or 
benchmark-equivalent standard (with 
the exception of the EPSDT wrap- 
around benefits). We would also permit 
States to combine an alternative benefit 
package with alternative benefit 
delivery methods, such as through 
managed care, employer-based coverage, 
or selective contracting. An alternative 
might have been to require the State to 
document any deviation from otherwise 
applicable State plan requirements, 
much as is required under section 1115 
demonstration waivers, 1915(b) waivers, 
1915(c) waivers, or any combination 
thereof. We have not elected this 
alternative because it would be 
cumbersome for States, it would not be 
consistent with the statutory use of 
benchmark and benchmark-equivalent 
coverage as reference points for 
permissible benefit packages, and it 
would not improve the clarity of the 
State plan. Another alternative might 
have been to limit State flexibility under 
this provision to variation in the 
amount, duration and scope of benefits 
without providing authority for an 
integrated approach combining 
alternative benefits with alternative 
benefit delivery methods. We have not 
elected this alternative because an 
integrated approach allows greater State 
flexibility to tailor both benefits and 
delivery methods to the eligible groups 
of individuals being served. 
D. Accounting Statement 
As required by OMB Circular A–4 
(available at ), http:// 
www.whitehouse.gov/omb/circulars/ 
a004/a-4.pdf), in Table 15 below, we 
have prepared an accounting statement 
showing the classification of the 
expenditures associated with the 
provisions of this proposed rule. This 
table provides our best estimate of the 
decrease in Medicaid payments as a 
result of the changes presented in this 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 16:29 Feb 21, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00015 Fmt 4702 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\22FEP1.SGM 22FEP1ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 P
R
O
D1
PC
66
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
9724 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 36 / Friday, February 22, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
proposed rule. All savings are classified as transfers to the Federal Government, 
as well as to States. 
TABLE.—ACCOUNTING STATEMENT: CLASSIFICATION OF ESTIMATED SAVINGS, FROM FY 2006 TO FY 2010 
[In $ millions] 
Category Transfers 
Year Dollar Units Discount Rate Period Covered 
Annualized Monetized Transfers ................................................... .................... 7% 3% 0% ..............................
2006 ¥$430.8 ¥$445.0 ¥$456.0 2006–2010 
From Whom To Whom? ................................................................ Federal Government to Beneficiaries, Providers 
Category Transfers 
Year ............................................................................................... 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 
Annualized Monetized Transfers ................................................... ¥$70 ¥$280 ¥$460 ¥$660 ¥$810 
From Whom To Whom? ................................................................ Federal Government to Beneficiaries, Providers 
Category Transfers 
Year Dollar Units Discount Rate Period Covered 
Annualized Monetized Transfers ................................................... .................... 7% 3% 0% ..............................
2006 ¥$324.9 ¥$335.7 ¥$344.0 2006–2010 
From Whom to Whom? ................................................................. State Governments to Beneficiaries, Providers 
Category Transfers 
Year ............................................................................................... 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 
Annualized Monetized Transfers ................................................... ¥$50 ¥$210 ¥$350 ¥$500 ¥$610 
From Whom to Whom? ................................................................. State Governments to Beneficiaries, Providers 
Column 1: Category—Contains the 
description of the different impacts of 
the rule; it could include monetized, 
quantitative but not monetized, or 
qualitative but not quantitative or 
monetized impacts; it also may contain 
unit of measurement (such as, dollars). 
In this case, the only impact is the 
Federal annualized monetized impact of 
the rule. 
Column 2: Primary Estimate— 
Contains the quantitative or qualitative 
impact of the rule for the respective 
category of impact. Monetized amounts 
are generally shown in real dollar terms. 
In this case, the federalized annualized 
monetized primary estimate represents 
the equivalent amount that, if paid 
(saved) each year over the period 
covered, would result in the same net 
present value of the stream of costs 
(savings) estimated over the period 
covered. 
Column 3: Year Dollar—Contains the 
year to which dollars are normalized; 
that is, the first year that dollars are 
discounted in the estimate. 
Column 4: Unit Discount Rate— 
Contains the discount rate or rates used 
to estimate the annualized monetized 
impacts. In this case, three rates are 
used: 7 percent; 3 percent; 0 percent. 
Column 5: Period Covered—Contains 
the years for which the estimate was 
made. 
Rows: The rows contain the estimates 
associated with each specific impact 
and each discount rate used. 
‘‘From Whom to Whom?’’—In the case 
of a transfer (as opposed to a change in 
aggregate social welfare as described in 
the OMB Circular), this section 
describes the parties involved in the 
transfer of costs. In this case, the costs 
represent a reduction in Federal 
Government spending on behalf of 
beneficiaries. The table may also 
contain minimum and maximum 
estimates and sources cited. In this case, 
there is only a primary estimate and 
there are no additional sources for the 
estimate. 
Estimated Savings—The following 
table shows the discounted costs 
(savings) for each discount rate and for 
each year over the period covered. 
‘‘Total’’ represents the net present value 
of the impact in the year the rule takes 
effect. These numbers represent the 
anticipated annual reduction in Federal 
Medicaid spending under this rule. 
E. Conclusion 
We project that the use of benchmark 
plans under this rule will save $2.3 
billion from 2006–2010. These savings 
would arise as States use the plans 
described by this rule to manage the 
costs of their Medicaid program by 
modifying plan benefits for targeted 
beneficiaries. The actual savings will 
heavily depend on the number of States 
that ultimately implement these plans, 
the number of beneficiaries States cover 
with these plans, and the specific design 
and selection of benchmark plans. 
For reasons stated above, we are not 
preparing analyses for either the RFA or 
section 1102(b) of the Act because we 
have determined that this rule would 
not have a significant economic impact 
on a substantial number of small entities 
or a significant impact on the operations 
of a substantial number of small rural 
hospitals. 
In accordance with the provisions of 
Executive Order 12866, this regulation 
was reviewed by the Office of 
Management and Budget. 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 18:22 Feb 21, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00016 Fmt 4702 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\22FEP1.SGM 22FEP1ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 P
R
O
D1
PC
66
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
9725 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 36 / Friday, February 22, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
List of Subjects in 42 CFR Part 440 
Grant programs—health, Medicaid. 
For the reasons set forth in the 
preamble, the Centers for Medicare & 
Medicaid Services proposes to amend 
42 CFR chapter IV as set forth below: 
PART 440—SERVICES: GENERAL 
PROVISIONS 
1. The authority citation for part 440 
continues to read as follows: 
Authority: Sec. 1102 of the Social Security 
Act (42 U.S.C. 1302). 
2. A new subpart C, consisting of 
§ 440.300 through § 440.390, is added to 
part 440 to read as follows: 
Subpart C—Benchmark Benefit and 
Benchmark-Equivalent Coverage 
Sec. 
440.300 Basis. 
440.305 Scope. 
440.310 Applicability. 
440.315 Exempt individuals. 
440.320 State plan requirements: Optional 
enrollment for exempt individuals. 
440.325 State plan requirements: Coverage 
and benefits. 
440.330 Benchmark health benefits 
coverage. 
440.335 Benchmark-equivalent health 
benefits coverage. 
440.340 Actuarial report for benchmark- 
equivalent coverage. 
440.345 EPSDT services requirement. 
440.350 Employer-sponsored insurance 
health plans. 
440.355 Payment of premiums. 
440.360 State plan requirement for 
providing additional wrap-around 
services. 
440.365 Coverage of rural health clinic and 
federally qualified health center (FQHC) 
services. 
440.370 Cost-effectiveness. 
440.375 Comparability. 
440.380 Statewideness. 
440.385 Freedom of choice. 
440.390 Assurance of Transportation. 
Subpart C—Benchmark Benefit and 
Benchmark-Equivalent Coverage 
§ 440.300 Basis. 
This subpart implements section 1937 
of the Act, which authorizes States to 
provide for medical assistance to one or 
more groups of Medicaid-eligible 
recipients specified by the State under 
an approved State plan amendment 
through enrollment in coverage that 
provides benchmark or benchmark- 
equivalent health care benefit coverage. 
§ 440.305 Scope. 
(a) General. This subpart sets out 
requirements for States that elect to 
provide medical assistance to certain 
Medicaid eligible recipients within one 
or more groups of individuals specified 
by the State, through enrollment of the 
recipients in coverage, identified as 
‘‘benchmark’’ or ‘‘benchmark- 
equivalent.’’ 
(b) Limitations. A State may only 
apply the option in paragraph (a) of this 
section for an individual whose 
eligibility is based on an eligibility 
category under section 1905(a) of the 
Act that would have been covered under 
the State’s plan on or before February 8, 
2006. 
(c) A State may not require but may 
offer enrollment in benchmark or 
benchmark-equivalent coverage to the 
Medicaid eligible individuals listed in 
§ 440.315. States allowing individuals to 
opt in must be in compliance with the 
rules specified at § 440.320. 
§ 440.310 Applicability. 
(a) Enrollment. The State may require 
‘‘full benefit eligible’’ recipients not 
excluded in § 440.315 to enroll in 
benchmark or benchmark-equivalent 
coverage. 
(b) Full benefit eligible. A recipient is 
full benefit eligible if determined by the 
State to be eligible to receive the 
standard full Medicaid benefit package 
under the approved Medicaid State plan 
if not for the application of the option 
available under this subpart, but does 
not include individuals determined 
eligible as medically needy individuals, 
or eligible because of a reduction of 
income based on costs incurred for 
medical or other remedial care under 
section 1902(f) of the Act or otherwise 
based on incurred medical costs. 
§ 440.315 Exempt individuals. 
For recipients within one (or more) of 
the following categories, the State plan 
may offer, but may not require under 
§ 440.310, the opportunity to obtain 
benefits through enrollment in 
benchmark or benchmark-equivalent 
coverage: 
(a) The recipient is a pregnant woman 
who is required to be covered under the 
State plan under section 
1902(a)(10)(A)(i) of the Act. 
(b) The recipient qualifies for medical 
assistance under the State plan on the 
basis of being blind or disabled (or being 
treated as being blind or disabled) 
without regard to whether the 
individual is eligible for Supplemental 
Security Income benefits under title XVI 
on the basis of being blind or disabled 
and including an individual who is 
eligible for medical assistance on the 
basis of section 1902(e)(3) of the Act. 
(c) The recipient is entitled to benefits 
under any part of Medicare. 
(d) The recipient is terminally ill and 
is receiving benefits for hospice care 
under title XIX. 
(e) The recipient is an inpatient in a 
hospital, nursing facility, intermediate 
care facility for the mentally retarded, or 
other medical institution, and is 
required, as a condition of receiving 
services in that institution under the 
State plan, to spend for costs of medical 
care all but a minimal amount of the 
individual’s income required for 
personal needs. 
(f) The recipient is medically frail or 
otherwise an individual with special 
medical needs. For these purposes, 
individuals with special needs are those 
individuals described in § 438.50(d)(1) 
and § 438.50(d)(3) of this chapter. 
(g) The recipient qualifies based on 
medical condition for medical 
assistance for long-term care services 
described in section 1917(c)(1)(C) of the 
Act. 
(h) The recipient is an individual with 
respect to whom aid or assistance is 
made available under part B of title IV 
to children in foster care and 
individuals with respect to whom 
adoption or foster care assistance is 
made available under part E of title IV, 
without regard to age. 
(i) The recipient qualifies for medical 
assistance on the basis of eligibility to 
receive assistance under a State plan 
funded under part A of title IV (as in 
effect on or after welfare reform effective 
date defined in section 1931(i) of the 
Act). This provision relates to those 
individuals who qualify for Medicaid 
solely on the basis of qualification 
under the State’s TANF rules. 
(j) The recipient is a woman who is 
receiving medical assistance by virtue of 
the application of sections 
1902(a)(10)(ii)(XVIII) and 1902(a) of the 
Act. 
(k) The recipient qualifies for medical 
assistance on the basis of section 
1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(XII) of the Act. 
(l) The recipient is not a qualified 
alien (as defined in section 431 of the 
Personal Responsibility and Work 
Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996) 
and receives care and services necessary 
for the treatment of an emergency 
medical condition in accordance with 
section 1903(v) of the Act. 
§ 440.320 State plan requirements: 
Optional enrollment for exempt individuals. 
(a) General rule. A State plan that 
offers exempt individuals as defined in 
§ 440.315 the option to enroll in 
benchmark or benchmark-equivalent 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 18:22 Feb 21, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00017 Fmt 4702 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\22FEP1.SGM 22FEP1ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 P
R
O
D1
PC
66
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
9726 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 36 / Friday, February 22, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
coverage must identify in its State plan 
the exempt groups for which this 
coverage is available, and must comply 
with the following provisions: 
(1) In any case in which the State 
offers an exempt individual the option 
to obtain coverage in a benchmark or 
benchmark-equivalent benefit package, 
the State must inform the individuals 
that the enrollment is voluntary and that 
the individual may opt out of the 
benchmark or benchmark-equivalent 
coverage at any time and regain 
immediate access to standard full 
Medicaid coverage under the State plan. 
(2) The State must inform the exempt 
recipient of the benefits available under 
the benchmark or benchmark-equivalent 
benefit package and provide a 
comparison of how they differ from the 
benefits available under the standard 
full Medicaid program. 
(3) The State must document in the 
exempt recipient’s eligibility file that 
the recipient was informed in 
accordance with this section and 
voluntarily chose to enroll in the 
benchmark or benchmark-equivalent 
benefit package. 
(b) [Reserved] 
§ 440.325 State plan requirements: 
Coverage and benefits. 
Subject to requirements in § 440.345 
and § 440.365, States may elect to 
provide any of the following of types of 
health benefits coverage: 
(a) Benchmark coverage in accordance 
with § 440.330. 
(b) Benchmark-equivalent coverage in 
accordance with § 440.335. 
§ 440.330 Benchmark health benefits 
coverage. 
Benchmark coverage is health benefits 
coverage that is equal to the coverage 
under one or more of the following 
benefit plans: 
(a) Federal Employees Health Benefit 
Plan Equivalent Coverage (FEHBP— 
Equivalent Health Insurance Coverage). 
A benefit plan equivalent to the 
standard Blue Cross/Blue Shield 
preferred provider option service benefit 
plan that is described in and offered to 
Federal employees under 5 U.S.C. 
8903(1). 
(b) State employee coverage. Health 
benefits coverage that is offered and 
generally available to State employees 
in the State. 
(c) Health Maintenance Organization 
(HMO) plan. A health insurance plan 
that is offered through an HMO, (as 
defined in section 2791(b)(3) of the 
Public Health Service Act) that has the 
largest insured commercial, non- 
Medicaid enrollment in the State. 
(d) Secretary approved coverage. Any 
other health benefits coverage that the 
Secretary determines, upon application 
by a State, provides appropriate 
coverage for the population proposed to 
be provided such coverage. States 
wishing to opt for Secretarial approved 
coverage should submit a full 
description of the proposed coverage, 
(including a benefit-by-benefit 
comparison of the proposed plan to one 
or more of the three other benchmark 
plans specified above or to the State’s 
standard full Medicaid coverage 
package under section 1905(a) of the 
Act), and of the population to which the 
coverage would be offered. In addition, 
the State should submit any other 
information that would be relevant to a 
determination that the proposed health 
benefits coverage would be appropriate 
for the proposed population. The scope 
of a Secretary-approved health benefits 
package will be limited to benefits 
within the scope of the categories 
available under a benchmark coverage 
package or the standard full Medicaid 
coverage package under section 1905(a) 
of the Act. 
§ 440.335 Benchmark-equivalent health 
benefits coverage. 
(a) Aggregate actuarial value. 
Benchmark-equivalent coverage is 
health benefits coverage that has an 
aggregate actuarial value, as determined 
in § 440.340 that is at least actuarially 
equivalent to the coverage under one of 
the benchmark benefit packages 
described in § 440.330 for the identified 
Medicaid population to which it will be 
offered. 
(b) Required coverage. Benchmark- 
equivalent health benefits coverage 
must include coverage for the following 
categories of services: 
(1) Inpatient and outpatient hospital 
services. 
(2) Physicians’ surgical and medical 
services. 
(3) Laboratory and x-ray services. 
(4) Well-baby and well-child care, 
including age-appropriate 
immunizations. 
(5) Other appropriate preventive 
services, such as emergency services as 
designated by the Secretary. 
(c) Additional coverage. (1) In 
addition to the categories of services of 
this section, benchmark-equivalent 
coverage may include coverage for any 
additional services in a category 
included in the benchmark plan or 
described in section 1905(a) of the Act. 
(2) If the benchmark coverage package 
used by the State for purposes of 
comparison in establishing the aggregate 
actuarial value of the benchmark- 
equivalent package includes any of the 
following four categories of services: 
Prescription drugs; mental health 
services; vision services; and hearing 
services; then the actuarial value of the 
coverage for each of these categories of 
service in the benchmark-equivalent 
coverage package must be at least 75 
percent of the actuarial value of the 
coverage for that category of service in 
the benchmark plan used for 
comparison by the State. 
(3) If the benchmark coverage package 
does not cover one of the four categories 
of services in paragraph (c)(2) of this 
section, then the benchmark-equivalent 
coverage package may, but is not 
required to, include coverage for that 
category of service. 
§ 440.340 Actuarial report for benchmark- 
equivalent coverage. 
(a) A State plan amendment that 
would provide for benchmark- 
equivalent health benefits coverage 
described in § 440.335, must include an 
actuarial report. The actuarial report 
must contain an actuarial opinion that 
the benchmark equivalent health 
benefits coverage meets the actuarial 
requirements set forth in § 440.335. The 
report must also specify the benchmark 
coverage used for comparison. 
(b) The actuarial report must state that 
it was prepared according to the 
following requirements: 
(1) By an individual who is a member 
of the American Academy of Actuaries 
(AAA). 
(2) Using generally accepted actuarial 
principles and methodologies of the 
AAA. 
(3) Using a standardized set of 
utilization and price factors. 
(4) Using a standardized population 
that is representative of the population 
involved. 
(5) Applying the same principles and 
factors in comparing the value of 
different coverage (or categories of 
services). 
(6) Without taking into account any 
differences in coverage based on the 
method of delivery or means of cost 
control or utilization used. 
(7) Taking into account the ability of 
the State to reduce benefits by taking 
into account the increase in actuarial 
value of health benefits coverage offered 
under the State plan that results from 
the limitations on cost sharing (with the 
exception of premiums) under that 
coverage. 
(c) The actuary preparing the opinion 
must select and specify the standardized 
set of factors and the standardized 
population to be used in paragraphs 
(b)(3) and (b)(4) of this section. 
(d) The State must provide sufficient 
detail to explain the basis of the 
methodologies used to estimate the 
actuarial value or, if requested by CMS, 
to replicate the State’s result. 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 16:29 Feb 21, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00018 Fmt 4702 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\22FEP1.SGM 22FEP1ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 P
R
O
D1
PC
66
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
9727 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 36 / Friday, February 22, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
§ 440.345 EPSDT services requirement. 
(a) The State must assure access to 
early and periodic screening, diagnostic 
and treatment (EPSDT) services through 
benchmark or benchmark-equivalent 
plan benefits or as wrap-around benefits 
to those plans for any child under 19 
years of age eligible in a category under 
the State plan. 
(1) Sufficiency: Any wrap-around 
EPSDT benefits must be sufficient so 
that, in combination with the 
benchmark or benchmark-equivalent 
benefits plan, these individuals have 
access to the full EPSDT benefit. 
(2) State Plan requirement: The State 
must include a description of how the 
wrap-around benefits will be provided 
to ensure that these recipients have 
access to the full EPSDT benefit. 
(b) Individuals must first seek 
coverage of EPSDT services through the 
benchmark or benchmark equivalent 
plan before seeking coverage of such 
through wrap-around benefits. 
§ 440.350 Employer-sponsored insurance 
health plans. 
(a) A State may provide benchmark or 
benchmark-equivalent coverage by 
obtaining employer sponsored health 
plans (either alone or with the addition 
of wrap-around services covered 
separately under Medicaid) for 
individuals with access to private health 
insurance. 
(b) The State must assure that 
employer sponsored plans meet the 
requirements of benchmark or 
benchmark-equivalent coverage, 
including the cost-effectiveness 
requirements at § 440.370. 
(c) A State may provide benchmark or 
benchmark-equivalent coverage through 
a combination of employer sponsored 
health plans and additional benefit 
coverage provided by the State that 
wraps around the employer sponsored 
health plan which, in the aggregate, 
results in benchmark or benchmark- 
equivalent level of coverage for those 
recipients. 
§ 440.355 Payment of premiums. 
Payment of premiums by the State, 
net of beneficiary contributions, to 
obtain benchmark or benchmark- 
equivalent benefit coverage on behalf of 
beneficiaries under this section will be 
treated as medical assistance under 
section 1905(a) of the Act. 
§ 440.360 State plan requirement for 
providing additional wrap-around services. 
If the State opts to provide additional 
or wrap-around coverage to individuals 
enrolled in benchmark or benchmark- 
equivalent plans, the State plan must 
describe the populations covered and 
the payment methodology for these 
services. Additional or wrap-around 
services must be in categories that are 
within the scope of the benchmark 
coverage, or are described in section 
1905(a) of the Act. 
§ 440.365 Coverage of rural health clinic 
and federally qualified health center (FQHC) 
services. 
If a State provides benchmark or 
benchmark-equivalent coverage to 
individuals, it must assure that the 
individual has access, through that 
coverage or otherwise, to rural health 
clinic services and FQHC services as 
defined in subparagraphs (B) and (C) of 
section 1905(a)(2) of the Act. Payment 
for these services must be made in 
accordance with the payment provisions 
of section 1902(bb) of the Act. 
§ 440.370 Cost-effectiveness. 
Benchmark and benchmark- 
equivalent coverage and any additional 
benefits must be provided in accordance 
with Federal upper payment limits, 
procurement requirements and other 
economy and efficiency principles that 
would otherwise be applicable to the 
services or delivery system through 
which the coverage and benefits are 
obtained. 
§ 440.375 Comparability. 
States have the option to amend their 
State plan to provide benchmark or 
benchmark-equivalent coverage to 
recipients without regard to 
comparability. 
§ 440.380 Statewideness. 
States have the option to amend their 
State plan to provide benchmark or 
benchmark-equivalent coverage to 
recipients without regard to 
statewideness. 
§ 440.385 Freedom of choice. 
(a) States have the option to amend 
their State plan to provide benchmark or 
benchmark-equivalent coverage to 
recipients without regard to the 
requirements for free choice of provider 
in § 431.51 of this chapter. 
(b) States may restrict recipients to 
obtaining services from (or through) 
selectively procured provider plans or 
practitioners that meet, accept, and 
comply with reimbursement, quality 
and utilization standards under the 
State Plan, to the extent that the 
restrictions imposed meet the following 
requirements: 
(1) Do not discriminate among classes 
of providers on grounds unrelated to 
their demonstrated effectiveness and 
efficiency in providing the benchmark 
benefit package. 
(2) Do not apply in emergency 
circumstances. 
(3) Require that all provider plans are 
paid on a timely basis in the same 
manner as health care practitioners 
must be paid under § 447.45 of the 
chapter. 
§ 440.390 Assurance of Transportation. 
A State may at its option amend its 
State plan to provide benchmark or 
benchmark-equivalent coverage to 
recipients without regard to the 
assurance of transportation to medically 
necessary services requirement 
specified in § 431.53 of this chapter. 
(Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance 
Program No. 93.778, Medical Assistance 
Program) 
Dated: October 11, 2007. 
Kerry Weems, 
Acting Administrator, Centers for Medicare 
& Medicaid Services. 
Approved: November 1, 2007. 
Michael O. Leavitt, 
Secretary. 
Editorial Note: This document was 
received at the Office of the Federal Register 
on February 15, 2008. 
[FR Doc. E8–3206 Filed 2–21–08; 8:45 am] 
BILLING CODE 4120–01–P 
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND 
HUMAN SERVICES 
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid 
Services 
42 CFR Parts 447 and 457 
[CMS–2244–P] 
RIN 0938–A047 
Medicaid Program; Premiums and Cost 
Sharing 
AGENCY: Centers for Medicare & 
Medicaid Services (CMS), HHS. 
ACTION: Proposed rule. 
SUMMARY: This proposed rule would 
implement and interpret the provisions 
of sections 6041, 6042, and 6043 of the 
Deficit Reduction Act of 2005 (DRA), 
and section 405(a)(1) of the Tax Relief 
and Health Care Act of 2006 (TRHCA). 
These sections amend the Social 
Security Act (the Act) by adding a new 
section 1916A to provide State 
Medicaid agencies with increased 
flexibility to impose premium and cost 
sharing requirements on certain 
Medicaid recipients. This authority is in 
addition to the existing authority States 
have to impose premiums and cost 
sharing under section 1916 of the Act. 
The DRA provisions also specifically 
address cost sharing for non-preferred 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 16:29 Feb 21, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00019 Fmt 4702 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\22FEP1.SGM 22FEP1ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 P
R
O
D1
PC
66
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
