Thursday, 
July 2, 2009 
Part II 
Department of 
Health and Human 
Services 
Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention 
42 CFR Part 34 
Medical Examination of Aliens—Removal 
of Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) 
Infection From Definition of 
Communicable Disease of Public Health 
Significance; Proposed Rule 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 15:36 Jul 01, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00001 Fmt 4717 Sfmt 4717 E:\FR\FM\02JYP2.SGM 02JYP2
31798 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 126 / Thursday, July 2, 2009 / Proposed Rules 
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND 
HUMAN SERVICES 
Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention 
42 CFR Part 34 
[Docket No. CDC–2008–0001] 
RIN 0920–AA26 
Medical Examination of Aliens— 
Removal of Human Immunodeficiency 
Virus (HIV) Infection From Definition of 
Communicable Disease of Public 
Health Significance 
AGENCY: Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC), U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services (HHS). 
ACTION: Notice of Proposed Rulemaking 
(NPRM). 
SUMMARY: The Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention (CDC), within 
the U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services (HHS), is proposing to 
revise the Part 34 regulation to remove 
‘‘Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) 
infection’’ from the definition of 
‘‘communicable disease of public health 
significance.’’ HHS/CDC is also 
proposing to remove references to 
‘‘HIV’’ from the scope of examinations 
in its regulations. Aliens infected with 
a ‘‘communicable disease of public 
health significance’’ are inadmissible 
into the United States under the 
Immigration and Nationality Act (INA). 
The Tom Lantos and Henry Hyde 
United States Global Leadership Against 
HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria 
Reauthorization Act of 2008 (the July 
2008 legislation reauthorizing the 
President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS 
Relief (PEPFAR)) removed language 
from the INA which had previously 
mandated that HIV be on the list of 
diseases that can bar entry to the U.S. 
This legislative change allowed HHS/ 
CDC to reassess whether HIV infection 
should be retained or removed from 
regulations based on sound public 
health science and current 
understanding of HIV epidemiology. 
There are other diseases, including 
sexually transmitted diseases, which 
CDC may remove from the definition of 
‘‘communicable disease of public health 
significance’’ through future rulemaking 
after scientific review. 
While HIV infection is a serious 
health condition, it does not represent a 
communicable disease that is a 
significant threat for introduction, 
transmission, and spread to the U.S. 
population through casual contact. As a 
result of these proposed regulatory 
changes, aliens would no longer be 
inadmissible into the United States 
based solely on the grounds they are 
infected with HIV and they would no 
longer undergo HIV testing as part of the 
routine medical examination. 
DATES: Written comments must be 
received on or before August 17, 2009. 
Comments received after August 17, 
2009 will be considered to the extent 
possible. 
ADDRESSES: You may submit written 
comments, identified by Docket No. 
CDC–2008–0001 to the following 
address: Division of Global Migration 
and Quarantine, Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention, U.S. 
Department of Health and Human 
Services, Attn: Part 34 NPRM 
Comments, 1600 Clifton Road, NE., MS 
E–03, Atlanta, Georgia 30333. You may 
also submit written comments 
electronically via the Internet at the 
following Address: http:// 
regulations.gov, or via e-mail to 
Part34HIVcomments@cdc.gov. 
Comments will be available for public 
inspection from Monday through 
Friday, except for legal holidays, from 9 
a.m. until 5 p.m., Eastern Time, at 1600 
Clifton Road, NE., Atlanta, Georgia 
30333. Please call ahead to 1–404–498– 
1600, and ask for a representative in the 
Division of Global Migration and 
Quarantine to schedule your visit. 
Comments will also be available for 
viewing at the following Internet 
address: http://www.cdc.gov//ncidod/ 
dq. To download an electronic version 
of the NPRM, please go to the following 
Internet address: http://regulations.gov. 
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: 
Stacy M. Howard, Division of Global 
Migration and Quarantine, Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention, U.S. 
Department of Health and Human 
Services, 1600 Clifton Road, NE., MS 
E–03, Atlanta, Georgia 30333; telephone 
1–404–498–1600. 
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 
The NPRM is organized as follows: 
I. Legal Authority 
II. Background 
i. Inadmissibility and the Medical 
Examination 
ii. Legislative and Regulatory History 
iii. Immigration and Relevant Visa 
Categories 
iv. Current Scientific Knowledge for HIV 
Transmission 
v. Global Context 
III. Summary of Proposed Changes to 42 CFR 
part 34 
IV. Required Regulatory Analyses Under 
Executive Order 12866 
V. Regulatory Flexibility Analysis 
VI. Other Administrative Requirements 
I. Legal Authority 
HHS/CDC is promulgating this rule 
under the authority of 42 U.S.C. 252 and 
8 U.S.C. 1182 and 1222. 
II. Background 
i. Inadmissibility and the Medical 
Examination 
Under section 212(a)(1) of the 
Immigration and Nationality Act (INA) 
(8 U.S.C. 1182(a)(1)), any alien who is 
determined to have a communicable 
disease of public health significance is 
inadmissible to the United States. Those 
aliens outside the United States with a 
communicable disease of public health 
significance (see below) are ineligible to 
receive a visa and ineligible for 
admission into the United States. The 
grounds of inadmissibility for specified 
health-related grounds also pertain to 
aliens in the United States who are 
applying for adjustment of their status 
to that of a lawful permanent resident. 
In addition to other potential grounds 
of inadmissibility, aliens are 
inadmissible if they are determined: (1) 
To have a communicable disease of 
public health significance (as currently 
defined by regulations); (2) to have a 
physical or mental disorder and 
behavior associated with that disorder 
that may pose, or has posed, a threat to 
the property, safety, or welfare of the 
alien or others; (3) to have had a 
physical or mental disorder and a 
history of behavior associated with the 
disorder, which has posed a threat to 
the property, safety, or welfare of the 
alien or others and which is likely to 
recur or lead to other harmful behavior; 
or (4) to be a drug abuser or addict. 
Further, except for certain adopted 
children 10 years of age or younger, any 
alien who seeks admission as an 
immigrant, or seeks adjustment of their 
immigration status to that of a lawful 
permanent resident, is inadmissible if 
the alien fails to present documentation 
of having received vaccination against 
vaccine-preventable diseases, including 
mumps, measles, rubella, polio, tetanus 
and diphtheria toxoids, pertussis, 
Haemophilus influenzae type B, 
hepatitis B, and any other vaccination 
against vaccine-preventable disease 
recommended by the Advisory 
Committee for Immunization Practices 
(ACIP). 
Medical examinations, including a 
physical and mental evaluation, to 
determine whether an alien could have 
such a health-related condition, are 
authorized under section 232 of the 
INA. (8 U.S.C. 1222) Under sections 
212(a)(1) and 232 of the INA, and 
section 325 of the Public Health Service 
Act (42 U.S.C. 252), the Secretary of 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 15:36 Jul 01, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00002 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\02JYP2.SGM 02JYP2
31799 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 126 / Thursday, July 2, 2009 / Proposed Rules 
Health and Human Services (HHS) 
promulgates regulations establishing the 
requirements for the medical 
examination and lists the health-related 
conditions that make aliens ineligible 
for admission into the United States. 
The regulations, administered by the 
HHS/Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC), are promulgated at 42 
CFR part 34. 
The provisions in part 34 apply to the 
medical examination of: (1) Aliens 
outside the United States who are 
applying for a visa at an embassy or 
consulate of the United States; (2) aliens 
arriving in the United States; and (3) 
aliens required by the U.S. Department 
of Homeland Security (DHS) to have a 
medical examination in connection with 
determination of their admissibility into 
the United States; and (4) aliens who 
apply for adjustment of their 
immigration status to that of lawful 
permanent resident. 
While 42 CFR part 34 can apply to 
individuals who wish to come to the 
United States on a temporary basis, such 
as leisure or business travelers, a 
medical examination is not routinely 
required as a condition for issuance of 
non-immigrant visas or entry into the 
United States. 
On October 6, 2008, HHS/CDC revised 
42 CFR part 34 to amend the definition 
of communicable disease of public 
health significance and revise the scope 
of the medical examination. This update 
addressed emerging and reemerging 
diseases in immigrant or refugee 
populations who are bound for the 
United States. See 73 FR 58047 and 73 
FR 62210. The current definition of 
communicable disease of public health 
significance contained in 42 CFR 34.2(b) 
includes: active tuberculosis, infectious 
syphilis, gonorrhea, infectious leprosy, 
chancroid, lymphogranuloma 
venereum, granuloma inguinale, and 
HIV infection; quarantinable diseases 
designated by Presidential Executive 
Order; and a communicable disease that 
may pose a public health emergency of 
international concern in accordance 
with the International Health 
Regulations of 2005, provided it meets 
specified criteria. 
Panel physicians, designated by 
Department of State (DoS) consular 
officers, perform medical examinations 
on refugees and/or persons living 
outside of the United States who are 
seeking to immigrate to the United 
States, and civil surgeons, designated by 
U.S. Citizenship and Immigration 
Services within DHS, perform medical 
examinations for aliens who are already 
present in the United States seeking a 
change of status. Aliens determined to 
have a communicable disease of public 
health significance may request a waiver 
of inadmissibility to enter the United 
States under sections 207(c)(3), 
212(d)(3)(A) and 212(g) of the INA (8 
U.S.C. 1157(c)(3), 1182(d)(3)(A) and 
1182(g)). 
HHS/CDC issues Technical 
Instructions and provides the technical 
consultation and guidance to panel 
physicians and civil surgeons who 
conduct the medical examinations of 
aliens. The CDC Technical Instructions 
for Medical Examination of Aliens, 
including the most current updates, 
which panel physicians and civil 
surgeons must follow in accordance 
with these regulations, are available to 
the public on the CDC Web site, located 
at the following Internet address: http:// 
www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dq/technica.htm. 
ii. Legislative and Regulatory History 
Beginning in 1952, the INA mandated 
that aliens ‘‘who are afflicted with any 
dangerous contagious disease’’ are 
ineligible to receive a visa and are to be 
excluded from admission into the 
United States. In April, 1986, prior to 
the recent developments in medicine 
and epidemiologic principles, HHS 
proposed to include acquired 
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) as 
a dangerous contagious disease and in 
June, 1987 issued a final rule adopting 
the proposal. 51 FR 15354 (April 23, 
1986); 52 FR 21532 (June 8, 1987). 
Separately, HHS proposed to substitute 
HIV infection for AIDS on the list of 
dangerous contagious diseases since 
individuals who are so infected, but do 
not actually have AIDS, are also 
contagious. 52 FR 21607 (June 8, 1987). 
While the proposed rule was pending 
for public comment, Congress added 
HIV infection to the list of dangerous 
contagious diseases. Public Law 100–71, 
section 518, 101 Stat. 475 (July 11, 
1987). HHS issued final regulations in 
August of that year complying with the 
congressional mandate. 52 FR 32540 
(August 28, 1987). Accordingly and 
immediately, aliens infected with HIV 
became ineligible to receive visas and 
were excluded from admission into the 
United States because of infection with 
a dangerous contagious disease. See INA 
section 212(a)(6), 8 U.S.C. 
1182(a)(6)(1988). 
In 1990, Congress amended the INA 
by revising the classes of excludable 
aliens to provide that an alien who is 
determined (in accordance with 
regulation prescribed by the Secretary of 
Health and Human Services) to have a 
communicable disease of public health 
significance is excludable from the 
United States. Immigration Act of 1990, 
Public Law 101–649, section 601, 104 
Stat. 4978 January 23, 1990; INA section 
212(a)(1)(A)(i), 8 U.S.C. 1182(a)(1)(A)(i) 
(effective June 1, 1991). HHS/CDC 
subsequently published a proposed rule 
that would have removed from the list 
all diseases, including HIV infection, 
except for infectious tuberculosis. 56 FR 
2484 (January 23, 1991). Based on 
comments received and reconsideration 
of the issues, HHS published an interim 
final rule retaining all diseases on the 
list, including HIV infection, and 
committing its initial proposal for 
further study. 56 FR 25000 (May 31, 
1991). Congress subsequently amended 
INA section 212(a)(1) to specify that 
‘‘infection with the etiologic agent for 
acquired immune deficiency syndrome’’ 
is a communicable disease of public 
health significance, thereby making 
explicit in the INA that aliens with HIV 
are ineligible for admission into the 
United States. National Institutes of 
Health Revitalization Act of 1993, 
Public Law 103–43, section 2007, 107 
Stat. 122 (June 10, 1993). 
In the summer of 2008, Congress 
amended the INA by striking ‘‘which 
shall include infection with the 
etiologic agent for acquired immune 
deficiency syndrome,’’ thereby leaving 
to the Secretary of HHS the discretion 
for determining whether HIV should 
remain in the definition of 
communicable disease of public health 
significance provided for in 42 CFR 
34.2(b). Tom Lantos and Henry Hyde 
United States Global Leadership Against 
HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria 
Reauthorization Act of 2008, Public Law 
110–293, section 305, 122 Stat. 2963 
(July 30, 2008). In this Notice of 
Proposed Rulemaking, HHS/CDC is 
proposing this action to remove HIV 
infection from the definition of 
communicable disease of public health 
significance. While HIV infection is a 
serious health condition, it does not 
represent a communicable disease that 
is a significant threat for introduction, 
transmission, and spread to the United 
States population through casual 
contact. An arriving alien with HIV 
infection does not pose a public health 
risk to the general population through 
casual contact. 
iii. Immigration to the U.S. and Relevant 
Visa Categories 
Annually, the U.S. Government 
admits more than 1,000,000 immigrants 
and refugees to reside permanently in 
this country. 
Foreign citizens who wish to live 
permanently in the United States must 
comply with U.S. immigration law and 
specific procedures for applying for an 
immigrant visa or adjustment of status. 
The four main immigrant visa 
classifications are: (1) Immediate 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 15:36 Jul 01, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00003 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\02JYP2.SGM 02JYP2
31800 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 126 / Thursday, July 2, 2009 / Proposed Rules 
relatives, that is, the spouse, child 
(unmarried and under 21 years of age) 
or parent of a U.S. citizen (a citizen 
must be at least 21 years old to file a 
petition for a parent); (2) Family-Based 
immigrants (adult sons or daughters of 
citizens, the siblings of citizens who are 
at least 21 years old, and the spouse, 
child, or adult sons or daughters of 
lawful permanent residents); (3) 
Employment-Based immigrants; and (4) 
immigrant visas available to ‘‘Diversity’’ 
immigrants who obtain by lottery the 
ability to seek one of these visas. The 
immigration of immediate relatives is 
not subject to numerical restrictions; 
thus, an immigrant visa is available to 
a qualified immediate relative upon 
approval of the citizen relative’s visa 
petition. Each month, the U.S. 
Department of State (DoS) publishes a 
Visa Bulletin, indicating the availability 
of Family-Based, Employment-Based, 
and Diversity immigrant visas for the 
next month. The monthly Visa Bulletin 
is available on the Department of State’s 
Web site (http://travel.state.gov). 
Aliens who are already in the United 
States may apply to adjust to permanent 
resident status pursuant to the family- 
based and employment-based categories 
described above, as well as several other 
statutorily-eligible adjustment 
categories. See INA section 245; 8 U.S.C. 
1255. Refugees and aslyees may also 
apply to adjust to permanent resident 
status from inside the United States. See 
INA section 209; 8 U.S.C. 1159. 
An alien seeking permanent 
residence, whether through an 
immigrant or refugee visa or through an 
adjustment of status, must undergo a 
medical examination to determine 
whether the alien is inadmissible on 
medical grounds. Overseas 
examinations are conducted by panel 
physicians designated by the 
Department of State. Applicants for 
adjustment of status to lawful 
permanent resident are required to have 
a medical examination conducted by a 
civil surgeon designated by U.S. 
Citizenship and Immigration Services. 
Under the proposed rule, testing for HIV 
infection would be eliminated from 
these medical examinations. 
Additionally, Temporary Protected 
Status (TPS) is another immigration 
mechanism for eligible aliens who are in 
the United States and whose countries 
have been designated for TPS due to 
ongoing armed conflict, natural 
disasters, or certain other extraordinary 
and temporary conditions. INA section 
244; 8 U.S.C. 1255a; 8 CFR Part 244. 
TPS applicants are also subject to the 
medical grounds of inadmissibility. 
Currently, if a TPS applicant is infected 
with HIV, DHS requires that the 
applicant be granted a waiver of 
inadmissibility before TPS can be 
granted. 
Section 101(a)(42)(A) of the INA 
generally defines refugees as persons 
who cannot return to their country 
because of persecution or the well 
founded fear of persecution based on 
race, religion, nationality, membership 
in a particular social group, or political 
opinion. An applicant is preliminarily 
approved for refugee status overseas, but 
is admitted as a refugee upon admission 
to the U.S. at a port of entry. A refugee 
is also subject to the medical grounds of 
inadmissibility and the medical 
examination requirements. See INA 
section 207; 8 U.S.C. 1157; 8 CFR Part 
207. 
vi. Current Scientific Knowledge for HIV 
Transmission 
While HIV infection is a serious 
health condition, it does not represent a 
communicable disease that is a 
significant threat for introduction, 
transmission, and spread to the United 
States population through casual 
contact as is the case with other serious 
conditions such as tuberculosis. An 
arriving alien with HIV infection does 
not pose a public health risk to the 
general population through casual 
contact. 
CDC has determined that HIV 
infection is transmitted among 
individuals in the United States almost 
exclusively by the following 
mechanisms: Unprotected sexual 
intercourse with an HIV-infected 
person, sharing needles or syringes 
contaminated with HIV, and mother-to- 
child transmission of HIV before or 
during birth or through breast feeding. 
Additionally, HIV can be transmitted 
through transfusion of blood or blood 
products infected with HIV. However, 
there has been continuous screening for 
HIV in all donated blood since 1985. 
Therefore, the risk for HIV infection 
through transfusion is extremely low. 
The U.S. blood supply is considered 
among the safest in the world. 
Interventions have been successful at 
mitigating exposure to and transmission 
of HIV. 
v. Global Context 
In 2004, the Joint United Nations 
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) and 
the International Organization for 
Migration (IOM) issued the ‘‘UNAIDS/ 
IOM Statement on HIV/AIDS-related 
travel restrictions’’ which provides 
guidance to governments regarding 
addressing the public health, economic, 
and human rights concerns involved in 
HIV-related travel restrictions. This 
document concludes that HIV-related 
travel restrictions have no public health 
justification. 
There are a dozen countries that deny 
entry if a person has HIV. These 
countries are: Armenia, Brunei, Iraq, 
Libya, Moldova, Oman, Qatar, the 
Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, South 
Korea, Sudan, and the United States. 
This proposed rule will remove the 
United States from the list of countries 
that continue to have entry restrictions 
for HIV-infected individuals. 
III. Summary of Proposed Changes to 
42 CFR Part 34 
This proposed rule removes HIV 
infection from the definition of 
communicable diseases of public health 
significance as defined in 42 CFR 
34.2(b) and scope of examinations in 42 
CFR 34.3. 
Section 34.2(b) Communicable 
Diseases of Public Health Significance 
This provision defines communicable 
disease of public health significance as 
both a specific list of diseases and 
categories of diseases for which all 
aliens are inadmissible to the United 
States. HHS/CDC is proposing to remove 
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) 
infection from the specific list of 
communicable disease of public health 
significance as provided for in 42 CFR 
34.2(b). 
As described above, inclusion of HIV 
in this definition is no longer statutorily 
mandated. As a result, the Secretary of 
HHS has the discretion to determine 
whether to leave HIV infection in the 
definition or remove it. 
In consideration of epidemiologic 
principles and current medical 
knowledge regarding the mode of HIV 
transmission, HHS/CDC is proposing to 
remove HIV infection from 42 CFR part 
34 because HIV infection does not 
represent a communicable disease of 
public health significance. HIV is not a 
significant threat for introduction and 
spread through casual contact to the 
general U.S. population, where HIV 
infection already exists among the U.S. 
population as an endemic disease. 
Under current regulatory 
requirements, aliens who test positive 
for HIV infection can apply for a waiver 
from DHS and, if granted such a waiver, 
are allowed admission into the United 
States or to adjust status. 
Diseases transmissible through 
aerosol or respiratory droplets such as 
tuberculosis pose a much greater risk 
due to casual contact for introduction 
and spread in the U.S. population. 
While HIV infection continues to be a 
disease of public health concern 
throughout the world, HIV infection is 
preventable by avoiding high risk sexual 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 15:36 Jul 01, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00004 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\02JYP2.SGM 02JYP2
31801 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 126 / Thursday, July 2, 2009 / Proposed Rules 
contact or needle-sharing with HIV- 
infected persons. Interventions have 
been successful at mitigating exposure 
to and transmission of HIV. 
The rationale for maintaining HIV 
infection as an excludable condition is 
no longer valid based on current 
medical knowledge and practice, 
scientific knowledge, and experience 
which has informed us on 
characteristics of the virus, the modes of 
transmission of HIV, and interventions 
for prevention and further spread of the 
virus. Indeed, HIV infection is not 
spread by casual contact, through the 
air, or from food, water or other objects. 
An HIV-infected person in a common 
public setting will not place another 
individual at risk. HIV is a fragile virus 
and cannot live for very long outside the 
body. The virus is not transmitted by 
mosquitoes, or through day-to-day 
activities such as shaking hands, 
hugging, or a casual kiss. HIV infection 
cannot be acquired from a toilet seat, 
drinking fountain, doorknob, eating 
utensils, drinking glasses, food, or pets. 
Section 34.3 Scope of Examinations 
HHS/CDC is also proposing to remove 
all references to serologic testing for HIV 
infection in 42 CFR 34.3 which is 
entitled ‘‘Scope of examinations’’. This 
section applies to those aliens who are 
required to undergo a medical 
examination for U.S. immigration 
purposes. The scope of examinations 
outlines those matters that relate to the 
inadmissible health-related conditions. 
This section provides specific screening 
and testing requirements for those 
diseases that meet the current definition 
of communicable disease of public 
health significance and directly relates 
to the diseases list in Section 34.2 (b) of 
42 CFR Part 34. It does not provide 
specific testing requirements for other 
health-related conditions which are not 
included in the current definition of 
communicable disease of public health 
significance. Therefore, HHS/CDC is 
proposing to remove the specific testing 
requirements for HIV infection in 42 
CFR 34.3. 
IV. Required Regulatory Analyses 
Under Executive Order 12866 
HHS/CDC has examined the impacts 
of the proposed rule under Executive 
Order 12866 and the Regulatory 
Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 601–612), and 
the Unfunded Mandates Reform Act 
(Pub. L. 104–4). Executive Order 12866 
directs agencies to assess all costs and 
benefits of available regulatory 
alternatives and, when regulation is 
necessary, to select regulatory 
approaches that maximize net benefits 
(including potential economic, 
environmental, public health and safety, 
and other advantages; distributive 
impacts; and equity). The agency 
believes that this proposed rule may be 
an economically significant action 
under the Executive Order. 
In the analysis that follows, we assess 
the potential impacts of removing HIV 
from the list of specific communicable 
disease of public health significance and 
removing the HIV testing requirement in 
the medical examination for aliens who 
are applying for adjustment of their 
status to that of a lawful permanent 
resident. We are seeking comments on 
this preliminary regulatory impact 
analysis, including the identification of 
potential data sources that would allow 
us to more appropriately characterize 
and estimate the impact of the proposed 
rule. 
A. Objectives and Basis for the Action 
Prior to the enactment of the United 
States Global Leadership Against HIV/ 
AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria 
Reauthorization Act of 2008, HHS/CDC 
was required by statute to list HIV as a 
‘‘communicable disease of public health 
significance.’’ Now that the statute 
provides discretion, HHS/CDC is 
proposing to take this action to reflect 
current scientific knowledge and public 
health best practices, and to reduce 
stigmatization of and discrimination 
against people who are HIV-infected. 
This proposed rule is not intended to 
correct any market failure, but to 
remove a government-imposed barrier 
that does not appear to provide a 
significant public health benefit and is 
at odds with human rights 
considerations. 
B. Alternatives 
HHS/CDC examined three regulatory 
approaches. 
1. The first approach is to maintain 
HIV infection on the list of 
communicable disease of public health 
significance, i.e., to keep the disease as 
an excludable condition for entry into 
the U.S. This means that visa applicants 
seeking permanent residency would 
continue to undergo testing for HIV 
infection as part of the application 
process. Those applicants testing 
positive for HIV, if eligible, would still 
be required to apply for and obtain a 
waiver from DHS prior to coming to the 
U.S. There are several disadvantages to 
this approach. As stated previously, 
while HIV infection is a serious health 
condition, it does not represent a 
communicable disease that is a 
significant threat for introduction, 
transmission, and spread to the U.S. 
population through casual contact. 
Currently, there are already roughly 1 
million persons in the United States 
living with HIV [1]. Thus, maintaining 
HIV infection on the list of excludable 
conditions for entry into the U.S. would 
not result in significant public health 
benefits. Further, this approach is not in 
line with current international public 
health practice. This approach 
continues discriminatory practices and 
contributes toward the stigmatization of 
HIV-infected persons. HHS/CDC did not 
select this approach. 
2. The second approach is to remove 
HIV infection from the list of 
communicable diseases of public health 
significance, i.e. remove it as a ground 
of inadmissibility into the U.S., but 
continue mandatory HIV testing for all 
immigrant applicants similar to an 
approach followed by some countries. 
Under this approach, all those aliens 
who test positive for HIV infection 
could be informed of their HIV status, 
counseled regarding their condition, the 
need for appropriate treatment, and the 
steps that should be taken to minimize 
the risk of onward transmission. 
There are potential public health 
benefits to a mandatory testing 
approach. The medical examination 
offers a unique opportunity to both 
inform immigrants of their HIV status 
and link them with care. Through 
screening, HIV-infected aliens who are 
potentially unaware of their HIV status 
would become aware of their status and 
could be linked with prevention, care 
and treatment options in the United 
States. Early diagnosis and treatment of 
HIV-infected persons can increase life 
expectancy and may improve the 
quality of life. Additionally, knowing 
one’s HIV status decreases the 
likelihood of onward transmission [2, 
3]. These public health benefits are the 
basis for the HHS/CDC’s ‘‘Revised 
Recommendations for HIV Testing of 
Adults, Adolescents, and Pregnant 
Women in Health-Care Settings,’’ which 
states that the characteristics of HIV 
infection are consistent with all 
generally accepted criteria that justify 
voluntary screening [4]. However, 
mandatory HIV testing is limited to 
certain infrequent cases such as blood 
and organ donors. 
There are also disadvantages to 
continued mandatory testing if HIV 
infection is removed from the definition 
of a communicable disease of public 
health significance. Mandatory testing 
for other serious health-related 
conditions that are not inadmissible 
health conditions, (e.g., infectious 
diseases, such as hepatitis, malaria, and 
West Nile virus and chronic conditions 
such as diabetes and heart conditions), 
are not required as part of this medical 
examination. Thus, continued 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 15:36 Jul 01, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00005 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\02JYP2.SGM 02JYP2
31802 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 126 / Thursday, July 2, 2009 / Proposed Rules 
mandatory HIV testing would 
differentiate HIV from other serious 
health-related conditions. Second, 
although the purpose of the medical 
examination is to identify health 
conditions considered inadmissible on 
public health grounds, the results of 
exams conducted by panel physicians in 
the immigrant’s home country might not 
be kept confidential because of 
requirements in the country of origin 
making it necessary to report HIV 
results to local authorities. DHS would 
also know an applicant’s HIV status 
(while not necessarily other serious 
health conditions) due to this 
information being included on medical 
notification form and could be used by 
DHS in evaluating the possibility of the 
alien becoming a public charge. 42 CFR 
34.3(b)(ii)(5). These results may be 
counter to HHS/CDC objectives of 
reflecting current scientific knowledge 
and public health best practices, and 
reducing stigmatization of and 
discrimination against people who are 
HIV-infected. Therefore, as discussed 
below in the 3rd approach, HIV testing, 
consistent with CDC’s recommendations 
for general screening, would be 
available. 
Although the approach of removing 
HIV from the definition of 
communicable disease of public health 
significance but maintaining the 
mandatory testing component of the 
medical examination was not selected 
for this proposal, HHS/CDC welcomes 
public comment on the advantages and 
disadvantages of this or alternative 
approaches, such as (non-mandatory) 
testing (i.e., opt out/opt in approach). 
3. The third approach is to remove 
HIV infection from the definition of 
communicable disease of public health 
significance and as a requirement in the 
medical examination. This means that 
mandatory testing for HIV infection 
would no longer be required and DHS 
would allow HIV-infected persons to 
enter into the U.S. (or to adjust to 
permanent resident status) if they meet 
all other conditions of admissibility. 
This is the regulatory approach that 
HHS/CDC selected. Along with this 
approach, all immigrants, refugees and 
status adjusters would still have the 
opportunity to receive information 
about HIV testing and to be tested in the 
United States as recommended by the 
CDC guidelines [4]. The discussion of 
the potential impacts of the rule that 
follow relate to this approach. 
C. Baseline and Incremental Analysis 
The baseline for this analysis assumes 
no change in the current regulation. In 
other words, all applicants for 
admission into the U.S. as legal 
permanent residents and those already 
within the U.S. seeking adjustment to 
permanent resident status are currently 
tested for HIV during the immigration 
medical exam. Those who are HIV- 
infected and are not granted a waiver by 
the Department of Homeland Security 
are refused lawful permanent resident 
status in the United States. 
Currently, refugees who are HIV- 
infected must be granted a waiver by the 
Department of Homeland Security 
before entering the U.S. Subsequently, 
refugees infected with HIV who are 
present in the U.S. and apply for 
adjustment to permanent resident status 
must be re-examined and granted 
another waiver from DHS at that time 
(i.e., the grant of waivers permits these 
individuals to obtain refugee status, and 
later, permanent resident status despite 
being HIV-infected, which would 
otherwise render them inadmissible). 
We have not explicitly included 
refugees and TPS-turned permanent 
residents in our analysis, however, 
because: (i) These persons, compared to 
the other immigrants, enter the U.S. 
under extraordinary circumstances; (ii) 
the numbers are relatively small; and, 
(iii) the proposed change in regulations 
is not likely to have a significant impact 
on the annual number of HIV-infected 
refugees admitted to the U.S. and who 
later become permanent residents 
because such persons generally receive 
a waiver of inadmissibility for HIV 
infection under current procedures. 
Thus, the numbers of admitted HIV- 
infected refugees who are subsequently 
granted permanent resident status are 
likely to stay the same, regardless of 
regulations in place. That is, the HIV- 
infected refugees-turned-permanent 
residents are part of the baseline 
scenario. 
Furthermore, though this policy 
would increase the total number of 
people who may be eligible to be 
admitted, we assume that the total 
number of immigrants who are annually 
admitted into the United States is fixed 
over time. Thus, the incremental input 
to the rule is a calculation of the 
additional costs due to HIV-infected 
immigrants above the costs of non-HIV- 
infected immigrants. In general, given 
that the total number of immigrants is 
not likely to change and the share of 
HIV-infected immigrants is likely to be 
relatively small, the rule will not likely 
have an appreciable impact on the 
economy in terms of wages, 
productivity, or prices of goods and 
services. 
D. Defining the Population Affected 
The affected population is defined as 
the number of new HIV-infected lawful 
permanent residents entering the United 
States each year and those individuals 
already in the United States seeking to 
adjust their immigration status to that of 
a lawful permanent resident. The 
proposed changes in the medical 
examination of aliens regulations affect 
all foreign nationals entering the U.S. 
who are infected with HIV. Although 
HIV testing is not routinely required for 
entrance into the U.S. except for those 
aliens who are seeking to become lawful 
permanent residents, visitors who are 
infected with HIV are currently required 
to request waivers to obtain entrance. If 
this rule is finalized, that waiver process 
will no longer be necessary. Data on the 
number of waivers granted annually 
based on HIV status are not available 
but costs to obtain waivers are thought 
to be minimal. For example, in Fiscal 
Year 2007, the Department of State 
reported that its consular officers found 
746 immigrants ineligible for admission 
to the U.S. under the communicable 
disease grounds of INA 212(a)(1)(A)(i). 
Of those immigrants 327 overcame the 
initial finding. What portion of those 
who tested positive for HIV infection is 
unknown. This analysis is limited to 
aliens seeking to become lawful 
permanent residents who are required to 
have a medical examination to 
determine admissibility. Because 
visitors, refugees and TPS applicants 
have historically had the option of 
obtaining a waiver to enter and remain 
in the U.S., these groups are not 
included in this analysis. 
Based on the estimated distribution of 
HIV/AIDS cases in each of the regions 
in the world and weighted by the 
number of immigrants entering the 
United States from each region, we 
estimate that approximately 4.06 
immigrants per 1000 immigrants that 
would be likely to enter the U.S. under 
the proposed rule would be infected 
with HIV (see Table 1 for the summary 
of regional estimates and weights and 
Technical Appendix II, Table 1: 
Summary of Model, HIVEcon, Inputs 
and Assumptions for Primary, Lower 
and Upper Bound Analyses [5]). 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 15:36 Jul 01, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00006 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\02JYP2.SGM 02JYP2
31803 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 126 / Thursday, July 2, 2009 / Proposed Rules 
TABLE 1—REGIONAL POPULATION, IMMIGRATION AND HIV ESTIMATES USED TO CALCULATE THE WEIGHTED REGIONAL 
RATE ESTIMATES 
Legal 
permanent 
residents 
(2007) [6] 
Estimate of HIV rate per 1,000 
(based on 2006 regional 
population estimates [7] and 
2007 HIV regional estimates [8]) 
Estimated number of HIV 
infected immigrants 
Primary Low High 
Primary Low High 
Africa* ............................................................................... 96,105 18.05 16.70 19.57 1,735 1,605 1,880 
Asia .................................................................................. 383,508 1.29 1.05 1.63 494 403 624 
Europe .............................................................................. 120,821 3.23 2.46 4.38 390 297 529 
N. America ....................................................................... 339,355 3.84 1.42 5.61 1,302 481 1,903 
Oceania ............................................................................ 6,101 2.19 1.55 3.50 13 9 21 
S. America ....................................................................... 106,525 3.20 2.81 3.79 341 300 404 
Total .......................................................................... 1,052,415 4.98 4.35 5.73 ................ ................ ................
HIV positive Rate per 1,000 U.S. immigrants † 4.06 ‡2.94 ‡5.09 4,275 3,096 5,361 
* In this case, Africa includes North Africa, the Middle East and Unknowns. 
** Total number of adults and children living with HIV in the region (see Technical Appendix II for more detail [5]). 
† Based on weighted regional estimates. The assumption is that prevalence of HIV amongst immigrants to the U.S. mirrors that of the immi-
grant’s native regions and is adjusted for the number of immigrants coming to the U.S. from each region. 
‡Note: These estimates represent the 5th and 95th percentiles based on regional weight estimates. Due to concern that immigrants may not 
be representative of the typcial country level estimates and thus may be outside the confidence interval, for purposes of this analyses we ex-
panded our confidence interval to 25% to 150% of the Primary estimate (i.e. 1.02 to 6.09 HIV+ immigrants per 1,000 immigrants). 
The numbers of HIV/AIDS persons in 
each region of the world were taken 
from the 2007 AIDS Epidemic Update: 
Global Overview issued by the Joint 
United Nations Programme on HIV/ 
AIDS (UNAIDS)[8]. HHS/CDC used 
regional data and rates that were 
determined using the regional 
population data from 2006 published by 
the Population Division of the 
Department of Economic and Social 
Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat 
[7]. After examining the immigration 
data, by region, from the Yearbook of 
Immigration Statistics: 2007 Immigrants 
[6], we assigned regional weights 
according to the number of aliens 
coming to the United States from each 
region. 
The 2007 Immigration Statistics [6, 9] 
indicate that 1,052,415 persons became 
permanent residents in 2007. 
Multiplying this number by our 
prevalence estimate of 4.06 HIV-infected 
immigrants per 1000 immigrants yields 
an estimated 4,275 HIV-infected 
immigrants who would enter into the 
United States each year. 
However, we note that there are 
significant uncertainties in this estimate 
since no specific data exist on the HIV 
prevalence of persons seeking to 
immigrate to the United States. We do 
not have a basis to judge whether these 
immigrants who qualify for permanent 
residence differ from the general 
regional population in terms of HIV 
prevalence; thus, for the purposes of 
this analysis we assumed that it would 
be equivalent to the regional HIV 
prevalence rates. We used regional HIV 
prevalence rates rather than HIV rates 
for specific countries to allow for year 
to year variations in the number of 
aliens entering the U.S. from specific 
countries. 
There are several possible reasons as 
to why the proportion of HIV-infected 
immigrants could be less or more than 
the prevalence of HIV-infected persons 
in the region of origin. For example, the 
cost of adequate medical care in the U.S. 
may make HIV-infected individuals 
reluctant to immigrate to this country. 
With the increase in the availability of 
appropriate HIV treatments in many 
parts of the world, adequate treatment is 
often cheaper outside of the U.S. 
Conversely, in regions or specific 
countries where appropriate treatment 
is less readily available, the portion of 
HIV-infected immigrants from those 
regions could be higher than the 
prevalence of HIV-infected persons in 
that region. We are seeking comments 
on these assumptions and data that 
would further allow us to refine our 
estimates. 
However, we also conducted 
sensitivity analyses to assess the impact 
of altering this assumption. We used a 
range of 1.02 to 6.09 HIV-infected 
persons per 1,000 immigrants based on 
25% and 150% of the mean weighted 
average, 4.06 per 1,000 immigrants (high 
and low estimates) of the number of 
estimated HIV-infected persons in each 
region but weighted by the number of 
lawful permanent residents who entered 
the U.S. in 2007. This range yields a 
lower bound estimate of 1,073 and an 
upper bound estimate of 6,409 HIV- 
infected persons entering the United 
States annually (see Technical 
Appendix II [5]). Because the impact of 
the proposed rule change is highly 
sensitive to HIV prevalence in aliens 
entering the U.S., we are seeking 
comment on these assumptions. 
E. Benefits 
HHS/CDC is proposing to remove HIV 
infection from the definition of 
communicable disease of public health 
significance contained in 42 CFR 34.2(b) 
and scope of examination, 42 CFR 34.3 
because HIV infection does not 
represent a communicable disease that 
is a significant threat to the general U.S. 
population. The rationale for 
maintaining HIV infection as an 
excludable condition is no longer valid 
based on current medical knowledge 
and public health practice, scientific 
knowledge, and experience which has 
informed us on the characteristics of the 
virus, the modes of transmission of HIV, 
and the effective interventions to 
prevent further spread of the virus. 
The benefits from this action are 
difficult to quantify. Based on the 
estimate above, this rule would allow 
perhaps roughly 4,000 persons to enter 
the United States annually who are 
otherwise admissible but are denied 
admission solely based on their HIV 
status. The rule will bring family 
members together who had been barred 
from entry, thus strengthening families. 
Also, HIV-infected immigrants with 
skills in high demand would be 
permitted to enter the U.S. to seek 
employment and contribute as 
productive members of U.S. society. 
Depending on the region of the world 
from which a person emigrates, 
admittance to the U.S. may afford 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 15:36 Jul 01, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00007 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\02JYP2.SGM 02JYP2
31804 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 126 / Thursday, July 2, 2009 / Proposed Rules 
greater opportunity, better health care, 
and education and training programs 
than those available in the immigrant’s 
home country. These HIV-infected 
individuals, compared to those who do 
not receive appropriate multi-drug anti- 
retroviral therapy for HIV treatment, 
could survive an additional 13 years, 
with an average life expectancy of 
approximately 29 years (to age 49 years) 
[10]. This increased life expectancy 
allows the opportunity for longer and 
improved productivity. 
Further, this proposed rule to remove 
HIV infection from the list of 
communicable disease of public health 
significance and from the scope of 
examinations will remove 
stigmatization of and discrimination 
against HIV-infected people who have 
long been denied entry into the U.S. 
based only on a treatable and 
preventable medical condition. This 
proposed rule will bring the U.S. in line 
with current science and international 
standards of public health and human 
rights practice. 
Though this rule is assumed to not 
have an impact on the total number 
immigrants annually admitted as legal 
permanent residents, we note that 
immigration, in general, produces net 
economic gains for the United States. 
Overall, an NRC study estimated that 
immigrants, in general, create an annual 
economic impact of between $1 billion 
to $10 billion [11]. 
HHS/CDC welcomes comments on 
these and other benefits associated with 
the proposed regulatory change. 
F. Costs 
To the extent the proposed rule will 
result in an increased number of HIV- 
infected immigrants to the U.S. each 
year, there will be quantifiable impacts. 
We have made our best attempt to 
capture the likely effects of the rule, but 
there are significant uncertainties in this 
estimation effort. HHS/CDC encourages 
public comment on costs associated 
with this rulemaking and, in particular, 
additional information that would 
provide a basis for more robust 
qualitative discussion or quantitative 
estimates. 
Impact on Health Care Expenditures 
As previously discussed, the 
incremental impacts of the rule should 
be a comparison between the arrival of 
an HIV-infected immigrant and the 
arrival of an HIV-negative immigrant. 
Presumably, HIV-related healthcare 
expenditures will be different, but there 
are a variety of health expenditures that 
the HIV-infected immigrant may not 
incur that other immigrants may incur 
(e.g., certain types of cancer, diabetes, 
heart disease). It is not clear that, over 
the course of a lifetime, on net an HIV- 
infected immigrant would consume 
more health care resources than other 
immigrants. Furthermore, HIV treatment 
yields benefits that offset the 
expenditures, including increased life 
expectancy and productivity. 
However, given that health care 
expenditures associated with treatment 
of HIV infection can be substantial and 
may result in some fiscal impacts (as 
discussed below), we developed a 
model (HIVEcon) to estimate these 
potential effects of the rule. A complete 
description of the model including 
assumptions, results and limitations is 
available for comment [5]. The 
spreadsheet model itself is also 
available for download so that the 
reader can determine the relative impact 
of altering almost any input value, 
individually or several simultaneously 
[12]. 
The model, HIVEcon, examines the 
treatment costs as estimated by 
Schackman et al. [13] associated with 
newly identified persons infected with 
HIV regardless of payer, following the 
2004 standards of care. The annual 
treatment cost is estimated to be $25,200 
in 2004 dollars, with a range of $19,466 
to $30,954. However, significant 
advances in the treatment of HIV have 
been made since 2004 [14], and are 
likely to continue to be made. Thus, the 
expenditure estimates could be an 
underestimate since as treatment 
options increase, the benefits such as 
quality of life and lifespan will increase 
but so will costs. However, these 
expenditures may be overestimates 
since it is not clear to what extent 
immigrants will seek and receive even 
the 2004 standard of care. 
Therefore, assuming 0% onwards 
transmission from HIV-infected 
immigrants entering at an average age of 
20 years, an average annual medical 
expenditures of $25,200 annually, an 
HIV prevalence rate among immigrants 
of 4.06 per 1,000, and a 3% annual 
discount rate, the primary estimate of 
the present value of lifetime medical 
costs for persons identified as HIV- 
infected in Year One is $94 million in 
the first year. The absolute lower bound 
estimate is $19 million in the first year 
(decreasing the prevalence rate to 1.02 
HIV+ immigrants per 1,000 immigrants 
and the average annual medical 
expenditures to $19,466). The maximum 
upper bound estimate is $173 million 
(increasing the prevalence rate to 6.09 
HIV+ immigrants among 1,000 
immigrants, and the average annual 
medical expenses to $30,954 per 
immigrant). In the HIVEcon model, in 
Year Two following the change in 
regulations, as the cumulative number 
of HIV-infected immigrants almost 
doubles, so will these health 
expenditures. Likewise in the third year, 
the expenditures will be equivalent to 
three years’ worth of immigrants 
(excluding those who have passed 
away) and so on until the HIV-infected 
immigrants reach their life expectancy 
(e.g., in the model, an HIV-infected 
person at age 30 has an average life 
expectancy of 24.7 years). 
Comparison With Congressional Budget 
Office Analysis 
The Congressional Budget Office 
(CBO) estimated the cost to the federal 
government of Section 305 of PL 110– 
293 prior to the law’s enactment. The 
analysis included increases in direct 
spending related to provision of health 
care and other benefits paid for by the 
federal government. Specifically, those 
benefits include Medicaid, 
Supplemental Security Income, Food 
Stamps, and nutritional programs. In 
total, CBO estimated that providing 
these benefits to HIV-infected 
immigrants and their citizen children 
will increase spending by less than 
$500,000 in 2010 and $83 million over 
the 2010–2018 period, primarily for 
Medicaid. 
The CBO analysis was done for the 
purpose of estimating the impact of PL 
110–293 on the federal budget. This 
analysis was done to comply with 
Executive Order 12866, which directs 
agencies to assess all costs of available 
regulatory alternatives, including, but 
not limited to, those costs incurred by 
the federal government. The economic 
analysis for this regulation differs from 
the CBO analysis for PL 110–293 in four 
major areas: (1) The CBO analysis 
assumed that the HIV prevalence rate 
would be equal to half of the weighted- 
average HIV prevalence rate for the 
immigrants’ country of origin, whereas 
this analysis assumed that the HIV 
prevalence rate would be equal to the 
weighted-average rate of the immigrants’ 
region of origin; (2) the number of 
immigrants was increased by 5% each 
year in the CBO analysis while this 
analysis did not include growth in the 
annual number; (3) the CBO analysis 
only examined health care costs paid for 
by Medicaid whereas this analysis 
included all health care costs including 
those paid for by the Ryan White 
Program; and (4) the CBO analysis 
included costs of federal disability and 
nutrition benefits, whereas this analysis 
did not include those costs. 
By the year 2013, the number of HIV- 
infected immigrants entering the U.S. 
projected by the CBO analysis is roughly 
equivalent to that projected by this 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 15:36 Jul 01, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00008 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\02JYP2.SGM 02JYP2
31805 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 126 / Thursday, July 2, 2009 / Proposed Rules 
analysis (analytical differences in 
prevalence and growth rates cancel out). 
By 2018, the number of HIV-infected 
immigrants projected by the CBO 
analysis exceeds projections in this 
analysis. The health care costs in this 
analysis exceed that of CBO’s analysis 
because the former included all federal 
and nonfederal costs including those 
costs paid for through the federally- 
funded Ryan White Program. This 
analysis did not include non-healthcare 
costs. 
We are seeking comments on these 
assumptions and data that would 
further allow us to refine our estimates. 
We welcome comment on the estimated 
prevalence of HIV among those likely to 
immigrate based on, for example, 
humanitarian waivers or other sources 
of available data. 
Potential Fiscal Impacts 
As previously discussed, even if HIV- 
related health restrictions are removed 
as a barrier to admission for immigrants, 
all immigrants still must meet other 
admission requirements. In the United 
States, under the Federal Personal 
Responsibility Work and Opportunity 
Reconciliation Act (PRWORA) of 1996, 
most immigrants are not eligible to 
receive means-tested public benefits for 
five years after their entry into the U.S. 
[15, 16]. Federal means-tested public 
benefits include Supplemental Security 
Income (SSI), cash Temporary 
Assistance for Needy Families (TANF), 
Medicaid, and food stamps [15, 17]. 
State and local means-tested benefits are 
determined at the state or local level 
and vary by jurisdiction. We have no 
data to assume that HIV-infected 
immigrants will seek, five years after 
being admitted to the U.S., such benefits 
at rates different from non HIV-infected 
immigrants. 
In addition, PRWORA placed other 
limitations on aliens’ access to public 
benefits, making them more difficult for 
aliens to obtain such benefits in the first 
place. For example, the income and 
resources of the sponsor of a family- 
based immigrant or permanent resident 
are deemed to be available to that alien 
if he/she should apply for certain 
means-tested public benefits. See 8 
U.S.C. 1631, 1632. Since a sponsor must 
first prove to DHS that he/she is able to 
provide support to the sponsored alien 
at an annual income that is at least 
125% above the federal poverty level 
before the alien’s immigration 
application will be approved, it is 
unlikely that the alien will be able to 
show that his/her available resources 
fall beneath the low income eligibility 
thresholds required for many means- 
tested public benefits. See INA 
§ 213A(a)(1)(A). 
However, some immigrants may be 
eligible for certain assistance through 
the Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program—a 
federally-funded program that provides 
HIV-related health services. Funds are 
awarded to agencies located around the 
country, which in turn deliver care to 
eligible individuals. Since the program 
is administered through different 
grantees using different eligibility 
criteria, it is difficult to assess to what 
extent the HIV-infected immigrants will 
be eligible for assistance through this 
program. However, given that the 
estimated number of new HIV-infected 
immigrants entering the United States as 
a result of this rule are relatively small 
(around 4,000 annually) compared to 
the total number of persons currently 
assisted by the funding (roughly half a 
million), the overall impact on the 
program is likely small. 
Onward Transmission 
Though difficult to quantify with 
precision, there will likely be some 
additional cases of HIV due to onward 
transmission from HIV-infected 
immigrants to others in the United 
States who are not currently infected. 
The costs associated with onward 
transmission include: 
• Shortened lifespan and reduction in 
quality of life even with treatment, 
• The health care costs associated 
with treating HIV infection, 
• The costs of social services when 
individuals are unable to fully support 
themselves because of their illness, and 
• Decreased productivity when 
individuals become too sick to work. 
Because health care costs are 
substantial and other costs listed above 
are difficult to quantify, the analysis in 
the HIVEcon model is limited to health 
care costs associated with treatment of 
HIV infection. 
In the model, the number of estimated 
HIV-infected cases due to onward 
transmission (in Year t) is calculated as: 
[(Number of HIV-infected immigrants 
entering in Year t + Number of HIV- 
infected immigrants surviving from 
previous years that survive to Year t + 
additional persons previously infected 
by onward transmission from HIV- 
infected immigrants that survive to Year 
t) × onward transmission rate]. 
A 1.51% onward transmission rate 
was used in the HIVEcon model to 
represent the annual estimated number 
of new infections caused by HIV- 
infected immigrants to the U.S., or 
caused by U.S. person infected by HIV- 
infected immigrants (i.e., annually every 
100 HIV-infected persons infect an 
additional 1.51 persons). The most 
recent estimate of average onward 
transmission, when limited to sexual 
transmission, in the United States is 
3.02 per 100 HIV positive immigrants 
[18]. In 2006, the overall rate for onward 
transmission of HIV in the U.S. from all 
causes, was 5 new infections per 100 
HIV-infected persons [19]. Results from 
published research indicate that 
immigrants to the United States, 
regardless of their race or ethnicity, 
often have an initial better health profile 
than native-born Americans across 
diverse health behaviors and outcomes; 
however, this health advantage declines 
as length of residence in the United 
States and degree of acculturation 
increase [20–26]. Specifically, studies of 
HIV risk behavior among immigrant 
populations, upon arrival in the U.S., 
indicate that these behaviors are 
influenced by a number of factors 
including the demographic 
characteristics of the migrants 
(especially sex, social class, relationship 
status and education); the purpose of 
immigration; the type and location of 
their receiving community and the 
existing supports; discrepancy between 
pre-immigration expectations and post- 
immigration experiences; and 
transnational movement between the 
U.S. and their home countries [27–31]. 
These multiple factors result in 
heterogeneity in HIV risk between 
migrant communities, with some being 
at lower, and others higher risk, than 
their U.S. counterparts. There is no 
evidence to suggest immigration to the 
U.S. significantly affects HIV incidence 
in this country in one direction or the 
other. Thus, it is not unreasonable to 
assume that onward transmission rates 
amongst HIV-infected immigrants will 
be lower than among HIV-infected 
persons born in the U.S. 
For this analysis, we assumed that the 
onward transmission rate for 
immigrants, and those that they infect, 
would be fifty percent of the average 
U.S. rate for sexual transmission (i.e., 
rate of onward transmission from HIV- 
infected immigrants is assumed, in the 
baseline case, to be 1.51 per 100). 
Because data supporting this 
assumption are limited, this assumption 
was tested in sensitivity analysis. We 
used 0% transmission as our lower 
bound estimate and a transmission rate 
of 4.53 per 100 HIV-infected 
immigrants, and those that they infect, 
as our upper bound estimate. The upper 
bound transmission rate is a fifty 
percent increase in the average annual 
onward transmission rate of 3.02%. 
Assuming 4,275 HIV-infected 
immigrants enter in the first year, there 
will be 65 new HIV infections due to 
onward transmission, assuming an 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 15:36 Jul 01, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00009 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\02JYP2.SGM 02JYP2
31806 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 126 / Thursday, July 2, 2009 / Proposed Rules 
onward transmission rate of 1.51 per 
100 HIV, with a range of 0 to 261 
(assuming onward transmission of 0 and 
4.53 per 100 HIV-infected immigrants, 
respectively). These estimates imply 
treatment costs, for those infected via 
onward transmission only, in the first 
year of $1.6 million in the primary 
estimate and a range of $0 to $8.1 
million [5]. 
For the purposes of calculating new 
HIV infections associated with HIV- 
infected immigrants in the U.S., 
HIVEcon adds persons infected by HIV- 
infected immigrants to the cohort of 
projected HIV-infected immigrants. This 
modeling technique represents the 
chain of onward transmission after 
initial transmission from an HIV- 
infected immigrant. Thus, in the next 
year, though the cumulative number of 
HIV-infected immigrants essentially 
doubles, the number of new HIV cases 
(as well as the associated treatment 
costs) will be slightly more than double 
the previous year. 
This modeling approach assumes that 
those people infected by HIV-infected 
immigrants would never have become 
infected with HIV were it not for the 
arrival in the U.S. of HIV-infected 
immigrants. This could be unrealistic 
since U.S. persons who are infected by 
HIV-infected immigrants may engage in 
behaviors that lead them to activities 
that expose them to HIV infections, 
regardless of the source of infection. An 
alternative interpretation may be that at 
least some of the additional infections 
are occurring earlier than they otherwise 
would have. Thus, these shifts in the 
timing of infection will increase the 
total number of new cases in any one 
year, but the true incremental impact 
may be the implications of becoming 
infected earlier. 
Furthermore, the model treats the 
onward transmission rate as fixed over 
time. However, data shows that onward 
transmission has declined over time 
[19]. If we assume that transmission 
rates will continue to decrease in the 
future, it is possible that the model may 
overestimate the number of HIV- 
infected individuals due to onward 
transmission as we project impacts into 
the future. 
G. Summary of Impacts 
The HIVEcon model projects potential 
impacts out to 50 years after the rules 
go into effect. However, many of the key 
inputs to the model may be significantly 
different even ten years from now given 
the rapid pace of change in HIV 
treatment, HIV prevalence in other 
countries, as well as potential changes 
in the overall immigration policy. It may 
not be inconceivable that there would 
be an HIV vaccine in the next decade or 
two. Given these uncertainties, Table 2 
provides a summary of the potential 
effects of the rule five years after 
implementation. 
TABLE 2—SUMMARY OF IMPACTS (YEAR FIVE AFTER IMPLEMENTATION), ASSUMING THE AVERAGE AGE OF ENTRY IS 30 
YEARS AND THE ANNUAL DISCOUNT RATE IS 3% 
Category 
Primary 
Estimate 
(4.06 HIV+ 
immigrants 
per 1,000 
immigrants) 
Low 
Estimate 
(1.02 HIV+ 
immigrants 
per 1,000 
immigrants) 
High 
Estimate 
(6.09 HIV+ 
immigrants 
per 1,000 
immigrants) 
HIV-POSITIVE IMMIGRANTS AT YEAR 5 (EXCLUDING ONWARD TRANSMISSION) 
Total number of HIV-Positive Immigrants present in the U.S ............................................ 15,755 .............. 3,956 ................ 23,622. 
Annualized Monetized Healthcare Expenditures ................................................................ $342 million ...... $86 million ........ $513 million. 
Benefits (Qualitative) .......................................................................................................... 1. Reduce stigmatization of and discrimination 
against HIV-infected people. 
2. Compared to those who don’t receive appropriate 
multi-drug anti-retroviral therapy, survive an addi-
tional 13 years, with an average life expectancy of 
approximately 29 years (to age 49 years) [10]. 
This increased life expectancy allows opportunity 
for longer and improved productivity. 
HIV-POSITIVE CASES AT YEAR 5 DUE TO 1.51% ONWARD TRANSMISSION 
Total number of HIV-Positive cases due to 1.51% onward transmission connected with 
U.S. Immigrants.
676 ................... 170 ................... 1,014. 
Annualized Monetized Healthcare Expenditures ................................................................ $96 million ........ $24 million ........ $145 million. 
TRANSFERS 
Federal Annualized Monetized ........................................................................................... Depends upon assumptions of who pays annualized 
monetized medical costs. 
Notes: Source of estimates—see Figures 1, 
3, and 4 in Technical Appendix II [5]. 
In the context of the U.S. HIV/AIDS 
prevalence, currently estimated at 
roughly 1 million persons [1] the 4,275 
HIV-infected immigrants represents 
only 0.4% of the national total of 
persons living with HIV/AIDS. In the 
context of the new U.S. incidence of 
HIV, currently estimated at roughly 
56,000 [32], the onward transmission of 
272 by year five represents only 0.5% of 
the new cases. 
In the primary estimate, the 
monetized costs, mainly the treatment 
cost of the onward transmission cases 
are relatively modest. In terms of health 
care expenditures for immigrants, by 
Year Five there will be a cumulative 
total of 15,755 HIV-infected immigrants 
living in the U.S., with another 676 
cases occurring due to onward 
transmission (total: 16,431) (Table 2) 
These cases will incur $438 million of 
medical expenses in Year Five. 
We conclude that while we do not 
believe HIV is a ‘‘communicable disease 
of public health significance’’ for the 
purposes of admissibility 
determinations, the rule may be 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 15:36 Jul 01, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00010 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\02JYP2.SGM 02JYP2
31807 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 126 / Thursday, July 2, 2009 / Proposed Rules 
economically significant. However, due 
to all of the uncertainties previously 
discussed, we solicit comments on this 
tentative conclusion. 
H. Literature Cited 
1. CDC, HIV prevalence estimates—United 
States, 2006. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep, 
2008. 57(39): p. 1073–6. 
2. Marks, G., N. Crepaz, and R.S. Janssen, 
Estimating sexual transmission of HIV from 
persons aware and unaware that they are 
infected with the virus in the USA. AIDS, 
2006. 20(10): p. 1447–50. 
3. Marks, G., et al., Meta-analysis of high- 
risk sexual behavior in persons aware and 
unaware they are infected with HIV in the 
United States: implications for HIV 
prevention programs. J Acquir Immune Defic 
Syndr, 2005. 39(4): p. 446–53. 
4. Branson, B.M., et al., Revised 
recommendations for HIV testing of adults, 
adolescents, and pregnant women in health- 
care settings. MMWR Recomm Rep, 2006. 
55(RR–14): p. 1–17; quiz CE1–4. 
5. CDC, Technical Appendix II: HIVEcon: 
Additional notes and data on model inputs 
and outputs. 2009. Available from: http:// 
www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dq. 
6. DHS, Yearbook of Immigration 
Statistics: 2007 Immigrants. Table 3: Persons 
Obtaining Legal Permanent Resident Status 
by Region and Country of Birth: Fiscal Years 
1998 to 2007. 2007. Available from: http:// 
www.dhs.gov/xlibrary/assets/statistics/ 
yearbook/2007/table03d.xls. 
7. UN, World Population Prospects: The 
2006 Revision. Population Division of the 
Department of Economic and Social Affairs 
of the United Nations Secretariat, 2007. 
Available from: http://www.un.org/esa/ 
population/publications/wpp2006/ 
wpp2006.htm. 
8. UNAIDS, 2007 AIDS Epidemic Update. 
WHO Library Cataloguing-in-Publication 
Data: UNAIDS/07.27E/JC1322E, 2007. 
Available from: http://data.unaids.org/pub/ 
EPISlides/2007/2007_epiupdate_en.pdf. 
9. DHS, Yearbook of Immigration 
Statistics: 2007 Immigrants. Table 8: Persons 
Obtaining Legal Permanent Resident Status 
by Gender, Age, Marital Status, and 
Occupation: Fiscal Year 2007. 2007. 
Available from: http://www.dhs.gov/xlibrary/ 
assets/statistics/yearbook/2007/table08.xls. 
10. Life expectancy of individuals on 
combination antiretroviral therapy in high- 
income countries: a collaborative analysis of 
14 cohort studies. Lancet, 2008. 372(9635): p. 
293–9. 
11. PDEII, et al., The New Americans: 
Economic, Demographic, and Fiscal Effects 
of Immigration. Panel on the Demographic 
and Economic Impacts of Immigration, 
National Research Council, Commission on 
Behavioral and Social Sciences and 
Education, ed. J.R. Smith and B. Edmonston. 
1997: National Academies Press. 
12. Borse, R.H. and M.I. Meltzer, Technical 
Appendix I: HIVEcon: A model to estimate 
the economic costs of immigrants who are 
HIV-positive. 2009. Available from: http:// 
www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dq. 
13. Schackman, B.R., et al., The lifetime 
cost of current human immunodeficiency 
virus care in the United States. Med Care, 
2006. 44(11): p. 990–7. 
14. PAGAA, Guidelines for the Use of 
Antiretroviral Agents in HIV–1–Infected 
Adults and Adolescents. DHHS Panel on 
Antiretroviral Guidelines for Adults and 
Adolescents (PAGAA)—A Working Group of 
the Office of AIDS Research Advisory 
Council (OARAC), 2008: p. 1–139. Available 
from: http://aidsinfo.nih.gov/contentfiles/
AdultandAdolescentGL.pdf. 
15. USCIS, Interoffice memorandum: 
Consolidation of Policy Regarding USCIS 
Form I–864, Affidavit of Support (AFM 
Update AD06–20). 2006. Available from: 
http://www.uscis.gov/files/pressrelease/
AffSuppAFM062706.pdf. 
16. USDA, Public Law 104–193–Aug.22, 
1996. 1996. Available from: http:// 
www.fns.usda.gov/snap/rules/Legislation/ 
pdfs/PL_104–193.pdf. 
17. USCIS, A quick guide to public charge 
and receipt to public benefits. U.S. 
Department of Homeland Security, 1999. 
Available from: http://www.uscis.gov/files/ 
article/Public.pdf. 
18. Pinkerton, S.D., How many sexually- 
acquired HIV infections in the USA are due 
to acute-phase HIV transmission? AIDS, 
2007. 21(12): p. 1625–9. 
19. CDC, HIV/AIDS Transmission Rates in 
the United States. CDC HIV/AIDS Facts, 
2008. Available from: http://www.cdc.gov/
Hiv/topics/surveillance/resources/factsheets/ 
pdf/transmission.pdf. 
20. Lucas, J.W., D.J. Barr-Anderson, and 
R.S. Kington, Health status, health insurance, 
and health care utilization patterns of 
immigrant Black men. Am J Public Health, 
2003. 93(10): p. 1740–7. Available from: 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/ 
query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=
Citation&list_uids=14534231. 
21. Kenya, S., et al., Effects of immigration 
on selected health risk behaviors of Black 
college students. J Am Coll Health, 2003. 
52(3): p. 113–20. Available from: http:// 
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/
query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=
Citation&list_uids=14992296. 
22. Newcomb, M.D., et al., Acculturation, 
sexual risk taking, and HIV health promotion 
among Latinas. Journal of Counseling 
Psychology, 1998. 45: p. 454–467. 
23. Hines, A.M. and R. Caetano, Alcohol 
and AIDS-related sexual behavior among 
Hispanics: acculturation and gender 
differences. AIDS Educ Prev, 1998. 10(6): p. 
533–47. Available from: http:// 
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/ 
query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=
Citation&list_uids=9883288. 
24. Shedlin, M.G., C.U. Decena, and D. 
Oliver-Velez, Initial acculturation and HIV 
risk among new Hispanic immigrants. J Natl 
Med Assoc, 2005. 97(7 Suppl): p. 32S–37S. 
Available from: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=
Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=
Citation&list_uids=16080455. 
25. Hoffman, S., et al., HIV and sexually 
transmitted infection risk behaviors and 
beliefs among Black West Indian immigrants 
and US-born Blacks. Am J Public Health, 
2008. 98(11): p. 2042–50. Available from: 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/ 
query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=
Citation&list_uids=18309140. 
26. McDonald, J.A., J. Manlove, and E.N. 
Ikramullah, Immigration measures and 
reproductive health among Hispanic youth: 
findings from the national longitudinal 
survey of youth, 1997–2003. J Adolesc 
Health, 2009. 44(1): p. 14–24. Available from: 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/ 
query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=
Citation&list_uids=19101454. 
27. Lassetter, J.H. and L.C. Callister, The 
impact of migration on the health of 
voluntary migrants in western societies. J 
Transcult Nurs, 2009. 20(1): p. 93–104. 
Available from: http:// 
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/ 
query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=
Citation&list_uids=18840884. 
28. Shedlin, M.G., et al., Immigration and 
HIV/AIDS in the New York Metropolitan 
Area. J Urban Health, 2006. 83(1): p. 43–58. 
Available from: http:// 
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/ 
query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=
Citation&list_uids=16736354. 
29. Harawa, N.T., et al., HIV prevalence 
among foreign- and US-born clients of public 
STD clinics. Am J Public Health, 2002. 
92(12): p. 1958–63. Available from: http:// 
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/ 
query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=
Citation&list_uids=12453816. 
30. Marin, B.V., et al., Acculturation and 
gender differences in sexual attitudes and 
behaviors: Hispanic vs non-Hispanic white 
unmarried adults. Am J Public Health, 1993. 
83(12): p. 1759–61. Available from: http:// 
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/ 
query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=
Citation&list_uids=8259813. 
31. UNAIDS and IOM, Migration and 
AIDS. Int Migr, 1998. 36(4): p. 445–68. 
Available from: http:// 
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/ 
query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&dopt=
Citation&list_uids=12295093. 
32. CDC, HIV Incidence. 2008 (accessed 
May 25, 2009). Available from: http:// 
www.cdc.gov/hiv/topics/surveillance/
incidence.htm. 
V. Regulatory Flexibility Analysis 
HHS/CDC has considered the 
proposed rule’s effects on small entities, 
as required by the Regulatory Flexibility 
Act (RFA) (5 U.S.C. 601 et seq., Pub. L. 
96–354) as amended by the Small 
Business Regulatory Enforcement 
Fairness Act of 1996 (SBREFA) (Pub. L. 
104–121). The RFA establishes, as a 
principle of regulation, that agencies 
should tailor regulatory and 
informational requirements to the size 
of the entities, consistent with the 
objectives of a particular regulation and 
applicable statutes. 
The objective of this analysis was to 
compare the benefits and the costs of a 
change in legislation that currently 
prohibits HIV-infected immigrants from 
entering the United States. HHS/CDC 
carefully considered several other 
alternatives, but they were either not 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 15:36 Jul 01, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00011 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\02JYP2.SGM 02JYP2
31808 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 126 / Thursday, July 2, 2009 / Proposed Rules 
logistically feasible or inconsistent with 
current public health practice. This 
analysis appears in the ‘Alternatives’ 
section. 
HHS/CDC certifies the proposed rule 
will not have a significant impact on a 
substantial number of small entities as 
defined in the statute. 
VI. Other Administrative Requirements 
A. The Unfunded Mandates Reform Act 
HHS/CDC evaluated the rule 
requirements for compliance with the 
Unfunded Mandates Reform Act 
(UMRA) of 1995. This rule does not 
contain Federal mandates under the 
regulatory provisions of Title II of the 
UMRA for State, local, or Tribal 
Governments, nor for the private sector. 
The rule’s provisions will not affect 
small Governments. 
B. Executive Order 13045: Protection of 
Children From Environmental Health 
Risks and Safety Risks 
Executive Order 13045 requires HHS/ 
CDC to determine whether the rule is 
economically significant. The Executive 
Order further requires HHS to determine 
whether the rule would create an 
environmental health or safety risk 
disproportionately affecting children. 
HHS/CDC has determined that this rule 
of general applicability is consistent 
with these principles. 
C. Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 
The Paperwork Reduction Act applies 
to the data collection requirements 
found in 42 CFR part 34. Currently, 
aliens determined to have a 
communicable disease of public health 
significance may request a waiver from 
DHS to enter the United States under 
sections 212(d)(3)(a) and 212(g) of the 
INA (8 U.S.C. 1182(d)(3)(a) and 1182(g)). 
HHS/CDC has approval from the Office 
of Management and Budget (OMB) 
under OMB Control No. 0920–0006: 
Statements in Support of Application 
for Waiver of Inadmissibility under the 
Immigration and Nationality Act 
(expiration date December 31, 2011) to 
collect data pertaining to the waiver. 
CDC Form 4.422–1b is the form that is 
required in support of a waiver of 
inadmissibility for HIV infection. If the 
proposed change is finalized, infection 
with HIV would no longer be grounds 
for an alien to apply for a waiver and 
HHS/CDC would discontinue the use of 
CDC form 4.422–1b, for a reduction of 
67 burden hours for this approved data 
collection. 
D. Environmental Impact 
HHS has determined that provisions 
to amend 42 CFR part 34.2(b) will not 
have a significant impact on the human 
environment. 
E. Executive Order 13175: Consultation 
and Coordination With Indian Tribal 
Governments 
Executive Order 13175, entitled 
‘‘Consultation and Coordination with 
Indian Tribal Governments’’ (65 FR 
67249, September 9, 2000), requires 
agencies to develop an accountable 
process to ensure ‘‘meaningful and 
timely input by tribal officials in the 
development of regulatory policies that 
have tribal implications.’’ The Executive 
Order defines the phrase ‘‘policies that 
have tribal implications’’ to include 
regulations and other policy statements 
or actions that have ‘‘substantial direct 
effects on one or more Indian tribes, on 
the relationship between the Federal 
government and Indian tribes, or on the 
distribution of power and 
responsibilities between the Federal 
government and Indian tribes.’’ 
HHS/CDC has determined that 
provisions to amend 42 CFR Part 34 will 
not have tribal implications. 
F. Executive Order 12630: Governmental 
Actions and Interference With 
Constitutionally Protected Property 
Rights 
Under Executive Order 12630, if the 
contemplated rule would require a 
Federal taking of private property, then 
a takings analysis is required. Since the 
proposed rule does not require a Federal 
taking of private property, the 
provisions in the Executive Order are 
not applicable. 
G. Federalism 
Under Executive Order 13132, if the 
proposed rule would limit or preempt 
State authorities, then a Federalism 
analysis is required. The agency must 
consult with State and local officials to 
determine whether the rule would have 
a substantial direct effect on State or 
local Governments, as well as whether 
it would either preempt State law or 
impose a substantial direct cost of 
compliance on them. 
HHS/CDC determines that this 
proposed rule does not have sufficient 
federalism implications to warrant the 
preparation of a federalism summary 
impact statement. 
H. Executive Order 13211: Energy 
Effects 
Executive Order 13211 requires HHS/ 
CDC to produce a statement of energy 
effects if the proposed rule is significant 
or economically significant and likely to 
have a significant adverse effect on the 
supply, distribution, or use of energy. 
HHS/CDC has determined that the 
proposed rule does not have that effect 
and that a statement of energy is not 
required. 
I. National Technology Transfer and 
Advancement Act 
This act, 15 U.S.C. 272, requires the 
adoption of technical standards 
developed or adopted by voluntary 
consensus standards bodies in rules 
promulgated by HHS. No voluntary 
consensus standards are applicable and 
feasible with regard to the proposed 
rule. 
J. Assessment of Federal Regulations 
and Policies on Families 
Title 5 U.S.C.A. 601 (note) requires 
agencies to assess the impact of a 
proposed action to determine whether 
such an action would affect family well- 
being. HHS/CDC has assessed the 
impact of this proposed regulation and 
determines that it would not negatively 
affect family well-being. 
K. Executive Order 12988: Civil Justice 
Reform 
HHS/CDC has reviewed this rule 
under Executive Order 12988, on Civil 
Justice Reform and determines that the 
proposed rule meets the standard in the 
Executive Order. 
L. Plain Language in Government 
Writing 
Under 63 FR 31883 (June 10, 1998), 
Executive Departments and Agencies 
are required to use plain language in all 
proposed and final rules. HHS/CDC has 
attempted to use plain language in 
promulgating the proposed rule and 
would welcome any comment from the 
public in this regard. 
List of Subjects in 42 CFR 34 
Aliens, Health care, Scope of 
examination, Passports and visas, Public 
health. 
For the reasons stated in the 
preamble, the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention, within the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human 
Services, proposes to amend 42 CFR 
part 34 as follows: 
PART 34—MEDICAL EXAMINATION OF 
ALIENS 
1. The authority citation for part 34 
continues to read as follows: 
Authority: 42 U.S.C. 252; 8 U.S.C. 1182 
and 1222. 
§ 34.2 [Amended] 
2. Amend § 34.2 by removing 
paragraph (b)(6) and redesignating 
paragraphs (b)(7) through (10) (b)(6) 
through (9), respectively. 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 15:36 Jul 01, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00012 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\02JYP2.SGM 02JYP2
31809 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 126 / Thursday, July 2, 2009 / Proposed Rules 
3. Amend § 34.3 by revising 
paragraphs (b)(1)(i), (e)(1) introductory 
text, (e)(2)(iii), (e)(2)(iv), (e)(5), and 
(e)(6) to read as follows: 
§ 34.3 Scope of examinations. 
* * * * ** 
(b) * * * 
(1) * * * 
(i) A general physical examination 
and medical history, evaluation for 
tuberculosis, and serologic testing for 
syphilis. 
* * * * * 
(e) * * * 
(1) As provided in paragraph (e)(2) of 
this section, a chest x-ray examination 
and serologic testing for syphilis shall 
be required as part of the examination 
of the following: 
* * * * * 
(2) * * * 
(iii) For applicants 15 years of age and 
older, serologic testing for syphilis. 
(iv) Exceptions. Serologic testing for 
syphilis shall not be required if the alien 
is under the age of 15, unless there is 
reason to suspect infection with 
syphilis. An alien, regardless of age, in 
the United States, who applies for 
adjustment of status to lawful 
permanent resident shall not be 
required to have a chest x-ray 
examination unless their tuberculin skin 
test, or an equivalent test for showing an 
immune response to Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis antigens, is positive. HHS/ 
CDC may authorize exceptions to the 
requirement for a tuberculin skin test, 
an equivalent test for showing an 
immune response to Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis antigens, or chest x-ray 
examination for good cause, upon 
application approved by the Director. 
* * * * * 
(5) How and where performed. All 
chest radiograph images used in 
medical examinations performed under 
the regulations to this part shall be large 
enough to encompass the entire chest 
(approximately 14 x 17 inches; 35.6 x 
32.2 cm). 
(6) Chest x-ray, laboratory, and 
treatment reports. The chest radiograph 
reading and serologic test results for 
syphilis shall be included in the 
medical notification. When the medical 
examiner’s conclusions are based on a 
study of more than one chest x-ray 
image, the medical notification shall 
include at least a summary statement of 
findings of the earlier images, followed 
by a complete reading of the last image, 
and dates and details of any laboratory 
tests and treatment for tuberculosis. 
* * * * * 
Dated: June 30, 2009. 
Kathleen Sebelius, 
Secretary. 
[FR Doc. E9–15814 Filed 6–30–09; 4:15 pm] 
BILLING CODE P 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 15:36 Jul 01, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00013 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\02JYP2.SGM 02JYP2
