  
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES  
Food and Drug Administration 
 
 
Food Labeling: 
Calorie Labeling of Articles of Food in Vending 
Machines NPRM 
 
 
 
Preliminary Regulatory Impact Analysis 
Docket No. FDA-2011-F 0171  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Office of Regulations Policy and Social Sciences 
Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition 
March 2011 
 
 
 ii 
 
SUMMARY:  The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is proposing requirements for 
providing calorie information for certain articles of food sold from vending machines to 
implement the vending machine labeling provisions of the Patient Protection and Affordable 
Care Act of 2010 (Affordable Care Act).  The Affordable Care Act, in part, amended the Federal 
Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act (FD&C Act) to, among other things, require that for an article of 
food sold from a vending machine that does not permit a prospective purchaser to examine the 
Nutrition Facts Panel before purchasing the article, or does not otherwise provide visible 
nutrition information at the point of purchase, and is operated by a person engaged in the 
business of owning or operating 20 or more vending machines, the vending machine operator 
must disclose the number of calories for the article of food.  Vending machine operators not 
subject to the requirements of the Affordable Care Act may elect to be subject to the Federal 
requirements by registering with FDA.  Providing calorie disclosures for food sold from vending 
machines would assist consumers in making healthier dietary choices. The analysis of benefits 
and costs included in this document is the basis for the summary analysis included in the 
Proposed Rule:  Food Labeling; Calorie Labeling of Articles of Food in Vending Machines 
[Docket No. FDA-2011-F 0171]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 iii 
 
 iv 
Table of Contents 
I. Introduction ................................................................................................................................. 0 
A. Need for This Regulation....................................................................................................... 1 
B. Summary of Costs and Benefits of the Proposed Requirements and Regulatory Options .... 4 
C. Regulatory Options .............................................................................................................. 10 
II. Costs and Benefits of Regulatory Options: Detailed Analysis ................................................ 12 
A. Baseline No New Regulatory Action................................................................................... 12 
B.  Option 1:  Proposed Rule .................................................................................................... 13 
C.  Option 2:  Similar to the Proposed Rule, But Estimating the Cost of Individual Signs for 
Each Article of Food or Selection Button................................................................................. 26 
D.  Option 3:  Similar to the Proposed Rule, But With an Additional Year of Compliance Time 
for Firms With Less Than $500,000 in Annual Revenue. ........................................................ 27 
E.  Option 4:  Similar to the Proposed Rule, But With Coverage Extended to All Bulk Vending 
Machines. .................................................................................................................................. 29 
III. References............................................................................................................................... 30 
 
 
  
I. Introduction 
FDA has examined the impacts of the proposed rule under Executive Orders 13563 and 
12866, the Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 601-612), and the Unfunded Mandates Reform 
Act of 1995 (Public Law 104-4).  Executive Orders 13563 and 12866 direct agencies to assess all 
costs and benefits of available regulatory alternatives and, if regulation is necessary, to select 
regulatory approaches that maximize net benefits (including potential economic, environmental, 
public health and safety effects, distributive impacts, and equity). Executive Order 13563 
emphasizes the importance of quantifying both costs and benefits, of reducing costs, of 
harmonizing rules, and of promoting flexibility. This proposed rule has been designated an 
“economically” significant rule, under section 3(f)(1) of Executive Order 12866.  Accordingly, 
the proposed rule has been reviewed by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB). 
The Regulatory Flexibility Act requires agencies to analyze regulatory options that would 
minimize any significant impact of a rule on small entities. Using the Small Business 
Administration (SBA) definition of small vending machine operators as classified by the North 
American Industry Classification System (NAICS 45421), FDA estimates that a significant 
number of operators impacted by this proposed rule are small businesses. As directed by statute, 
the requirements of the proposed rule only apply to vending machine operators that own or 
operate 20 or more vending machines.  However, according to data from the Vending Times 
Census and from the National Automatic Merchandising Association (NAMA), the average 
annual revenue per machine is less than $7,000 (Refs. 1 and 2).  An operator with only 20 
machines may have vending machine revenue of less than $140,000.  In order to exceed the 
SBA’s definition of a small vending machine operator, a firm would need at least $10 million in 
annual revenue (Ref. 3).  This suggests that a firm with revenue exclusively from vending 
 
  1
machine sales would need more than 1,400 machines to exceed the definition of small business.  
Based on the latest available U.S. Economic Census data that breaks down establishments by 
revenue, we project that 97 percent of firms selling covered vending machine food, as that term 
is used in this document, that identify primarily as vending machine operators that are engaged in 
the business of owning or operating 20 or more vending machines would be small businesses as 
defined by SBA.  Therefore, the Agency believes that the proposed rule would have a significant 
economic impact on a substantial number of small entities.  This impact is discussed further in 
section V of this document. 
Section 202(a) of the Unfunded Mandates Reform Act of 1995 requires that agencies 
prepare a written statement, which includes an assessment of anticipated costs and benefits, 
before proposing “any rule that includes any Federal mandate that may result in the expenditure 
by State, local, and tribal governments, in the aggregate, or by the private sector, of 
$100,000,000 or more (adjusted annually for inflation) in any one year.”  The current threshold 
after adjustment for inflation is $135 million, using the most current (2009) Implicit Price 
Deflator for the Gross Domestic Product.  FDA does not expect this proposed rule to result in 
any 1-year expenditure that would meet or exceed this amount. 
    
A. Need for This Regulation 
This proposed rule is necessary to implement section 4205 of the Affordable Care Act, 
which principally amends sections 403 and 403A of the FD&C Act, and requires  operators of 20 
or more vending machines to disclose calorie information for covered vending machine food. 
The provision of calorie information for covered vending machine food may help consumers 
make better informed dietary choices.    
  2
Economic justifications for regulatory interventions in private markets rely on the 
presence of some market failure.  In the case of food sold from a vending machine, the private 
market is particularly robust and competitive.  Thousands of individual firms vie for consumer 
dollars in millions of vending machines across the United States (Ref. 1). Low entry costs for 
firms and low switching costs for customers suggest that if a sizable fraction of consumers were 
willing to pay for--and discriminate based on--the visible calorie information at the point of 
purchase then the industry would provide it to them.  In fact, some vending machine operators 
are voluntarily providing more healthful choices and additional information on machines (Refs. 2 
and 6).   
Although many of the usual market failures that justify regulatory action, such as the 
existence of market power or of ill-defined property rights, do not apply here (Refs. 5 and 6), the 
primary support for regulatory intervention is that there are systematic biases in how consumers 
process information and weigh current benefits (from consuming higher calorie foods) against 
future costs (higher probability of obesity and its comorbidities).  
The bias is more directly related to the requirements of this proposed rule: Consumer 
demand for calorie information does not create incentives for the provision of calorie 
information at the vending machine. This market failure occurs because at the time of purchase, 
consumers do not value calorie information as much as they do later, when the effects of excess 
calorie consumption are evident. Studies have shown that consumers have present-based 
preferences, meaning that they are continually optimistic about the healthfulness of their future 
choices (Refs. 7, 8 and 9).   
These studies suggest that calorie information often lacks salience, or relevance, for 
consumers at the time of purchase and consumption, even though they may experience regret 
  3
about their decisions at a later date. This tendency may explain why consumers have not 
generally demanded calorie and other nutrition information for food sold from vending machines 
before, or at, the point of purchase, even if they may, at a later point in time, value that 
information.  Because of competition for consumer time and attention vending machine 
operators have limited time and space in which to convey information to consumers. These limits 
mean that there is a substantial opportunity cost to the operator of providing calorie information. 
That is, just as an operator may have to decide which possible foods to leave out of a vending 
machine with limited space (thus giving up the opportunity to sell those items), it must choose 
which pieces of information about its foods it wants to convey.  Adding an additional piece of 
information means that an operator may need to downplay or remove some other piece of 
information. This opportunity cost of information holds true whether the calorie information is 
displayed on the machine or, as with an increasing number of packaged foods, on the principal 
display panel of the package.  
The proposed requirements mitigate the apparent market failure in information provision 
stemming from present-biased preferences, although not necessarily the tendency of consumers 
to underutilize that information.  Specifically, for a covered vending machine food, this proposed 
rule requires that the vending machine operator provide a sign in close proximity to the food or 
the selection button, i.e. in, on, or adjacent to the vending machine, but not necessarily attached 
to the vending machine, so long as the sign is visible at the same time as the food, its name, 
price, or selection number is visible. This information must be presented in a color that is 
sufficiently contrasted with the background, must be in close proximity to the vignette or name 
or in close proximity to the selection button when a name or vignette is displayed, and, for 
electronic vending machines, the calorie information may be displayed when the selection 
  4
numbers are entered but before the selection is confirmed. These requirements are designed so 
that the calorie information is made available to consumers before they purchase such food.  
Providing the information will likely increase consumer awareness regarding the calorie content 
in covered vending machine food and increase the perceived relevance of that information to 
their decision making. Providing the information may serve to highlight the potential future costs 
of additional calorie consumption. This increased attention to the caloric content of covered 
vending machine food may then result in an increased availability of lower calorie options, and 
an increased demand for these options. 
B. Summary of Costs and Benefits of the Proposed Requirements and Regulatory Options 
In this section FDA describes the bases of benefits and costs of the proposed 
requirements and summarizes the results of the detailed Preliminary Regulatory Impact Analysis 
(PRIA). 
Benefits in response to the proposed requirements.  Obesity is a major public health 
concern in the United States and one of the top leading health indicators addressed by the United 
States Healthy People 2020 goals.  Nationally representative data indicate an increase in the 
prevalence of obesity over the past three decades (Ref. 10).  The 2007-2008 National Health and 
Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) data showed that 34 percent of the adult U.S. 
population is obese and 34 percent are overweight (Ref. 11).   
Excess body weight has many health (Ref. 12), social (Refs. 13 and 14), psychological 
(Refs. 15 and 16), and economic consequences (Ref. 17) for the affected individuals.  Lower life 
expectancy, elevated risk of diabetes, hypertension, stroke and other cardiovascular diseases 
have been documented to rise simultaneously with the increased prevalence of obesity (Ref. 12).  
The economic impact is especially evident in health-care costs in terms of greater health-care 
  5
utilization and higher medical expenditures (Ref. 18).  More specifically, medical expenditures 
attributable to overweight and obesity accounted for more than 9 percent of the total U.S. 
medical expenditures in 1998, or between $85.7 billion and $147 billion (Ref. 18). Researchers 
have proposed various factors to explain this dramatic rise in obesity including declining food 
prices and physical requirements of labor (Refs. 19 and 20), declining time costs of food 
preparation (Ref. 21), fast-food restaurant density (Ref. 22) and social interactions (Refs. 23).  
Although the relationship between obesity and poor dietary choices is multi-faceted, there 
is a general agreement in the literature that reduction in excess calories is helpful in preventing or 
delaying the onset of excess weight gain (Ref. 24).  Vending machines are a likely source of 
high-calorie snack or discretionary foods, as well as some high-calorie meal items.  Industry data 
indicate that there is approximately one vending machine for every 40 adults in the United 
States, and that up to 5 percent of the money consumers spend on food away from home is spent 
on vending machine food (Ref. 25).  This suggests that providing calorie information for covered 
vending machine food to consumers may have a significant effect on calorie intake, the 
prevalence of obesity, and thus the cost of health care and lost productivity.  
To the extent that the proposed requirements mitigate the increase in the prevalence of 
obesity and the prevalence of these costly co-morbidities such as hypertension and diabetes, 
society gains the opportunity cost of the averted medical expenditures and an increase in 
productivity from averted debilitation and death.  In addition to educating consumers about 
calorie content, major predicted elements of the consumer and industry response to this proposed 
rule are: 
  6
1.  Increased awareness regarding the caloric content in covered vending machine foods, 
and the perceived relevance of that information to decision making, which may help reduce the 
present-bias in preferences, and thus encourage the consumption of lower calorie options. 
2.  Increased consumer interest in lower calorie options, and greater transparency in the 
caloric content of foods sold in vending machines, which may give manufacturers an incentive 
to: 
a. Reduce the calorie content of foods sold in vending machines through reformulation or 
by decreasing portion size. 
b. Provide additional items with lower calorie formulations. 
These changes may reduce consumers’ caloric intake from food sold in vending machines.  Note 
that any reduction in calorie intake in these settings may be at least partially offset by increases 
in calorie intake during other meals or snacks.  Because FDA lacks data on how consumers will 
substitute among caloric sources, the benefit estimations given here may be higher or lower than 
those that will be realized if the rule is finalized as proposed.  
Coverage of the proposed rule and industry overview.  The proposed rule covers 
certain vending machine operators that are engaged in the business of owning or operating 20 or 
more vending machines and those vending machine operators that voluntarily register with FDA 
to become subject to the Federal requirements.  The proposed rule does not cover vending 
machines without a selection button, including bulk vending machines that dispense gum, candy 
and nuts. Vending machines are operated both by food service firms and by firms in other 
businesses that operate machines for the benefit of their customers or employees and do not 
identify as vending machine operators.  Because this latter group cannot be accurately counted, 
published estimates of the number of vending machine operators will generally undercount the 
  7
number of covered operators under the proposed rule. For the purposes of this preliminary 
regulatory impact analysis, we will use the term “covered operators” or “covered vending 
machines” to refer to operators or machines that sell covered vending machine foods.   
According to the NAMA, there are approximately 13,500 companies that operate vending 
machines in the United States (Ref. 2). Other estimates put the total closer to 10,000 (Ref. 1).  
This total includes 5,000 firms whose primary business identification is as vending machine 
operators (NAICS 4542), plus a variety of other firms that operate vending machines, but do not 
primarily identify as such.  These other companies include, for example, beverage manufacturers 
and food service contractors.  Because of the difficulty in determining which firms are covered, 
and because FDA has no data on the potentially significant number of covered vending machine 
operators that self-identify as businesses outside the food industry, we take NAMA’s higher 
estimate of 13,500 firms as the number of covered firms. 
FDA estimates that 97 percent of firms selling covered vending machine food that 
identify primarily as vending machine operators that are engaged in the business of owning or 
operating 20 or more vending machines are small businesses as defined by the SBA. Other 
estimates indicate that more than 90 percent of the firms covered by the proposed rule are 
defined as small businesses (Ref. 1). This percentage may be lower for firms that have primary 
business identification other than as vending machine operators, but the majority of covered 
businesses will likely still be defined as small businesses. Because very small, informal 
businesses that are not captured by economic census data might operate 20 or more machines, 
these figures may underestimate the number of affected small businesses.  Conversely, 
approximately 72 percent of industry revenue--and thus a comparably large fraction of 
  8
consumption--comes from firms with more than $10 million in annual sales, and 85 percent 
comes from firms with more than $5 million in revenue (Ref. 1). 
Vending machine operators together operate an estimated 5 to 7 million machines (Refs. 
1 and 2) in at least 1.5 million locations (Ref. 1).  Approximately 70 percent of these machines 
sell packaged food, including beverages, that are required to bear nutrition labeling under section 
403(q)(1) of the FD&C Act and FDA regulations at § 101.9, and thus have Nutrition Facts.  This 
70 percent is comprised mostly of packaged beverage machines, which account for more than 50 
percent of all vending machines, with the remainder--approximately 20 percent of all machines--
selling packaged confections or snacks. Ten percent sell a variety of hot and cold cup beverages, 
frozen or fresh food products and miscellaneous other food products. The final 20 percent of 
machines are bulk candy, nut or gum machines that are not covered by section 403(q)(5)(H)(viii) 
and the proposed requirements because they lack selection buttons. While these bulk machines 
form a large percentage of vending machines, they account for less than 0.5 percent of vending 
machine sales (Ref. 2). 
Summary of costs and benefits of the proposed rule and regulatory options.  In this 
section we briefly summarize the costs and benefits of the proposed rule that are analyzed in the 
detailed PRIA. These estimates are collected in table 1.  Costs of complying with the proposed 
requirements have been estimated for three major areas:  Cost of nutrition analysis, cost of new 
signs or posters, and labor costs. In the case of the proposed rule, FDA estimates that there would 
be approximately 10,800 operators under the proposed requirements, controlling between 4 
million and 5.6 million machines that sell covered vending machine foods. The initial mean 
estimated cost of complying with the proposed requirements is $25.8 million, with an estimated 
mean ongoing cost of $24.0 million. Mean annualized costs are $24.5 million at a 7 percent 
  9
discount rate, and $24.2 million at 3 percent discount rate. Per operator costs are estimated to be 
$2,400. FDA estimates that average per machine costs are less than $10 annually.   
 FDA has not estimated the actual benefits associated with proposed requirements.  Food 
choice and consumption decisions are complex and FDA is unaware of any comprehensive data 
allowing accurate predictions of the effect of the proposed requirements on consumer choice and 
vended foods. Therefore, FDA has constructed a plausible individual effect of the proposed rule, 
and has conducted a break-even analysis in order to determine the proportion of the U.S. obese 
adult population that would need to attain this minimal response in order for the proposed 
requirement to yield a positive net benefit. Using a 100 calorie per week reduction in intake as 
the benchmark effect, FDA estimates that at least 0.02 percent of the adult obese population 
would need to reach this benchmark in order for the rule to break even on the initial total cost.  
On an ongoing basis, again, at least 0.02 percent of the adult obese population would need to 
reach this benchmark in order for the rule to break even on the recurring annual costs. These 
effects are summarized in table 1 of this document. 
 Finally, although registration by firms wishing to register with FDA in order to come 
under the proposed requirements and the associated preemption from State or local regulations is 
voluntary, and will only occur to the extent that the costs of registration and compliance with 
Federal regulation is lower than that of State or local laws, this registration constitutes a 
collection of information under the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995. 
  10
Table 1a.  Accounting Statement: Annualized Cost and Break-Even Benefit Point for the 
Proposed Requirements 
 
 Primary 
Estimate 
Low 
Estimate 
High 
Estimate 
Year 
Dollar 
Discount 
Rate 
Period 
Covered
Benefits 
Annualized  Monetized 
($millions/year) 
Annualized Quantified:  
Not Quantified 
Qualitative:  FDA estimates that at least 0.02 percent of the adult obese population would need to reduce 
caloric intake by at least 100 calories per week in order for benefits from the proposed requirements to 
reach a break even point on annualized costs (at either 3% or 7%) 
Costs 
$24.5 $12.5 $39.8 2009 7% 10Annualized Monetized 
($millions/year) $24.2 $12.1 $39.6 2009 3% 10
 
 
C. Regulatory Options   
In addition to a baseline, FDA has identified four regulatory options for this proposed 
rule. The costs and benefits of these options are summarized in table 1b of this document.  
(0)  Baseline for the purpose of analysis--No new Federal regulatory 
action.  
(1)  Option 1, the proposed rule, allowing a sign in close proximity to the article of food 
or selection button, i.e. in, on, or adjacent to the vending machine, but not necessarily attached to 
the vending machine, so long as the sign is visible at the same time as the food, its name, price, 
or selection number is visible, and with an effective date of 1 year after publication of the final 
rule.  
(2)  Option 2, similar to the proposed rule, but requiring that calorie declarations be 
immediately adjacent to the article of food or selection button for all calorie disclosures. For this 
option, FDA estimates the cost of individual signs for each article of food or selection button. 
  11
(3)  Option 3, Similar to the proposed rule, but with an additional year in compliance 
period for vendors with less than $500,000 in annual revenue from vending machines. 
(4)  Option 4, similar to the proposed rule, but with coverage extended to bulk vending 
machines without selection buttons. 
Table 1b: Summary of Estimated Annualized Compliance Costs for Each Option 
Summary Of 
Options 
Primary 
Estimate 
(in 
millions) 
Low 
Estimate 
(in 
millions) 
High 
Estimate 
(in 
millions) 
Percent 
Discount 
Rate (10 
year 
horizon) 
Proportional 
Cost Relative 
to Primary 
Estimate of 
the Proposed 
Requirements 
Proportional 
Dollar Sales of 
Restaurant 
Food Relative 
to Primary 
Estimate of 
the Proposed 
Requirements 
(Baseline) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A  
$24.2 $12.1 $39.6 3% Option 1: the 
Proposed Rule  $24.5 $12.5 $39.8 7% 
0.0% 0.0% 
$81.8 $36.1 $140.4 3% Option 2: 
Individual Signs  $82.5 $36.6 $141.1 7% 
+229.2% 0.0% 
$24.2 $12.1 $39.6 
3% Option 3: 
Longer 
Compliance 
Time for Small 
Businesses $24.5 $12.5 $39.8 
7% 0.0% 0.0% 
$30.2 $15.1 $49.4 
3% Option 4: 
Extended Scope 
to Include Bulk 
Machines $31.0 $15.8 $50.3 
7% +25.6% +0.5% 
 
FDA estimates that Option 2, which would require individual signs or labels for each 
covered vended food, has a ten-year annualized costs of between $36.1 million per year and 
$140.4 million per year at a 3 percent discount rate, with a primary estimate of $81.8 million. 
Averaged over primary, low and high estimates, the costs of Option 2 are 229.2 percent higher 
than those of the proposed requirements. These changes are discussed more fully in the detailed 
analysis. 
Option 3 which considers a longer compliance time for small businesses represents only a 
delay in the costs. This delay has a small positive impact on the annualized cost, but one that 
  12
does not change the (rounded) estimate of costs for Option 3 from the estimate, of costs for 
Option 1.  Option 4, expands the scope of the requirements to include foods in bulk vending 
machines without selection buttons, has costs that are 25.6 percent higher than the proposed 
option, and covers an additional 0.5 percent of sales of vended foods. 
 
II. Costs and Benefits of Regulatory Options: Detailed Analysis 
 This section describes the costs and benefits for the proposed rule and the regulatory 
options. 
A. Baseline No New Regulatory Action  
Imposing no new nutrition labeling requirements for covered vending machine food is the 
baseline for our analysis.  Section 4205 of the Affordable Care Act requires that FDA issue 
regulations to carry out section 403(q)(5)(H) of the FD&C Act, which includes nutrition labeling 
requirements for covered vending machine food.  Therefore, this is not a legally viable option.  
However, OMB cost-benefit analysis guidelines recommend discussing statutory requirements 
that affect the selection of regulatory approaches.  These guidelines also recommend analyzing 
the opportunity cost of legal constraints that prevent the selection of the regulatory action that 
best satisfies the philosophy and principles of the Executive Order 12866.  This option will serve 
as the baseline against which other options will be measured for assessing costs and benefits.    
Section 4205 of the Affordable Care Act established the first Federal nutrition labeling 
requirements related to vending machines.  We are not aware of any State or local nutrition 
labeling requirements related to vending machines.  Because there is increasing attention on and 
concern for the role that foods from vending machines play in the obesity epidemic, some 
  13
vending machine operators have voluntarily provided more healthful options and additional 
information on the outside of machines (Refs. 2 and 4).  
 Because efforts to reduce the prevalence of obesity in the United States will likely 
continue to grow, FDA expects some State and local jurisdictions to begin requiring nutrition 
information disclosure on vending machines.  If this were to occur, in the absence of the 
enactment of section 4205 of the Affordable Care Act, costs to industry could be several times 
the cost of this proposed rule, and the benefit to consumers may be lower because of incomplete 
coverage and fragmented presentation of nutrition information. 
B.  Option 1:  Proposed Rule 
 Under this option FDA proposes the following requirements for the placement of calorie 
declarations for covered vending machine food: 
 (A)  This calorie information may be placed (1) On a sign in close proximity to each 
article of food in the vending machine or the selection button or (2) On a sign, such as a poster 
in, on, or adjacent to the vending machine, but not necessarily attached to the vending machine, 
so long as the sign is visible at the same time as the food, its description name, price, or selection 
button number is visible.   
(B)  This information must be presented in a color that is sufficiently contrasted with the 
background. 
(C)  Where the vending machine only displays a vignette or name of the food item, the 
calorie information must be in close proximity to the vignette or name or in close proximity to 
the selection button. 
  14
(D)  For electronic vending machines (e.g., machines with digital or electronic or LCD 
displays), the calorie information may be displayed when the selection numbers are entered but 
before the selection is confirmed.  
For vending machine operators that are not subject to the requirements of section 
403(q)(5)(H) of the FD&C Act, the proposed rule specifies the terms and conditions for how 
these operators can voluntarily become subject to the proposed requirements by registering with 
FDA. Because this registration is voluntary, only operators that see a positive net benefit to 
themselves will choose to register, therefore, FDA estimates that the registration provision by 
itself will have no net cost.  
i.  Costs.  In order to comply with the proposed rule, each affected operator will need to 
have or acquire calorie content data for its covered vending machine food.  Because almost all 
vending machines sell food that is manufactured and packaged, calorie analysis and the design 
and printing of calorie analysis displays will be most efficiently done by manufacturers rather 
than vending machine operators. Furthermore, most package food sold from vending machines 
are subject to the nutrition labeling requirements of section 403(q) of the FD&C Act and § 101.9, 
which means that calorie information is already on the labels of these foods and collected and 
available for these foods.  
Because section 403(q)(5)(H) of the FD&C Act and the proposed rule does not cover 
vending machines without selection buttons, including certain bulk vending machines or vending 
machines that are not operated by a person who is engaged in the business of owing or operating 
20 or more vending machines, FDA estimates that the approximately 80 percent of all vending 
machines, or between 4 million and 5.6 million machines will be covered for the purposes of this 
analysis. Note that some of these vending machines may permit consumers to examine the 
  15
Nutrition Facts Panels for the food sold in the machines before purchasing the food or otherwise 
provide visible nutrition information for the food sold in the machines at the point of purchase, 
and therefore might not contribute to the costs analyzed for this proposed rule because these are 
not covered vending machine foods. FDA lacks data that breaks down vending machine firms by 
the kinds of machines that they operate; therefore, FDA uses the proportion of generally covered 
machines as the estimate for the proportion of covered firms, yielding approximately 10,800 
covered firms. To the extent that vending machines do permit consumers to examine the 
Nutrition Facts Panels for the food sold in the machines before purchasing the food or otherwise 
provide visible nutrition information for the food sold in the machines, at the point of purchase, 
this analysis may overestimate the costs of the proposed rule. 
FDA estimates that approximately 10 percent of all vending machines, or between 
500,000 and 700,000 machines, sell products that might not already have calorie information on 
their packages.  The manufacturer of these foods (mostly hot and cold cup beverages) would not 
necessarily have calorie information if the products were not otherwise subject to some nutrition 
labeling requirements.  In addition, there are operators providing fresh or frozen foods for a 
relatively small number of machines, and these foods may also lack nutrition labeling.  FDA 
tentatively estimates that between 5 and 10 percent of all affected firms, or between 540 and 
1,080 firms will need to acquire nutrition information for at least some of their products.  FDA 
tentatively estimates that each vending machine operator within these groups sells approximately 
5 to 10 covered vending machine foods that do not have nutrition labeling.  Thus the range of 
possible calorie estimates that would need to be made in order to comply with this proposed rule,  
if finalized, would be between roughly 2,700 items (5 items/firm x 540 firms) and 10,800 items 
  16
(10 items/firm x 1,080 firms), with a mean estimate of 6,800 items.  FDA requests comment on 
these estimates. 
Cost estimates for nutrition analyses vary widely: By complexity of the item, 
sophistication and accuracy of the analysis, detail of the nutrition report, and by whether the 
analysis is based on existing databases or on item-specific laboratory testing.  However, because 
of the small profit margins in the vending industry (Ref. 1), we expect firms to use cheaper 
database nutrition analysis.  One database nutrition analysis service quotes prices starting at $25 
per item, going up to $100 per item for more complicated items (Ref. 26).  Another service offers 
flat rates of $49 for ten items where the purchaser enters the recipe into a calculator (Ref. 27).  A 
senior dietician or nutritionist earns $35.91 per hour (Ref. 28). Taking into account 50 percent 
overhead costs, the labor cost to the firm of 1 hour to enter a recipe is approximately $54. The 
total cost per item at this Web site would be approximately $59 per item (and potentially lower 
with high volume discounts).  
Based on data from FDA’s Recordkeeping Cost Model (Ref. 29), we estimate 
approximately 4 hours as the time per analyzed food for creating and administering the record of 
nutritional information.  Although the proposed rule does not mandate recordkeeping, vending 
machine operators will likely need to be able to ensure that calorie disclosures for covered 
vending machine foods are accurate and consistent without needing to re-analyze these foods. 
Again using the hourly wage plus overhead for dietitians and nutritionists of $54 per hour, we 
estimate the costs for administering the records of nutritional analysis to be $216 per item (4 
hours/item x $54/hour).  We estimate that the per-item estimated cost of calorie analysis for 
covered vending machine food will be approximately $275 per item ($59 database +$216 
administration). The total estimated cost for calorie analysis for covered vending machine food is 
  17
between $0.7 million (2,700 items x $275/item) and $3 million (10,800 items x $275/item), with 
a mean estimate of $1.7 million.  
 Because the market for unpackaged food sold from vending machines is small and 
appeared to decline over the period from 2005 to 2008 (Ref. 1), FDA estimates that very few 
new products will be introduced that will need calorie analysis solely as a result of the proposed 
requirements, if finalized.  In addition, because new vending machine operators likely would use 
existing suppliers, growth in the vending machine industry likely would not create the need for 
new calorie analysis.  
Labeling Costs. The primary cost of the proposed rule will be in affixing and 
maintaining calorie information for covered vending machine food on, in or adjacent to vending 
machines.  Because there is wide variation in the kinds of vending machines used--in materials, 
display, and mechanism--there will likely be a variety of methods used for compliance.  On the 
high end, a calorie or nutrition display that is integrated with the graphics on the machine would 
require a new front display, and thus may cost several hundred dollars, or more.  On the low end, 
a sign, including a poster  that could be affixed to the front of the machine could cost 
significantly less than $1 per year.  Given the low profit margins in the vending machine 
industry, and given that most of the regulated vending machine operators will be small 
businesses, FDA anticipates that almost all operators will, at least initially, choose to include 
calorie information on signs, including posters adjacent to vending machines.  In the long run, 
the manufacturers of vending machines, and the larger vending machine operators, such as the 
soft drink companies, may use more integrated signs, and thus more expensive, methods as part 
of regular updates and replacement of machines.  
  18
 If  total calories  were included on the label for a food sold from a vending machine and 
the calorie information met the requirements for visible, , that food would not be subject to the 
nutrition labeling requirements under section 403(q)(5)(H)(viii)(I) of the FD&C Act.  Therefore, 
vending machine operators that operate glass front machines, or other kinds of vending machines 
that displays food products with visible nutrition information would not have to provide the 
calorie information described in section 403(q)(5)(H)(viii)(I) of the FD&C Act and § 
101.8(c)(2)of this proposed rule. In other cases, operators may not need  to comply with the 
proposed requirements by placing the products in a way that permits the consumer to examine 
the Nutrition Facts Panels for the products prior to purchase.  
In addition, the increased use of electronic displays on vending machines will reduce the 
need for physical signs.  As a conservative estimate, with between 4 million and 5.6 million 
machines, FDA estimates that the sign cost will between $4 million and $5.6 million annually.  
However, we expect this amount to fall over time as manufacturers continue to add the required 
calorie information to of the principal display panel of the package. 
 Because signs would not always need to be updated every time a machine’s product mix 
changed, FDA estimates an average recurring burden of between 5 and 15 minutes per machine 
per year to install or refresh the calorie displays.  FDA requests comment on this estimate.  The 
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics gives the average hourly wage of a nonsupervisory employee of 
a vending machine operator as $16 per hour.  Including a 50 percent increase for overhead costs, 
the average hourly cost of an employee in this sector is approximately $24 per hour. 
 Using the estimate of between 4 million and 5.6 million machines, and between 0.08 
hours (5 minutes/60 minutes/hour) and 0.25 hours (15 minutes/60 minutes/hour) per machine, 
the annual cost of labeling vending machines is between $8 million (0.08 hours/machine x 
  19
$24/hour x 4,000,000 machines) and $33.6 million (0.25 hour/machine x 4/year x $24/hour x 
5,600,000 machines), with a mean estimate of $19.2 million.  As with the cost of signs 
themselves, we expect this cost to fall over time as more products introduce principal display 
panels with calorie and other nutrition information and as vending machines integrate signs that 
are electronic displays.  Because estimates of the number of machines have not shown consistent 
growth in the last few years, FDA takes the number of machines as constant.  
 The estimated costs of calorie disclosure using this option are given in table 2 of this 
document. As noted above, initial, non-recurring costs are limited to calorie analysis, given the 
products covered.  All other costs will be ongoing. 
Table 2.--Costs of the Proposed Rule 
Cost Low Estimate Mean Estimate High Estimate 
Initial Calorie Analysis $0.7 million $1.8 million $3.0 million 
Sign Costs $4.0 million $4.8 million $5.6 million 
Sign Labor Costs $8.0 million $19.2 million $33.6 million 
Total First Year Costs $12.7 million $25.8 million $42.2 million 
Total Recurring Costs $12.0 million $24.0 million $39.2 million 
Annualized Costs, 3% $12.1 million $24.2 million $39.6 million 
Annualized Costs 7% $12.5 million $24.5 million $39.8 million 
 
ii.  Benefits.  The potential benefit from the proposed rule stems from the effect that 
decreasing the consumption of calories from vended food may have on mitigating obesity rates 
and growth in the U.S. population. The literature on access to vending machines and its relation 
to body weight to date is very limited and has focused mostly on soft drink consumption, with a 
particular emphasis on how soda taxes impact the demand for such beverages.  However, this 
literature provides evidence that shows that consumption of sugar-sweetened beverages as well 
as other common types of vended foods, such as candies, cookies, and chips is associated with 
higher energy intake, lower nutrient intake, and increased weight gain and risk for obesity among 
the U.S. population (Refs. 30 through 33).      
  20
Kakarala and colleagues (Ref. 34) estimate that the consumption of sugar-sweetened 
beverages and snack items contributes about an additional 250 calories per day among the 
overweight and obese population, and Krebs-Smith (Ref. 35) estimates that about 20 percent of 
that extra calorie intake is attributable to items purchased from vending machines. Twenty 
percent of 250 calories amounts to 50 calories per day from items purchased from vending 
machines. However, it is important to note that these studies were not based on a representative 
sample of the U.S. population and thus might over- or under-estimate the amount of calorie 
intake from food sold from vending machines. In addition, many potential substitutes to sugar-
sweetened beverages and snack items typically have a similar number of calories per serving.  
For example, 12 ounces (oz) of fruit juice or reduced-fat 2-percent milk contain a similar number 
of calories as 12 oz of sugar-sweetened beverage (140 calories).  In other words, calorie labeling 
may not necessarily drive substitution toward lower calorie items.  
Because FDA does not have comprehensive data on how consumption patterns would 
change in the long run due to the proposed requirements, and because FDA does not have data 
on how vending machine operators would respond to the proposed requirements, FDA estimates 
a benchmark response by the adult obese population that would be needed for the proposed 
requirements to have a positive net benefit. This benchmark is not an estimate of the real effect 
of the implementation of the proposed requirements, but an exercise to illustrate the magnitude 
of the response needed. The benchmark benefits are calculated by summing Quality Adjusted 
Life Years (QALYs) gained and medical costs averted from the benchmark decline in obesity. 
QALYs  One approach to estimating health benefits involves the use of QALYs. QALYs 
can be used to measure the loss of well-being that an individual suffers due to a disease or 
condition.  QALYs do not include the value of health expenditures caused by the condition in 
  21
question; we estimate health expenditures separately.  QALYs range from 0 to 1 where 0 is 
equivalent to death and 1 is equivalent to perfect health for 1 year. A number of methods have 
been constructed to measure QALYs. In this analysis we rely on estimates of the obesity related 
QALYs by Jia and Lubetkin that use a statistical method developed by Cutler and Richardson 
(Refs. 36, 37, 38).  In this context, the method uses regression analysis to estimate the effect of 
particular conditions on overall health status (Ref. 38).  The study finds that the QALYs lost by 
the U.S. adult population due to annual obesity related illness and lost quality adjusted life 
expectancy based on 2005 through 2008 data are 0.0410 per adult, with approximately 57 
percent of this burden coming from disability and activity limitations rather than premature death 
(Refs. 37 and 38).  Based on the U.S. Census Bureau Statistical Abstract of the United States: 
2011, the 18 and over population of the United States in 2009 was 232,458,000 (Ref. 39). The 
total estimate of lost QALYs from obesity for adults in the United States is then 9,530,778 
QALYs.  FDA notes in section I.A. of this document that 34 percent of the adult population is 
obese.  Therefore, approximately 79,035,720 adults (232,458,000 x 34%) are obese, and the lost 
QALY per obese adult is 0.121 QALY.  
FDA uses a range to estimate the value of an additional year of life to reflect the 
uncertainty in the literature on valuation. Beginning with an estimate of the value of a statistical 
life year (VSLY) of $7.9 million, we annualize this estimate to yield a value of an additional year 
of life of $106,000, $213,000, $319,000 and $532,000. Calculations for estimated benefits will 
reflect these four estimates of the VSLY. Using these values and the estimate of 0.121 QALY 
per obese adult, the annualized cost per obese adult of lost QALYs, including both disability and 
premature death due to obesity is estimated as in the range of $13,000 ($106,000 x 0.121), 
$26,000 ($213,000 x 0.121), $38,000 ($319,000 x 0.121) and $64,000 ($532,000 x 0.121). The 
  22
corresponding total burdens from lost QALYs associated with obesity in the U.S. adult 
population are then $1.028 trillion, $2.055 trillion, $3.003 trillion and $5.058 trillion. Note that 
these estimates are for the annual lost QALYs of all obese adults and are not estimates of the 
benefits of the proposed requirements. 
Medical Costs. The estimated medical expense reduction is calculated using data from 
the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS). MEPS is a nationally representative survey of 
the civilian non-institutionalized population. MEPS contain detailed information on the 
respondents’ medical expenditures, such as total annual medical expense by type of service and 
source of payment. In addition, the data also include demographic information (age, race, gender 
etc.) along with individual’s body mass index (BMI) based on self-reported measure of height 
and weight.  
Using 2006 MEPS data, Finkelstein and colleagues found that the annual obesity 
attributable medical costs for obese adults (BMI greater or equal to 30) relative to normal weight 
adults (BMI greater than or equal to 18.5 and less than 25) was between $85,739,000 and 
$146,624,000 in 2008 dollars. From Flegal and colleagues, 34 percent of adults were obese in 
2006. With an adult population in 2006 of 224,583,000, the number of obese adults in 2006 was 
approximately 76,358,220 (224,583,000 x 34%), yielding a per-obese cost of between $1.14 and 
$1.94 per obese adult in 2010 dollars (Ref. 18).  Using the previous estimate of 79,035,720 obese 
adults, this translates into between $89.9 billion and $153.7 billion in medical costs associated 
obesity, and a mean estimate of $121.8 billion.  Note that these estimates are additional medical 
costs for all obese adults and are not estimates of the benefits of the proposed requirements. 
Calorie reduction. Based on 2003 through 2004 NHANES data, Mancino and 
colleagues estimate that consuming a meal not prepared at home added an extra 239 calories to 
  23
the diet of obese individuals when compared to consuming a meal prepared at home (Ref. 40). 
NHANES data shows an estimated four meals eaten away from home per week (Ref. 40). This 
translates to an average of roughly 140 extra calories per day (239 cal/meal x 4 meals/week /7 
days/week).  
Studies of consumer response to vending machine calorie disclosure have been difficult 
to find. Restaurant menus studies of calorie disclosure have found that responses were often 
small or insignificant, but varied widely across different subgroups, ranging from increases in 
calorie intake for some populations to reductions of up to approximately 50 calories per meal for 
other groups (Refs. 41 through 46). Consumer response to reformulations and menu changes are 
also likely to be highly diverse. Taking a rough, unweighted average of the range of observed 
consumer responses for restaurant menus suggests that a 10-percent reduction in the additional 
calories consumed may be possible. For this proposed rule, we use a 10-percent reduction of the 
calories from vended food as a benchmark. This reduction may be possible for at least some 
populations, and may be supported by additional changes to the calorie amounts in the foods 
offered in vending machines. We therefore base our benchmark on an average decrease in calorie 
intake of 24 calories per meal (240 calories per meal x 10%), or 14 calories per day (140 calories 
per day x 10%) or 100 per week (14 calories per day x 7 days/week) by obese adults. We will 
further reduce this amount relative to the fraction of calories from vended food versus all 
restaurant and restaurant-type food.  
Weight and BMI reduction. In order to convert this benchmark calorie reduction to U.S. 
population weight and BMI reductions we use a non-linear steady state model developed by Hall 
and Jordan for the calculation of individual weight loss using daily calorie reduction, height, 
initial weight, age, gender, fat mass, and physical activity level, (Ref. 47).  In order to calculate 
  24
weight loss using NHANES U.S. population we implemented this model in symbolic algebra 
software which can solve nonlinear systems involving large matrices of data.   
On the advice of Hall and Jordan, we use 2003 through 2004 NHANES data rather than 
the most recent (2007 through 2008) NHANES data in order to be able to use the dual energy x-
ray absorptiometry data file. This data measures total fat mass for individuals, allowing for a 
much more accurate calculation of weight reduction than would be possible without this data. 
We do not use the MEPS data because height and weight are needed for calculating weight loss, 
and are not given in the public dataset. Furthermore, height and weight are self reported in 
MEPS, and may therefore be biased. 
In addition to the NHANES dual x-ray data file, we use demography, body measurement 
and physical activity questionnaire data. The physical activity data is converted into physical 
activity level/metabolic equivalent of task, or PAL/MET scores using the recommended values 
given in the NHANES documentation.  For missing values (approximately 1/3 of the 
observations), we assume the lowest level of activity (1.4).  Given that individuals with lower 
levels of background activity lose more weight, this assumption means that the calculated weight 
reductions may be slightly higher than if all scores were known. 
Using the weight reduction calculator and NHANES data, we estimate that a 14 calorie 
per day or 100 calorie per week reduction translates to a mean weight loss of 1.2 kilograms, from 
a range of 0.5 to 1.8 kilograms for U.S. adults over the age of 18. This decrease in weight 
translates to a mean decline in BMI of 0.455 BMI per obese adult from a range of 0.14 to 0.73. 
We contextualize this drop against the decline in BMI needed to bring the average obese adult 
BMI down to the average non-obese BMI. From NHANES 2003 through 2004 data the mean 
non-obese BMI is 24.7 and the mean obese BMI is 35.4, for a difference of 10.7 BMI points. We 
  25
can then characterize the 0.455 drop in BMI as a 4.3 percent drop in obesity as measured by 
excess BMI relative to the non-obese. Summing the estimates of QALY gains and medical cost 
abatement for all obese adults and taking 4.3 percent yields a range of $91 billion to $222 billion, 
with an intermediate estimate of $133 billion for the total cost of obesity in adults. Note that this 
is not an estimate of the benefit of the proposed requirements. 
Benchmark fraction of obese adults. Owing to the complexity of the causes of the 
obesity problem, and the complexity of the choices involved in choosing food away from home, 
we do not expect the proposed rule to reduce calories by this amount.  However, we illustrate 
benefits by using a benchmark response that would be needed to create a positive net benefit 
from the rule. As a benchmark only, and not as an estimate of the actual benefits associated with 
the proposed rule, we consider the benefit associated with a 4.3 percent reduction in excess BMI. 
In particular, we calculate the minimum percentage of obese consumers that would need to 
reduce calorie intake in order for the proposed requirements to have positive net benefits.    
Given the estimated mean cost for the proposed requirements of approximately $25.8 
million, and the estimated intermediate benefit of $133 billion for all obese adults, if at least 0.02 
percent ($25.8 million/$133 billion) of the adult obese population responded to the calorie 
disclosure, then the proposed requirements would have a positive net benefit.  
It is important to note here that these benchmark figures were drawn from data that was 
restricted to obese adults only (age greater than 18).  As such, the estimated reductions in 
medical expenses may be conservative estimates (Ref. 48). Conversely, this research suggests 
that weight-reducing behavior in one person might spread to others as well, and thus policies 
designed to bring about a reduction in body weight might be more cost effective than estimated.   
  26
We did not account for the benefit that might be accrued by children in our analysis.  
Reduction in childhood obesity has been linked with many dimensions of human capital 
formation such as better educational and labor market outcomes (Ref. 48). It is reasonable to 
expect that the reduction in calorie consumption due to nutrition labeling of food sold in vending 
machines will not be limited to adults, but may also benefit children and adolescents in terms of 
healthier eating choices.  Eighty-seven percent of all junior high and middle schools and 25 
percent of all elementary schools have vending machines where children can buy foods, 
including drinks (Refs. 49).  
C.  Option 2:  Similar to the Proposed Rule, But Estimating the Cost of Individual Signs for 
Each Article of Food or Selection Button. 
i. Costs.  This option would substantially increase the cost of disclosing calories.  
Because firms would need to manage signs for each covered vending machine food (or small 
groups of covered vending machine food) under this option, the displayed calorie information 
would potentially need to be changed every time a machine was filled.  FDA estimates that 
displays would need to be changed an average of four times per year, under this option. FDA 
requests comment on this estimate.  Workers would have to sort, affix, and change signs as the 
product mix changed. Therefore, FDA estimates that this approach would increase the labor 
costs of the proposed option to between $32 million and $134.4 million. Total initial costs for 
this option are between $36.5 million and $142.2 million. FDA requests comment on this 
estimate. The total costs of this option are provided in table 3 of this document. 
 
 
 
 
  27
Table 3.--Option 2 Costs 
Cost Low Estimate Mean Estimate High Estimate 
Initial Calorie Analysis  $0.7 million $1.8 million $3.0 million 
Sign Costs $4.0 million $4.8 million $5.6 million 
Signage Labor Costs $32.0 million $76.8 million $134.4 million 
Total First Year Costs $36.7 million $83.4 million $143.0 million 
Total Recurring Costs $36.0 million $81.6 million $140.0 million 
Annualized Costs, 3% $36.1 million $81.8 million $140.4 million 
Annualized Costs 7% $36.6 million $82.5 million $141.1 million 
 
 ii.  Benefits.  Because calorie information would likely be more prominently displayed 
under this option, consumers are more likely to absorb and respond to the information.  
Therefore, this option makes a higher response scenario more likely. However, because FDA 
does not have the data on how consumers’ consumption pattern would change due to this 
proposed option, it is not possible to estimate the probability with which a response might occur. 
The substantially higher costs for this option would require a greater effect in order to break 
even. In this case, given the estimated mean cost for the proposed requirements of approximately 
$82.9 million, and the estimated intermediate benefit of $133 billion for all obese adults, if at 
least 0.06 percent ($82.9 million/$133 billion) of the adult obese population responded to the 
calorie disclosure, then the proposed requirements would have a positive net benefit over the 
initial costs.   
 
D.  Option 3:  Similar to the Proposed Rule, But With an Additional Year of Compliance 
Time for Firms With Less Than $500,000 in Annual Revenue. 
i.  Costs.  This option would give smaller firms more time to comply with the proposed 
requirements.  Given the recurring nature of the costs, giving these firms more time to come into 
compliance would, in effect, relieve these firms from the costs of compliance for an additional 
year.  From the 2007 Economic Census, more than 50 percent of vending machine operators and 
  28
food service contractors had sales less than $500,000.  If this figure holds for all operators of 
vending machines selling covered vending machine food, then at least 6,750 operators would 
have extra time to comply. Based on the share of sales, FDA estimates that the vending machine 
operators with sales below $500,000 account for approximately 13 percent of vending machines.  
Taking a 13 percent reduction in the costs of labeling yields a first-year cost of between $11.7 
million and $38.4 million, with a mean estimate of $23.5 million.  It is important to note, that the 
lower costs in this option are simply avoided costs for the additional year for small firms rather 
than a reduction in the initial or ongoing costs of compliance. FDA believes that the compliance 
time given in the proposed rule is adequate to prevent additional costs of compliance from 
additional staff, overtime or expedited analysis and printing jobs that would disproportionally 
affect smaller entities. 
ii.  Benefits.  Under this option, consumers would see calorie declarations for some food 
sold in vending machines later and in a more piecemeal fashion than under the proposed rule. 
This delay may lower the initial health impact of the proposed rule, and delay the expected 
increase in consumer awareness of calorie intake from vending machine food. This may, in turn, 
lower, or at least delay, the overall benefit of requiring calorie disclosures for covered vending 
machine food in proportion to the number of machines that would fall into the delayed 
compliance period. In general, however, the benefits associated with calorie reduction are long 
term, and therefore relatively unaffected by a 1-year delay in compliance for small businesses. 
FDA estimates that the benefits associated with Option 3 are not different from the benefits 
associated with the proposed rule.  
 
 
  29
E.  Option 4:  Similar to the Proposed Rule, But With Coverage Extended to All Bulk 
Vending Machines. 
 Under this option, coverage would extend to bulk vending machines without selection 
buttons.  
i. Costs.  Under this option, between 5 million and 7 million machines and approximately 
13,500 firms would be covered. This means that all costs would increase by approximately 
20 percent over the costs of the proposed rule. Although the average cost per covered bulk 
machine would be under $5 (($31.7 million-$25.3 million)/1.3 million), this represents a 
significantly higher proportion of per machine annual revenue, approximately 3 percent per 
machine ($5 average cost /$147 average annual revenue) (Ref. 2). For machines covered 
under the proposed rule, this ratio of cost to revenue is less than one-tenth of 1 percent of 
average annual revenue ($5 average cost /$6,722 annual revenue) (Ref. 2). The costs of 
Option 4 are given in table 4 of this document. 
Table 4.--Total Costs, Option 4 
Cost Low Estimate Mean Estimate High Estimate 
Initial calorie analysis  $0.7 million $1.8 million $3.0 million 
Sign costs $5.0 million $6.0 million $7.0 million 
Signage adjustment costs $10.0 million $24.0 million $42.0 million 
Total first year costs $15.7 million $31.8 million $52.0 million 
Total recurring costs $15.0 million $30.0 million $49.0 million 
Annualized Costs, 3% $15.1 million $30.2 million $49.4 million 
Annualized Costs 7% $15.8 million $31.0 million $50.3 million 
 
ii. Benefits. Because consumer spending on foods sold from bulk vended machines with 
no selection buttons comprises less than 0.5 percent of all vending expenditure, FDA uses the 
same estimate of benefits for this option as for the proposed rule. With total initial costs of $31.7, 
the break-even point for this option is 0.02 percent of obese adults.  
 
  30
III. References 
1. Automatic Merchandiser. “2010 State of the Vending Industry Report.” 
http://www.vendingmarketwatch.com/content/reports/ accessed, November 09, 2010. 
2. National Automatic Merchandising Association. “Comments of: The National 
Automatic Merchandising Association.” Docket No. FDA-2010-N-0298 2010. 
3. U.S. Small Business Administration. “Table of Small Business Size Standards 
Matched to North American Industry Classification System Codes,” Effective November 5, 
2010. 
http://www.sba.gov/idc/groups/public/documents/sba_homepage/serv_sstd_tablepdf.pdf, 
accessed 12/10/2010. 
4. Jed, E. “Operators Find Today's Patrons Favor 'Better-For-You' Food Selections            
In Vending,” Vending Times, 41:8, 2001. 
5.  Finkelstein, E.A.and K.L. Strombotne. “The Economics of Obesity.” American 
Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 91(5): 1520S-1524S, May 2010. 
6. Philipson, T. and R. Posner. “Is the Obesity Epidemic a Public Health Problem? A 
Decade of Research on the Economics of Obesity.” NBER Working Paper Series, 14010, 
May 2008. 
7. Downs, J.S., G. Loewenstein and J. Wisdom. “Strategies for Promoting Healthier 
Food Choices.” American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 99(2): 1-10, 2009. 
8. O’Donoghue, T. and M. Rabin. “The Economics of Immediate Gratification.” Journal 
of Behavioral Decision Making, 13(2): 233-250, 2000. 
9.  O’Donoghue, T. and M. Rabin. “Doing it Now or Later.” American Economic 
Review, 89(1): 103-124, 1999. 
  31
10. Wang, Y., M.A. Beydoun, L. Liang,  B. Cabellero and S.K. Kumanyika,  “Will all 
Americans Become Overweight or Obese? Estimating the Progression and Cost of the US 
Obesity Epidemic.” Obesity, 16(10): 2323 – 2330, 2008.  
11. Ogden, C.L. and M.D. Carroll. “Prevalence of Overweight, Obesity, and Extreme 
Obesity Among Adults: United States, Trends 1976–1980 Through 2007–2008.” National 
Center for Health Statistics, June 2010. 
12. Sullivan, P.W., V. Ghusheyan, and R.H. Ben-Joseph. “The Effect of Obesity and 
Cardiometabolic Risk Factor on Expenditures and Productivity in the US.” Obesity, 16: 
2155 – 2162, 2008.  
13. Ali, M.M., A. Amialchuk, and F. Renna.. “Social Network and Weight Misperception 
Among Adolescents”. Southern Economic Journal, Forthcoming, (2010a).   
14. Cawley, J., K. Joyner, and J. Sobal. “Size Matters: The Influence of Adolescent’s 
Weight and Height on Dating and Sex.” Rationality and Society, 18(1): 67 – 94, 2006. 
15. Ali, M.M., H. Fang, and J. Rizzo. (2010b). “Body Weight, Self-Perception and 
Mental Health among Adolescents.” Journal of Mental Health Policy and Economics, 
13(2): 53 – 63 (2010b). 
16. Puhl, R., and K.D. Brownell. “Bias, Discrimination, and Obesity.” Obesity Research, 
9(12): 788-805, 2001 
17. Cawley, J. “The Impact of Obesity on Wages.” Journal of Human Resources, 39(2): 
451 – 474, 2004.  
18. Finkelstein, E.A., J.G. Trogdon, J.W. Cohen and W. Dietz. “Annual Medical 
Spending Attributable to Obesity: Payer- and Service-Specific Estimates.” Health Affairs, 
28(5): w822-w831, 2009. 
  32
19. Lakdawalla, D. and T.J. Philipson. “The Growth of Obesity and Technological 
Change: A Theoretical and Empirical Examination,” NBER Working Paper No. 8946, 
2002. 
20. Philipson, T. J. and R.A. Posner, . “The Long-Run Growth in Obesity as a Function 
of Technological Change.” NBER Working Paper No. 7423, 1999. 
21. Cutler, D. M., E. L. Glaeser, and J.M. Shapiro, “Why Have Americans Become More 
Obese?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 17: 93-118, 2003.  
22. Chou, S-Y., M. Grossman, and H. Saffer.. “An Economic Analysis of Adult Obesity: 
Results from the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System.” Journal of Health 
Economics, 23: 565-587, 2004. 
23. Burke, M. and F. Heiland). “Social Dynamics of Obesity.”  Economic Inquiry, 45(3), 
571-591, 2007. 
24. French, S.A., R.W. Jeffery, M. Story,  P. Hannan,  and P. Snyder. “A Pricing Strategy 
to Promote Low-Fat Snack Choices through Vending Machines”. American Journal of 
Public Health, 87: 849 – 851, 1997. 
25. U.S. Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service. “Table 15: Sales of 
meals and snacks away from home by type of outlet.” Food CPI and Expenditures: Food 
Expenditure Tables. http://www.ers.usda.gov/Briefing/CPIFoodAndExpenditures/Data/ 
Accessed 10/8/2010. 
26. RL Food Testing Laboratory. “Quality Nutrition Analysis.” 
http://www.rlfoodtestinglaboratory.com/services.asp, accessed September 23, 2010. 
27. FoodCalc LLC. “Menucalc Plans.” 
http://www.menucalc.com/recipeanalysisplans.aspx, accessed September 23, 2010. 
  33
28. Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Employment 
Statistics, http://www.bls.gov/oes/current/oes_nat.htm, accessed September 23, 2010. 
29. Eastern Research Group, Inc.  “Evaluation of Recordkeeping Costs for Food   
Manufacturers, Final Report.”  Prepared for Andy Estrin and Cristina McLaughlin of 
FDA's Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition. Prepared by Aylin Sertkaya, Ayesha 
Berlind and Seda Erdem. Contract No. 223-01-2461, Task Order Number 5, February 
2007. 
30. New York Times, 1920. City’s Soda Cost Millions Monthly: Tax on Soft Drinks in 
Manhattan and Bronx in February and March is $465,445. New York Times, May 23, 
1920. 
31. Caraher, M. and G. Cowburn. “Taxing Food: Implications for Public Health 
Nutrition.” Public Health Nutrition 8 (8), 1242–1249, 2005. 
32. Brownell, K.D. and T.R. Frieden.  “Ounces of Prevention — The Public Policy Case 
for Taxes on Sugared Beverages.” New England Journal of Medicine 360, 18, 2009.  
33. Fletcher, J.M., D. Frisvold and N. Tefft. “The Effects of Soft Drink Taxes on Child 
and Adolescent Consumption and Weight Outcomes.” Journal of Public Economics, 
94:967—974, 2010. 
34. Kakarala, M., D.R. Keast, and S. Hoerr. “Schoolchildren’s Consumption of 
Competitive Foods and Beverages, Excluding à la Carte.” Journal of School Health, 80(9): 
429 – 435, 2010. 
35. Krebs-Smith S.M. “Choose Beverages and Foods to Moderate your Intake of Sugars: 
Measurement Requires Quantification. Journal of Nutrition, 131:527S-535S, 2001. 
  34
36. Cutler, D.M. and E. Richardson, “Measuring the Health of the U.S. Population,” 
Brookings Paper, Microeconomics, 217–271, 1997. 
37. Jia, H. and E. Lubetkin. “Obesity-Related Quality-Adusted Life Years Lost in the 
U.S. from 1993-2008,” American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 39(3):220-227, 2010. 
38. Jia, H. and E. Lubetkin. “Trends in Quality-Adjusted Life-Years Lost Contributed by 
Smoking and Obesity,” American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 38(2):138-144, 2010. 
39. U.S. Census Bureau, Statistical Abstract of the United States: 2011 (130th Edition) 
Washington, DC, 2010; < http://www.census.gov/compendia/statab/>. 
40. Mancino, L., J. Todd, and B.H. Lin.  “Separating what We Eat from where: 
Measuring the Effect of Food Away from Home on Diet.” Food Policy, 34: 557 – 562, 
2009. 
41. Elbel, B., R. Kersh, V.L. Brescoll, and L.B. Dixon. "Calorie Labeling And Food 
Choices: A First Look At The Effects On Low-Income People In New York City." Health 
Affairs, 28(6):W1110-W1121, 2009. 
42. Yamamoto, J.A., J.B. Yamamoto, B.E. Yamamoto, and L.G. Yamamoto, “Adolescent 
Fast Food and Restaurant Ordering Behavior with and without Calorie and Fat Content 
Menu Information.” Journal of Adolescent Health, 37: 397-402, 2005. 
43. Variyam, JN. “Do Nutrition Labels Improve Dietary Outcomes? Health Economics, 
17: 695 – 708, 2008. 
44. Finkelstein, E.A., K. L. Strombotne, N. L. Chan and J. Krieger. “Mandatory Menu 
Labeling in One Fast-Food Chain in King County, Washington,” American Journal of 
Preventive Medicine, 40(2):122-127 2011. 
  35
45. Elbel, B,, J Gyamfi and R Kersh. “Child and Adolescent Fast-Food Choice and the 
Influence of Calorie Labeling: A Natural Experiment,” International Journal of Obesity,  
Advance online publication, February 15, 2011 
http://www.nature.com/ijo/journal/vaop/ncurrent/pdf/ijo20114a.pdf, Accessed February 16, 
2011. 
46. Tandon, P. S., J. Wright, C. Zhou, C. B. Rogers, and D. A. Christakis. "Nutrition 
Menu Labeling May Lead to Lower-Calorie Restaurant Meal Choices for Children." 
Pediatrics, 125(2):244-48, 2010. 
47. Hall, K. and P. Jordan. Modeling weight-loss maintenance to help prevent body 
weight regain,” American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 88:1495-1503, 2008. 
48. Cawley, J. . “The Economics of Childhood Obesity.” Health Affairs 29(3): 364 – 371, 
2010.  
49. Wiecha, J.L., D. Finkelstein, P.J. Troped, M.Fragala, and K.E.Peterson, KE.  “School 
Vending Machine Use and Fast-Food Restaurant Use Are Associated with Sugar 
Sweetened Beverage Intake in Youth.” American Journal of Dietetic Association, 
106:1624-1630, 2006. 
