69524 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 218 / Friday, November 12, 2010 / Proposed Rules 
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND 
HUMAN SERVICES 
Food and Drug Administration 
21 CFR Part 1141 
[Docket No. FDA–2010–N–0568] 
RIN 0910–AG41 
Required Warnings for Cigarette 
Packages and Advertisements 
AGENCY: Food and Drug Administration, 
HHS. 
ACTION: Proposed rule. 
SUMMARY: The Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) is proposing to 
amend its regulations to add a new 
requirement for the display of health 
warnings on cigarette packages and in 
cigarette advertisements. The proposed 
rule would implement a provision of the 
Family Smoking Prevention and 
Tobacco Control Act (Tobacco Control 
Act) that requires FDA to issue 
regulations requiring color graphics 
depicting the negative health 
consequences of smoking to accompany 
the nine new textual warning statements 
that will be required under the Tobacco 
Control Act. The Tobacco Control Act 
amends the Federal Cigarette Labeling 
and Advertising Act (FCLAA) to require 
each cigarette package and 
advertisement to bear one of nine new 
textual warning statements. This 
proposed rule, once finalized, would 
specify the color graphics that must 
accompany each of the nine new textual 
warning statements. 
DATES: Interested persons may submit 
either electronic or written comments 
on this proposed rule by January 11, 
2011. See section IV.G of this document 
for the proposed effective date of a final 
rule based on this proposed rule. 
ADDRESSES: You may submit comments, 
identified by Docket No. FDA–2010–N– 
0568 and/or RIN number 0910–AG41, 
by any of the following methods: 
Electronic Submissions 
Submit electronic comments in the 
following way: 
• Federal eRulemaking Portal: http:// 
www.regulations.gov. Follow the 
instructions for submitting comments. 
Written Submissions 
Submit written submissions in the 
following ways: 
• FAX: 301–827–6870. 
• Mail/Hand delivery/Courier (for 
paper, disk, or CD–ROM submissions): 
Division of Dockets Management (HFA– 
305), Food and Drug Administration, 
5630 Fishers Lane, rm. 1061, Rockville, 
MD 20852. 
Instructions: All submissions received 
must include the agency name and 
Docket No(s). and Regulatory 
Information Number (RIN) for this 
rulemaking. All comments received may 
be posted without change to http:// 
www.regulations.gov, including any 
personal information provided. For 
additional information on submitting 
comments, see the ‘‘Comments’’ heading 
of the SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION 
section of this document. 
Docket: For access to the docket to 
read background documents or 
comments received, go to http:// 
www.regulations.gov and insert the 
docket number(s), found in brackets in 
the heading of this document, into the 
‘‘Search’’ box and follow the prompts 
and/or go to the Division of Dockets 
Management, 5630 Fishers Lane, rm. 
1061, Rockville, MD 20852. 
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: 
Gerie Voss or Kristin Davis, Center for 
Tobacco Products, Food and Drug 
Administration, 9200 Corporate Blvd., 
Rockville, MD 20850–3229, 877–287– 
1373, gerie.voss@fda.hhs.gov or 
kristin.davis@fda.hhs.gov. 
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 
Table of Contents 
I. Legal Authority and Background 
II. Cigarette Use in the United States and the 
Resulting Health Consequences 
A. Smoking Prevalence Among Adults and 
Children 
B. Initiation of Smoking Among Adults and 
Children 
C. Costs to Society and Health Effects of 
Cigarettes 
1. Costs of Smoking to Society 
2. Negative Health Effects of Cigarettes 
III. Data Concerning Health Warnings 
A. Current Warnings on Cigarette Packages 
and Advertisements Are Inadequate 
1. Current Warnings Have Not Changed in 
More Than Twenty-Five Years 
2. Current Warnings Often Go Unnoticed 
3. Current Warnings Fail to Convey 
Relevant Information in an Effective 
Manner 
B. Larger, Graphic Warnings Communicate 
More Effectively: International 
Experience 
1. Getting Consumers’ Attention 
2. Influencing Consumers’ Awareness of 
Cigarette-Related Health Risks 
3. Impacting Smoking Intentions and 
Behaviors 
C. Benefits of FDA’s Proposed Required 
Warnings 
1. The Addition of Graphic Images Will 
Have a Significant, Positive Impact on 
Public Health 
2. The Revised Textual Statements Will 
Communicate More Effectively 
D. FDA’s Process for Development and 
Plan for Selection of the Required 
Warnings 
IV. Description of Proposed Regulations 
A. Section 1141.1—Scope 
B. Section 1141.3—Definitions 
C. Section 1141.10—Required Warnings 
D. Section 1141.12—Incorporation by 
Reference of Required Warnings 
E. Section 1141.14—Misbranding of 
Cigarettes 
F. Section 1141.16—Disclosures Regarding 
Cessation 
G. Proposed Effective Date 
V. Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 
VI. Executive Order 13132: Federalism 
VII. Environmental Impact 
VIII. Analysis of Impacts 
A. Introduction and Summary 
B. Need for Rule 
C. Benefits 
1. Reduced Smoking Rates 
2. Expected Life-Years Saved 
3. Benefits of Reduced Premature Mortality 
4. Reduced Emphysema 
5. Reduced Fire Costs 
6. Medical Services 
7. Summary of Benefits 
8. Uncertainty Analysis 
D. Costs 
1. Number of Affected Entities 
2. Costs of Changing Cigarette Labels 
3. Market Testing Costs Associated With 
Changing Cigarette Package Labels 
4. Advertising Restrictions: Removal of 
Noncompliant Point-of-Sale Advertising 
5. Government Administration and 
Enforcement Costs 
6. Summary of Costs 
E. Cost-Effectiveness Analysis 
F. Distributional Effects 
1. Tobacco Manufacturers, Distributors, 
and Growers 
2. National and Regional Employment 
Patterns 
3. Retail Sector 
4. Advertising Industry 
5. Excise Tax Revenues 
G. International Effects 
H. Regulatory Alternatives 
1. 24-Month Compliance Period 
2. Six-Month Compliance Period 
3. Summary of Regulatory Alternatives 
I. Impact on Small Entities 
1. Description and Number of Affected 
Small Entities 
2. Description of the Potential Impacts of 
the Final Rule on Small Entities 
3. Alternatives to Minimize the Burden on 
Small Entities 
IX. Comments 
X. References 
I. Legal Authority and Background 
The Tobacco Control Act was enacted 
on June 22, 2009, amending the Federal 
Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FD&C 
Act) and FCLAA, and providing FDA 
with the authority to regulate tobacco 
products (Pub. L. 111–31; 123 Stat. 
1776). Section 201 of the Tobacco 
Control Act modifies section 4 of 
FCLAA (15 U.S.C. 1333) to require that 
nine new health warning statements 
appear on cigarette packages and in 
cigarette advertisements: 
• WARNING: Cigarettes are addictive 
• WARNING: Tobacco smoke can 
harm your children 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:19 Nov 10, 2010 Jkt 223001 PO 00000 Frm 00002 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\12NOP2.SGM 12NOP2em
cd
on
al
d 
on
 D
SK
2B
SO
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
69525 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 218 / Friday, November 12, 2010 / Proposed Rules 
1 Section 202(b) of the Tobacco Control Act 
amends section 4 of FCLAA (15 U.S.C. 1333) to add 
a new subsection (d), ‘‘Change in Required 
Statements.’’ However, section 201 of the Tobacco 
Control Act also amends section 4 of FCLAA to add 
a new subsection (d), ‘‘Graphic Label Statements.’’ 
2 Provisions regarding adjustments to the health 
warnings and other disclosures are also in sections 
4(b)(4) and 4(d) of FCLAA, as amended by section 
201 of the Tobacco Control Act. 
3 There are 168 signatories to the WHO’s 
Framework Convention on Tobacco Control as of 
August 2010. At this time, the United States is a 
signatory but has not ratified this treaty. 
4 Countries/jurisdictions that have implemented 
pictorial warning requirements for tobacco 
packaging include: Australia; Belgium; Brazil; 
Brunei; Canada; Chile; Colombia; Cook Islands; 
Djibouti; Egypt; Hong Kong; India; Iran; Jordan; 
Continued 
• WARNING: Cigarettes cause fatal 
lung disease 
• WARNING: Cigarettes cause cancer 
• WARNING: Cigarettes cause strokes 
and heart disease 
• WARNING: Smoking during 
pregnancy can harm your baby 
• WARNING: Smoking can kill you 
• WARNING: Tobacco smoke causes 
fatal lung disease in nonsmokers 
• WARNING: Quitting smoking now 
greatly reduces serious risks to your 
health. 
Section 201 also states that ‘‘the 
Secretary [of Health and Human 
Services] shall issue regulations that 
require color graphics depicting the 
negative health consequences of 
smoking’’ to accompany the nine new 
health warning statements. 
Section 202(b) of the Tobacco Control 
Act amends section 4 of FCLAA (15 
U.S.C. 1333) to add a new subsection 1 
that permits FDA to, after notice and an 
opportunity for the public to comment, 
adjust the format, type size, color 
graphics, and text of any health warning 
statement if such a change would 
promote greater public understanding of 
the risks associated with the use of 
tobacco products. Similarly, section 
202(b) of the Tobacco Control Act 
permits FDA to adjust the format, type 
size, and text of any other disclosures 
required under the FD&C Act, using the 
same process and upon the same basis 
as for adjusting the health warning 
statements.2 Among the provisions of 
the FD&C Act that provide authority to 
require disclosures is section 906(d) (21 
U.S.C. 387f(d)). This provision 
authorizes FDA to issue regulations 
restricting the sale or distribution of 
cigarettes and other tobacco products, 
including restrictions on the advertising 
and promotion of such products, if FDA 
determines the restriction is appropriate 
for protecting the public health. 
These requirements are supplemented 
by the FD&C Act’s misbranding 
provisions, which require that product 
advertising and labeling include proper 
warnings. For example, a tobacco 
product is deemed misbranded under 
section 903(a)(1) or (a)(7)(A) of the 
FD&C Act (21 U.S.C. 387c(a)(1) or 
(a)(7)(A)) if its labeling or advertising is 
false or misleading in any particular. 
Under section 201(n) of the FD&C Act 
(21 U.S.C. 321(n)), in determining 
whether labeling or advertising is 
misleading, the agency considers, 
among other things, the failure to reveal 
material facts concerning the 
consequences that may result from the 
customary or usual use of the product. 
Similarly, under section 903(a)(8)(B) of 
the FD&C Act (21 U.S.C. 387c(a)(8)(B)), 
a tobacco product is deemed 
misbranded unless the manufacturer, 
packer, or distributor includes in all 
advertisements and other descriptive 
printed matter a brief statement of, 
among other things, the relevant 
warnings. Moreover, a tobacco product 
is deemed misbranded under section 
903(a)(7)(B) of the FD&C Act (21 U.S.C. 
387c(a)(7)(B)) if it is sold or distributed 
in violation of regulations prescribed 
under section 906(d) of the FD&C Act. 
Under section 701(a) of the FD&C Act 
(21 U.S.C. 371(a)), FDA has authority to 
issue regulations for the efficient 
enforcement of the FD&C Act. 
Cigarette smoking kills an estimated 
443,000 Americans each year, most of 
whom began smoking when they were 
under the age of 18 (Ref. 1). Tobacco use 
is the foremost preventable cause of 
premature death in America, and has 
been shown to cause cancer, heart 
disease, and other serious adverse 
health effects (Ref. 2). In enacting the 
Tobacco Control Act, Congress found 
that providing FDA with authority to 
regulate tobacco products, including the 
advertising and promotion of such 
products, would result in significant 
benefits to the American public in 
human and economic terms (section 
2(12) of the Tobacco Control Act). The 
U.S. government has a substantial 
interest in reducing the number of 
Americans, particularly children and 
adolescents, who use cigarettes and 
other tobacco products in order to 
prevent the life-threatening health 
consequences associated with tobacco 
use (section 2(31) of the Tobacco 
Control Act). Virtually all new users of 
tobacco products are minor children 
and a reduction in tobacco use by this 
population alone could significantly 
reduce tobacco-related death and 
disease in the United States (Ref. 3 at 
pp. 5–6). 
In 1964, the Surgeon General of the 
Public Health Service issued the 
landmark report titled ‘‘Smoking and 
Health,’’ which comprehensively 
assessed the available scientific 
evidence relating to the health effects of 
cigarette smoking and concluded that 
cigarette smoking is a health hazard of 
sufficient importance in the United 
States to warrant appropriate remedial 
action. Subsequently, Congress passed 
the Federal Cigarette Labeling and 
Advertising Act (FCLAA) of 1965 (Pub. 
L. 89–92); this legislation required that 
a printed warning appear on cigarette 
packages to warn consumers of the 
potential hazards of cigarette smoking. 
This warning requirement was modified 
by later amendments to FCLAA, 
including the Comprehensive Smoking 
Education Act (CSEA) of 1984 (Pub. L. 
98–474), which extended the warning 
requirement to cigarette advertising. The 
current requirements for cigarette 
package and advertising warning 
statements are set forth in FCLAA. 
Although FCLAA has required the 
inclusion of textual health warnings on 
cigarette packages and in cigarette 
advertisements for many years, there is 
considerable evidence that the current 
warnings are given little attention or 
consideration by viewers (Id. at p. 168). 
These warnings, which have not 
changed in over twenty-five years, have 
been described as ‘‘invisible’’ and fail to 
convey relevant information in an 
effective way (Ref. 4; Ref. 5 at p. 291). 
The current warnings also fail to 
include any graphic component. In 
proposing this current regulation, FDA 
examined the scientific literature and 
found substantial evidence indicating 
that prominent warnings including a 
graphic component would offer 
significant public health benefits over 
the current warnings used in the United 
States (see Section III). FDA also found 
evidence of a strong worldwide 
consensus that effective tobacco health 
warnings should be large and should 
include a graphic image component. For 
example, the World Health 
Organization’s (WHO) Framework 
Convention on Tobacco Control 
(FCTC),3 an evidence-based treaty that 
provides a regulatory strategy for 
addressing the serious negative impacts 
of tobacco products, calls for warnings 
that are rotating, ‘‘large, clear, visible 
and legible.’’ The treaty recommends 
that the warnings occupy 50 percent or 
more of the principal display areas, and 
states that they may be in the form of 
or include pictures or pictograms. WHO 
FCTC art. 11.1(b). Worldwide, over 30 
countries/jurisdictions have 
implemented pictorial warnings on 
tobacco packages and requirements for 
pictorial warnings are pending in 
several other countries/jurisdictions.4 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:19 Nov 10, 2010 Jkt 223001 PO 00000 Frm 00003 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\12NOP2.SGM 12NOP2em
cd
on
al
d 
on
 D
SK
2B
SO
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
69526 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 218 / Friday, November 12, 2010 / Proposed Rules 
Latvia; Malaysia; Mauritius; Mexico; Mongolia; 
New Zealand; Pakistan; Panama; Paraguay; Peru; 
Romania; Singapore; Switzerland; Taiwan; 
Thailand; Turkey; United Kingdom; Uruguay; and 
Venezuela. Countries/jurisdictions with pending 
requirements include: France; Guernsey, Honduras; 
Malta; Norway; Philippines; and Spain. 
Therefore, as directed by section 201 
of the Tobacco Control Act, and in the 
interest of the public health, we are 
proposing to modify the required 
warnings that appear on cigarette 
packages and in cigarette 
advertisements to include color graphics 
depicting the negative health 
consequences of smoking. Specifically, 
we are proposing to add a new part 1141 
to Title 21 of the Code of Federal 
Regulations, which would require new 
warnings on cigarette packages and in 
cigarette advertisements. These new 
required warnings would consist of the 
nine textual warning statements set 
forth in section 201 of the Tobacco 
Control Act accompanied by color 
graphics depicting the negative health 
consequences of smoking. As required 
by section 201 of the Tobacco Control 
Act, the new warnings would appear 
prominently on packages and in 
advertisements, occupying at least 50 
percent of the area of the front and rear 
panels of cigarette packages and 20 
percent of the area of advertisements. 
Under sections 201 and 202 of the 
Tobacco Control Act, FDA may adjust 
the type size, text, and format of the 
textual warning statements. For 
example, under section 4(d) of FCLAA 
(as amended by section 201 of the 
Tobacco Control Act), FDA may adjust 
the type size, text, and format as FDA 
determines appropriate so that both the 
textual warning statements and the 
accompanying graphics are clear, 
conspicuous, legible and appear within 
the specified area. Such adjustments, 
including adjustments to the text of 
some of the textual warning statements, 
are included for some of the new 
warnings FDA is proposing. 
These proposed modifications to the 
warnings currently required in the 
United States would promote greater 
public knowledge of the health risks of 
using cigarettes and would help reduce 
the initiation of smoking and the 
prevalence of cigarette use among 
Americans, and thus help prevent the 
life-threatening health risks posed by 
cigarettes. Specifically, the new 
required warnings are designed to 
clearly and effectively convey the 
negative health consequences of 
smoking on cigarette packages and in 
cigarette advertisements, which would 
help both to discourage nonsmokers, 
including minor children, from 
initiating cigarette use and to encourage 
current smokers to consider cessation to 
greatly reduce the serious risks that 
smoking poses to their health. 
II. Cigarette Use in the United States 
and the Resulting Health Consequences 
In the United States, cigarette 
smoking is the leading cause of 
preventable death and disease (Ref. 6), 
resulting in more deaths each year than 
AIDS, alcohol, illegal drug use, 
homicide, suicide, and motor vehicle 
crashes combined (Ref. 7). Each day, an 
estimated 6,600 Americans (nearly 
4,000 of them under the age of 18) 
become new smokers (Ref. 8 at p. 59), 
and due to the highly addictive nature 
of cigarettes, many will find it difficult 
to quit smoking, despite the severe 
health risks associated with cigarette 
use. Most smokers begin smoking before 
they are 18 years old (Ref. 3 at p. 6)— 
more than 80 percent of established 
adult smokers began smoking before age 
18 (Ref. 9)—and about half of 
adolescents who continue to regularly 
smoke will eventually die from 
smoking-attributable disease (Ref. 10). 
Smoking causes at least 443,000 
premature deaths annually in the 
United States, and each year cigarettes 
are responsible for approximately 5.1 
million years of potential life lost, direct 
health care expenditures of 
approximately $96 billion, and at least 
$96.8 billion in annual productivity 
losses in the United States (Ref. 1). The 
public health benefits that would result 
from reducing the number of Americans 
who smoke, and thus preventing the 
life-threatening consequences associated 
with cigarette use, are substantial. 
A. Smoking Prevalence Among Adults 
and Children 
Adults. A significant percentage of 
U.S. adults are cigarette smokers. For 
example, results from the 2009 National 
Health Interview Survey (NHIS) indicate 
that approximately 46.6 million U.S. 
adults (or 20.6 percent of the adult 
population) are cigarette smokers (Ref. 
6). Among these adult smokers, the vast 
majority—78.1 percent, or 
approximately 36.4 million people— 
smoke every day (Id.). There are also 
subsets of the adult population with 
smoking prevalence rates that are 
significantly higher than the overall 
average. For example, the highest 
prevalence rates have been observed in 
adults with low education levels. Data 
indicate that 49.1 percent of adults with 
a General Education Development 
certificate (GED) and 28.5 percent of 
adults with less than a high school 
diploma were current smokers in 2009, 
compared with 5.6 percent of adults 
with a graduate degree (Id.). 
Children. Among children, data from 
the 2009 Youth Risk Behavior Survey 
(YRBS), a nationally representative 
survey of students in grades 9–12 in the 
United States, showed that almost half 
(46.3 percent) of U.S. high school 
students had tried cigarette smoking, 
and an estimated 19.5 percent of 
students were current cigarette smokers 
(Ref. 11 at p. 10). Of these current 
cigarette smokers, 7.8 percent reported 
that they had smoked more than 10 
cigarettes per day on the days they 
smoked (Id. at p. 11). Overall, 
approximately 7.3 percent of high 
school students in 2009 were frequent 
cigarette users, and 11.2 percent of 
students under the age of 18 had been 
daily smokers at some point during their 
lifetime (Id. at pp. 10–11). Furthermore, 
follow-up studies of youth smokers have 
indicated that a significant number of 
students who are light smokers (i.e., 
students who are not daily smokers or 
who smoke less than 10 cigarettes per 
day) in high school will become heavy 
smokers after leaving high school (Ref. 
12). 
Trends. During the period of 1998– 
2009, the proportion of U.S. adults who 
were current cigarette smokers declined 
from 24.1 percent to 20.6 percent. 
However, the proportion did not decline 
from 2008 to 2009 (20.6 percent in both 
years), and during the five-year period 
of 2005 to 2009, rates showed virtually 
no change (20.9 percent in 2005 and 
20.6 percent in 2009) (Ref. 6). 
For children, data from the YRBS 
show that smoking prevalence rates 
increased rapidly in the early 1990s, 
peaking around 1997. Prevalence then 
declined during the late 1990s, but the 
rate of decline slowed during 2003– 
2009 (Ref. 13). According to 2009 data 
from the University of Michigan’s 
Monitoring the Future survey, cigarette 
smoking rates among 8th, 10th, and 12th 
grade U.S. students declined only 
slightly from 2007 to 2009, at a much 
slower pace than observed previously. 
Specifically, over the two-year time 
period from 2007 to 2009, smoking 
prevalence fell by just 0.6, 0.9 and 1.5 
percentage points among 8th, 10th, and 
12th graders, respectively (Ref. 12). Data 
from this survey also indicate that the 
proportion of students who perceive a 
great risk associated with being a 
smoker has leveled off in the past 
several years (Id.). 
B. Initiation of Smoking Among Adults 
and Children 
As discussed in section II.A, roughly 
one-fifth of Americans are current 
cigarette smokers. Although the 
cigarette industry regularly loses 
customers through user cessation and 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:19 Nov 10, 2010 Jkt 223001 PO 00000 Frm 00004 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\12NOP2.SGM 12NOP2em
cd
on
al
d 
on
 D
SK
2B
SO
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
69527 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 218 / Friday, November 12, 2010 / Proposed Rules 
through deaths caused by smoking, each 
year millions of U.S. adults and 
children become new smokers. 
For example, results from the 2008 
National Survey on Drug Use and 
Health (NSDUH) indicate that the 
number of persons aged 12 or older who 
smoked cigarettes for the first time 
within the past 12 months was 2.4 
million (Ref. 8 at p. 59). This estimate 
was similar to the 2007 estimate (2.2 
million) but statistically significantly 
higher than the estimates for 2002 (1.9 
million), 2003 (2.0 million) and 2004 
(2.1 million) (Id.). This 2008 estimate 
averages out to approximately 6,600 
new cigarette smokers every day (Id.). 
Most of these new cigarette smokers 
(nearly 4,000) were under the age of 18 
(Id.). However, it is also notable that the 
number of people who began smoking at 
age 18 or older showed a significant 
increase over the last several years, 
jumping from approximately 600,000 in 
2002 to 1 million in 2008 (Id. at p. 60). 
In addition, data from the 2008 
NSDUH indicate that almost 1 million 
Americans aged 12 or older had started 
smoking cigarettes daily within the past 
12 months. Of these new daily smokers, 
37.2 percent (350,000 persons) were 
younger than age 18 when they started 
smoking daily. In other words, each day 
in 2008 approximately 1,000 U.S. 
children became new daily smokers 
(Id.). This is particularly concerning 
from a public health perspective, as 
studies suggest that the age individuals 
begin smoking can greatly influence 
how much they smoke per day and how 
long they smoke, which will ultimately 
influence their risk of tobacco-related 
disease and death (Refs. 14 through 16). 
Data from animal studies also suggest 
that nicotine can cause permanent brain 
changes in the adolescent brain that 
lead to addiction and that these changes 
are greater in adolescents than in adults 
(Ref. 17). Furthermore, data from human 
studies indicate that the younger 
smokers start, the more likely they are 
to become addicted (Id.). 
C. Costs to Society and Health Effects of 
Cigarettes 
Cigarettes are responsible for 
premature deaths from a variety of 
diseases, a substantial burden on the 
U.S. healthcare system, and significant 
economic losses to society (Ref. 1). 
Smoking is the primary causal factor for 
at least 30 percent of deaths from 
cancer, including 90 percent of deaths 
from lung cancer, almost 80 percent of 
deaths from chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD), and nearly 
one-fifth of all deaths from 
cardiovascular disease (Ref. 1 and Ref. 
2 at pp. 39 and 43). 
1. Costs of Smoking to Society 
Data from the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention’s (CDC) 
Smoking-Attributable Mortality, 
Morbidity, and Economic Costs 
(SAMMEC) system for 2000–2004, the 
most recent years for which analyses are 
available, indicate that cigarette 
smoking and exposure to cigarette 
smoke are responsible for at least 
443,000 premature deaths each year 
(Ref. 1). For every person who dies from 
smoking, approximately 20 more people 
(8.6 million persons) suffer from at least 
one serious smoking-related illness, 
primarily heart disease and COPD (Ref. 
18). The three leading causes of 
smoking-attributable death for current 
and former smokers were lung cancer, 
ischemic heart disease, and COPD (Ref. 
1). Cigarettes also have significant 
deleterious effects on nonsmokers. For 
example, maternal smoking during 
pregnancy resulted in an estimated 776 
infant deaths annually during 2000– 
2004, and each year an estimated 49,400 
lung cancer and heart disease deaths 
were attributable to exposure to 
secondhand smoke (Id.). 
Overall, each year cigarettes are 
responsible for approximately 5.1 
million years of potential life lost, direct 
health care expenditures of 
approximately $96 billion, and at least 
$96.8 billion in productivity losses due 
to premature deaths in the United States 
(Id.). The total costs of smoking to 
society are much higher, as this estimate 
of productivity losses does not include 
costs associated with smoking-related 
disability, employee absenteeism, or 
costs associated with secondhand- 
smoke attributable disease morbidity 
and mortality (Id.). These health care 
expenditures and productivity losses 
result in a combined economic burden 
from cigarette smoking of approximately 
$193 billion per year (Id.). There are 
also costs to the smoker and his or her 
family. One study estimated that the 
total cost of smoking over a lifetime, 
including private costs to the smoker 
and costs imposed on society (e.g., 
second hand-smoke and costs of 
Medicare, Medicaid, and Social 
Security) come to nearly $40 per pack 
of cigarettes smoked (Ref. 19 at p. 11). 
2. Negative Health Effects of Cigarettes 
The healthcare burdens, productivity 
losses, and deaths attributed to smoking 
are related to an array of diseases and 
health conditions caused by cigarettes. 
Beginning with the landmark 1964 
report ‘‘Smoking and Health,’’ the U.S. 
Surgeon General has issued a series of 
reports addressing the health 
consequences of smoking and nicotine 
addiction. According to the most recent 
Surgeon General’s Report, ‘‘The Health 
Consequences of Smoking,’’ which 
summarizes thousands of peer-reviewed 
scientific studies and is itself peer- 
reviewed, smoking remains the leading 
preventable cause of death in the United 
States, and cigarettes have been shown 
to cause an ever-expanding number of 
diseases and health conditions (Ref. 2 at 
pp. 9 and 25). As stated in the 2004 
Report, ‘‘[s]moking harms nearly every 
organ of the body, causing many 
diseases and reducing the health of 
smokers in general * * * [and] 
[q]uitting smoking has immediate as 
well as long-term benefits, reducing 
risks for diseases caused by smoking 
and improving health in general’’ (Id. at 
p. 25). The following discussion 
presents a summary of some of the 
diseases and conditions caused by 
cigarettes, and of the impact smoking 
cessation has on some of these 
conditions. 
Cancer. Cigarette smoking has long 
been tied to a variety of cancers. For 
example, there is overwhelming 
evidence that smoking causes lung 
cancer, and that the worldwide 
epidemic of lung cancer is attributable 
largely to smoking (Id. at p. 43). Studies 
indicate that the risk for developing 
lung cancer can be 20 or more times 
higher for smokers compared to lifelong 
nonsmokers, and the risk of lung cancer 
increases in smokers with the duration 
of smoking and the number of cigarettes 
smoked (Id.). There are extensive data 
showing that quitting smoking decreases 
the risk of lung cancer, and that this risk 
continues to decline as the duration of 
not smoking increases in comparison to 
the risk among continuing smokers (Id. 
at p. 49). However, the risk does not 
decline to the level of risk for those who 
have never smoked, even after 15 to 20 
years of not smoking (Id. at p. 43). 
It also has been established for some 
time that cigarette smoking also causes 
a variety of other cancers, including 
laryngeal cancer, oral cavity and 
pharyngeal cancers, esophageal cancer, 
and bladder cancer (Id. at pp. 62, 67, 
116, and 167). Furthermore, smoking 
has also been shown to cause pancreatic 
cancer, kidney cancer, stomach cancer, 
cervical cancer, and acute myeloid 
leukemia (Id. at p. 25). 
For all of these cancers, increasing 
smoking prevention and cessation 
would cause a significant decrease in 
the risk (Id. at ch. 2). For example, 
smoking cessation halves the risk for 
cancers of the oral cavity and esophagus 
as soon as five years after cessation (Id. 
at p. 117). 
Cardiovascular disease. Smoking is 
causally related to all of the major 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:19 Nov 10, 2010 Jkt 223001 PO 00000 Frm 00005 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\12NOP2.SGM 12NOP2em
cd
on
al
d 
on
 D
SK
2B
SO
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
69528 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 218 / Friday, November 12, 2010 / Proposed Rules 
clinical cardiovascular diseases, with 
higher levels of smoking and longer 
duration of smoking increasing the risk 
of disease (Id. at p. 397). Heart disease 
and stroke are the main types of 
cardiovascular disease caused by 
smoking and represent the first and 
third leading causes of death in the 
United States (Id. at p. 363). Studies 
have shown that smokers have a 70 
percent greater death rate from coronary 
heart disease than nonsmokers, a 
twofold to fourfold greater incidence of 
coronary heart disease, and a twofold to 
fourfold greater risk of sudden death 
than nonsmokers (Ref. 20 at pp. 58–59). 
The beneficial impact of smoking 
cessation on these risks has also been 
well established. For example, one year 
after quitting smoking, a former 
smoker’s additional risk of heart disease 
compared to a person who has never 
smoked is reduced by about half and, 
after 15 years of abstinence, this risk is 
similar to that of a person who never 
smoked (Ref. 2 at p. 363). 
Current smoking is also associated 
with a twofold to fourfold increase in 
the risk of stroke; smoking cessation 
steadily decreases this risk and, after 5 
to 15 years of not smoking, the risk of 
stroke is indistinguishable from that for 
lifetime nonsmokers (Id. at p. 394). 
Smoking has also been shown to 
cause abdominal aortic aneurysm. 
Studies have shown that the risk of 
death from abdominal aortic aneurysm 
was increased more than fourfold in 
current smokers and twofold in former 
smokers; smoking is one of the few 
avoidable causes of this frequently fatal 
condition (Id. at pp. 396–97). 
Respiratory diseases. Smoking has 
negative effects on the entire lung—it 
impairs lung defenses against infection 
and causes the sustained lung injury 
that leads to COPD (Id. at p. 423). 
Cigarettes have been shown to cause a 
range of acute respiratory illnesses, 
including increased risk of pneumonia, 
and chronic respiratory diseases, which 
are leading causes of illness and death 
in the United States and worldwide (Id. 
at pp. 423, 508–509). 
For example, cigarette smoking is the 
leading cause of COPD in the United 
States, and this major public health 
problem could be almost completely 
prevented by smoking abstinence (Id. at 
p. 501). Although smoking cessation 
reduces the risk of COPD, the risk of 
COPD mortality among former smokers, 
even after 20 years or more of 
abstinence, remains elevated compared 
with the risk among people who have 
never smoked (Id.). 
Maternal smoking during pregnancy 
causes a reduction in lung function in 
infants, and children who smoke 
experience impaired lung growth and an 
early onset of lung function decline (Id. 
at pp. 508–509). Smoking during 
adulthood also leads to a premature 
onset of accelerated age-related decline 
in lung function, while smoking 
cessation can return the rate of lung 
function decline to that of persons who 
have never smoked (Id. at pp. 480 and 
509). Results from several investigations 
suggest that the benefits of smoking 
cessation for FEV1 decline (a measure of 
the air capacity of the lungs) are greatest 
for persons who stop smoking at 
younger ages (Id. at p. 480). 
Smoking also results in poor asthma 
control and it causes a range of 
respiratory symptoms in children, 
adolescents, and adults, including 
coughing, phlegm, wheezing, and 
shortness of breath (Id. at p. 509). 
Smoking cessation reduces the rates of 
these respiratory symptoms and of 
respiratory infections (Id. at p. 467). 
Reproductive effects. Smoking has 
well-documented negative effects on 
fertility, on pregnancies, and on infants 
and children born to women who 
smoke. For example, studies show that 
women who smoke have reduced 
fertility (Id. at p. 541). Women who 
smoke during pregnancy are more likely 
to experience premature rupture of the 
membranes, placenta previa, and 
placental abruption (Id. at p. 576). 
Smoking also increases rates of preterm 
delivery and shortened gestation, and 
studies have indicated that women who 
smoke are twice as likely to have low 
birth weight infants as women who do 
not smoke (Id. at pp. 576 and 569). 
Smoking also causes an increased risk of 
sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS) 
for infants whose mothers smoke during 
and after pregnancy (Id. at pp. 587 and 
601). 
Other effects. Smoking has been 
shown to have a variety of other 
negative health effects. For example, 
cigarette smokers have poorer overall 
health status compared to nonsmokers; 
this may manifest as increased 
absenteeism from work and increased 
use of medical care services (Id. at p. 
818). Smokers have an increased risk of 
adverse surgical outcomes related to 
wound healing and respiratory 
complications compared to nonsmokers 
(Id.). In postmenopausal women who 
smoke, smoking is associated with low 
bone density (Id. at p. 716). Smokers are 
also at an increased risk for hip 
fractures, which account for a 
significant proportion of the morbidity 
and mortality associated with 
osteoporosis (Id. at pp. 717–719). 
Smoking also increases the risk for 
periodontitis, cataract, and for the 
occurrence of peptic ulcer disease in 
persons who are Helicobacter pylori 
positive (Id. at pp. 736, 777, 780 and 
813). Furthermore, smokers are at a 
greater risk of dying from peptic ulcer 
disease than nonsmokers (Id. at p. 807). 
Addiction. Nicotine addiction is 
another negative effect of cigarette 
smoking. Nicotine is the primary 
chemical compound in tobacco that 
causes addiction, and the magnitude of 
public health harm caused by cigarettes 
is inextricably linked to the addictive 
nature of these products (Ref. 21 at 
p. 14; Ref. 5 at p. xi). Nicotine is 
psychoactive (mood altering) and can 
provide pleasurable effects; it also 
causes physical dependence 
characterized by withdrawal symptoms 
that usually accompany nicotine 
abstinence (Ref. 21 at p. 14). The 
pharmacologic and behavioral processes 
that determine tobacco addiction are 
similar to those that determine 
addiction to drugs such as heroin and 
cocaine (Id. at p. 9). Smokers develop 
tolerance to the effects of nicotine over 
time as well as a physical dependence 
on these effects, and as a result need 
greater amounts of nicotine over time to 
produce the same effects; thus smokers 
tend to smoke more over time to avoid 
withdrawal symptoms (Id. at pp. 50, 
197–98). Withdrawal symptoms are 
common among persons attempting to 
quit smoking—in one study, 78 percent 
of subjects reported significant 
withdrawal symptoms (Id. at pp. 201– 
202). 
In addition to physical dependence, 
nicotine addiction also results in 
conditioned behavior in smokers in 
response to situations and 
environmental stimuli associated with 
cigarette use. Smokers typically use 
cigarettes in certain patterns—e.g., upon 
waking in the morning, after a meal, 
with a cup of coffee or an alcoholic 
beverage—and this patterned behavior 
is strongly reinforced by the pleasurable 
effects of nicotine (Id. at pp. 306–308; 
Ref. 17). Other stimuli associated with 
smoking itself, such as the smell of 
cigarette smoke or the sight of cigarette- 
associated paraphernalia, also become 
part of the conditioning process by 
repeated association with the desired 
physiological effects of nicotine (Ref. 21 
at p. 307; Ref. 17). As these processes 
repeat over time as a result of regular 
smoking, these situations and stimuli 
become a powerful cue to smoke due to 
their association with the rewarding 
effects of nicotine, and the desire to 
smoke triggered by these situations can 
persist long after withdrawal symptoms 
subside (Ref. 17). 
As a result of nicotine addiction, only 
a minority of smokers can achieve 
permanent abstinence in an initial quit 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:19 Nov 10, 2010 Jkt 223001 PO 00000 Frm 00006 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\12NOP2.SGM 12NOP2em
cd
on
al
d 
on
 D
SK
2B
SO
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
69529 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 218 / Friday, November 12, 2010 / Proposed Rules 
attempt. There are data suggesting that 
more than 70 percent of smokers in the 
United States report that they want to 
quit, and approximately 44 percent 
report that they try to quit each year 
(Ref. 19 at p. 15). This estimate is likely 
a significant underestimate of the actual 
number of quit attempts because 
unsuccessful quit attempts, particularly 
if short-lived or in the past, are often not 
reported in surveys. One study reported 
that at three months, 90.1 percent of 
quit attempts lasting less than one day, 
63.7 percent of those lasting between a 
day and one week, and 38.9 percent of 
those lasting between one week and one 
month failed to be reported to 
researchers conducting surveys (Ref. 
22). Many of the quit attempts that are 
reported are unsuccessful. For example, 
among the 19 million adults who 
reported attempting to quit in 2005, 
epidemiologic data suggest that only 4 
to 7 percent were successful (Ref. 19 at 
p. 15). Similarly, the Institute of 
Medicine (IOM), considering data for 
2004, found that although 
approximately 40.5 percent of adult 
smokers reported attempting to quit in 
that year, only between 3 and 5 percent 
were successful (Ref. 5 at p. 82). 
Furthermore, adults with education 
levels at or below the equivalent of a 
high school diploma have the highest 
smoking prevalence levels but the 
lowest quit ratios (i.e., the ratio of 
persons who have smoked at least 100 
cigarettes during their lifetime but do 
not currently smoke to persons who 
report smoking at least 100 cigarettes 
during their lifetime) (Ref. 23). 
Adolescents also experience low 
success rates when attempting to quit. 
Most Americans who use tobacco 
products begin using when they are 
under the age of 18 and become 
addicted before reaching the age of 18 
(Refs. 3 and 7). Although many 
adolescents believe ‘‘they can quit 
[smoking] at any time and therefore 
avoid addiction,’’ nicotine dependence 
can be rapidly established (Ref. 5 at p. 
89; see also Ref. 19 at p. 158). Research 
has shown that some adolescents report 
symptoms of withdrawal and craving 
within days or weeks of beginning to 
smoke (Ref. 24). As a result, many 
adolescents are nicotine dependent 
despite their relatively short smoking 
histories (Ref. 25). An analysis of data 
from the 2007 YRBS found that 60.9 
percent of high school students who 
ever smoked cigarettes daily tried to 
quit smoking, but only 12.2 percent 
were successful (Id.). Research among 
adolescents also highlights their poor 
understanding of the difficulty of 
quitting smoking—for example, one 
study found that only 3 percent of 12th 
grade daily smokers estimated that they 
would still be smoking in 5 years, while 
in reality 63 percent of this population 
is still smoking daily 7 to 9 years later 
(Ref. 5 at p. 91). 
Benefits of reduced prevalence. 
Dramatic declines in the deaths caused 
by the conditions discussed above can 
be achieved by further reducing 
smoking prevalence rates. Smoking 
cessation has major and immediate 
health benefits for men and women of 
all ages, regardless of health status (Ref. 
26 at p. i). Smoking cessation decreases 
the risk of the health consequences of 
smoking, and former smokers live 
longer than continuing smokers. For 
example, persons who quit smoking 
before age 50 have one-half the risk of 
dying in the next 15 years compared 
with continuing smokers (Id. at p. v). 
More importantly, preventing 
nonsmokers, particularly children, from 
starting smoking in the first instance 
would allow them to avoid nicotine 
addiction and the severe adverse health 
consequences of smoking. Preventing 
initiation would result in enormous 
public health benefits. As Congress 
found when enacting the Tobacco 
Control Act, ‘‘reducing the use of 
tobacco by minors by 50 percent would 
prevent well over 10,000,000 of today’s 
children from becoming regular, daily 
smokers, saving over 3,000,000 of them 
from premature death due to tobacco- 
induced disease. Such a reduction in 
youth smoking would also result in 
approximately $75,000,000,000 in 
savings attributable to reduced health 
care costs’’ (section 2(14) of the Tobacco 
Control Act). 
III. Data Concerning Health Warnings 
A. Current Warnings on Cigarette 
Packages and Advertisements Are 
Inadequate 
Section 201 of the Tobacco Control 
Act requires FDA to issue regulations 
mandating the use of color graphics 
depicting the negative health 
consequences of smoking to accompany 
the nine warning statements that are 
specified in section 4(a)(1) of FCLAA 
(15 U.S.C. 1333(a)(1)). The warning 
statements must be randomly displayed 
(i.e., in each 12-month period, all of the 
different warnings must appear in as 
equal a number of times as is possible 
on each brand of the product and be 
randomly distributed in all areas of the 
United States in which the product is 
marketed) on cigarette packages and 
rotated quarterly in alternating sequence 
in cigarette advertisements, as provided 
by sections 4(c)(1) and 4(c)(2) of FCLAA 
(15 U.S.C. 1333(c)(1), (2)), as amended 
by the Tobacco Control Act. Congress 
directed that stronger and larger 
warning statements, accompanied by 
graphics, would replace the current text- 
only requirements. Data from studies 
indicate the current warnings on 
cigarette packages and advertisements 
are ineffective at communicating health 
risk information to consumers. 
Cigarette packages and advertisements 
can be effective channels for 
communication of important health 
information. The warning on a cigarette 
package can provide a clear, visible 
vehicle to communicate risk at the most 
crucial time for smokers and potential 
smokers. Pack-a-day smokers are 
potentially exposed to warnings more 
than 7,000 times per year (Refs. 27–29). 
When utilized effectively, cigarette 
packages and advertisements can serve 
as an important channel for 
communicating health information to 
broad national audiences that include 
both smokers and nonsmokers. 
The inclusion of strong health 
warnings on packages and in 
advertisements can thus provide a 
critical opportunity to educate 
consumers about the health risks of 
cigarettes, support intentions among 
current smokers who want to quit or 
decrease cigarette consumption, and 
discourage nonsmokers, particularly 
youth, from initiating cigarette use. 
Prominent displays of warnings increase 
their effectiveness; larger warnings, with 
pictures, are more likely to be noticed 
by consumers, communicate 
information about health risks to 
consumers, and reinforce intentions 
among tobacco users who want to quit 
(Ref. 30). 
However, cigarette warnings in the 
United States have not been changed or 
improved in more than 25 years. The 
unchanging nature of these warnings, as 
well as their relatively small size and 
lack of a graphic image component, 
severely impairs their ability to 
effectively communicate to consumers. 
Research has repeatedly illustrated that 
the current warnings used in the United 
States frequently go unnoticed or fail to 
convey relevant information regarding 
health risks. 
1. Current Warnings Have Not Changed 
in More Than Twenty-Five Years 
In response to the Surgeon General’s 
first major report on smoking and health 
in 1964, Congress passed FCLAA to 
require warning labels on all cigarette 
packages. The warning, which was 
required to be conspicuous and legible, 
was written in small print and located 
on one of the side panels of each 
cigarette package. It stated ‘‘CAUTION: 
Cigarette Smoking May Be Hazardous to 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:19 Nov 10, 2010 Jkt 223001 PO 00000 Frm 00007 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\12NOP2.SGM 12NOP2em
cd
on
al
d 
on
 D
SK
2B
SO
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
69530 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 218 / Friday, November 12, 2010 / Proposed Rules 
5 Slightly different health warnings were required 
on outdoor billboard advertisements. 
Your Health.’’ This language appeared 
on all cigarette packs sold from January 
1, 1966, through October 31, 1970. In 
1969, Congress passed the Public Health 
Cigarette Smoking Act (Public Law 91– 
222), which slightly modified the 
warning statement on cigarette 
packages, but did not yet require any 
warnings on cigarette advertisements. 
The new warning language, ‘‘Warning: 
The Surgeon General Has Determined 
That Cigarette Smoking Is Dangerous to 
Health,’’ appeared on cigarette packages 
sold in the United States from 
November 1, 1970, through October 11, 
1985. In 1972, the Federal Trade 
Commission (FTC) issued consent 
orders requiring six major cigarette 
manufacturers and distributors to 
include in all their cigarette 
advertisements a clear and conspicuous 
disclosure of the warning required to be 
on packages (Ref. 31 at 460–65). 
In 1981, the FTC issued a report to 
Congress that concluded that the then- 
current health warning labels had little 
effect on public awareness and attitudes 
toward smoking. The FTC stated that 
the existing warning likely was 
ineffective because it ‘‘(1) is overexposed 
and worn out, (2) lacks novelty, (3) is 
too abstract, and (4) lacks personal 
relevance’’ (Ref. 32 at pp. 7–16). 
Subsequently, Congress again 
modified cigarette warnings by passing 
the CSEA, which required the following 
four rotational health warnings on 
packages and advertisements 5: 
• ‘‘SURGEON GENERAL’S 
WARNING: Smoking Causes Lung 
Cancer, Heart Disease, Emphysema, and 
May Complicate Pregnancy.’’ 
• ‘‘SURGEON GENERAL’S 
WARNING: Quitting Smoking Now 
Greatly Reduces Serious Risks to Your 
Health.’’ 
• ‘‘SURGEON GENERAL’S 
WARNING: Smoking by Pregnant 
Women May Result in Fetal Injury, 
Premature Birth and Low Birth Weight.’’ 
• ‘‘SURGEON GENERAL’S 
WARNING: Cigarette Smoke Contains 
Carbon Monoxide.’’ 
In addition, the law established the 
location and format for these warning 
statements and mandated that the 
warnings be rotated quarterly, which 
helped keep them from becoming stale. 
Despite a FTC recommendation to 
change the size and shape of warnings, 
Congress retained the size and 
rectangular format of previous warnings. 
More than twenty-five years have 
passed since these last changes, and 
there is a substantial body of evidence 
that these warnings do not effectively 
communicate information about the 
adverse health effects of smoking to the 
American public, as discussed in more 
detail below. Given the extreme hazards 
cigarettes pose to the public health, the 
revised warnings required under section 
4 of FCLAA (15 U.S.C. 1333) and 
provided in this proposed rule are 
critical to the effective communication 
of the health risks of smoking, and 
should encourage current smokers to 
consider cessation and discourage 
nonsmokers from initiating use of 
cigarettes. 
2. Current Warnings Often Go 
Unnoticed 
The CSEA requires the current 
warnings to be ‘‘conspicuous and 
legible’’ with the same package location 
and font size required on the date of 
enactment (i.e., October 12, 1984). 
However, researchers have found that 
these health warnings go largely 
unnoticed and unconsidered by both 
smokers and nonsmokers. For example, 
a major study into tobacco policy in the 
United States by the IOM in 2007 
concluded that U.S. package warnings 
are both ‘‘unnoticed and stale’’ (Ref. 5 at 
p. 291). The Chair of the IOM’s 
Committee on Reducing Tobacco Use 
has described the warnings on cigarette 
packs as ‘‘invisible’’ (Ref. 4). 
Research regarding warning 
statements in cigarette advertisements 
has shown similar results. For example, 
one study of the recall and eye-tracking 
of adolescents viewing tobacco 
advertisements found: 43.6 percent of 
adolescents did not even look at the 
warning statement included in the 
advertisement; just 36.7 percent looked 
at the warning long enough to read any 
of its words; and the average viewing of 
the warning only accounted for 8 
percent of the total viewing time (Ref. 
33). Researchers in this study also 
determined that adolescents are unable 
to recall the content of the current 
cigarette warnings or to correctly 
recognize the warnings from a list, 
indicating that the current warnings are 
likely to be ineffective among younger 
consumers (Id.). 
Another study of adolescents also 
found that they are not seeing, reading, 
and remembering health warnings on 
cigarette packages and advertisements 
(Ref. 34). In this study of ninth-grade 
students, only 32 percent of regular 
smokers recalled seeing one of the 
current warnings which states: ‘‘Quitting 
Smoking Now Greatly Reduces Serious 
Risks To Your Health’’ (Id.). In addition, 
almost 20 percent incorrectly reported 
having seen a simulated health warning 
that is not among one of the four current 
required warnings (Id.). 
Data from a 1989 study indicate that 
consumers also fail to notice or read 
health warnings on outdoor billboards 
and taxicab cigarette advertisements 
(though these advertising media are no 
longer in common use). According to 
this study, which was published in the 
Journal of the American Medical 
Association, drivers only read the entire 
warning message on 5 percent of 
highway billboard advertisements and 
were only able to fully read the health 
warning on 18 of the 39 street 
advertisements used in this study (Ref. 
35). Participants were unable to read, 
even partially, the Surgeon General’s 
warnings in any of the 47 taxicab 
advertisements used in this study (Id.). 
Yet, those same consumers were able to 
identify the brand name and imagery on 
100 percent of the highway billboards 
(Id.). Likewise, these participants were 
able to identify the brand name in 100 
percent and the imagery in 95 percent 
of the taxicab advertisements (Id.). 
These results indicate that the current 
warnings are not appropriately 
conspicuous in advertisements 
compared to the rest of the advertising 
message, as discussed in more detail 
below. 
3. Current Warnings Fail To Convey 
Relevant Information in an Effective 
Manner 
Even when consumers notice and 
contemplate the current health warnings 
on cigarette packages and in 
advertisements, there is clear evidence 
that these warnings fail to appropriately 
convey crucial information such as the 
nature and extent of the health risks 
associated with smoking cigarettes. The 
current small, wordy text-based 
messages are ambiguous, providing less 
health information than is provided 
regarding many other consumer goods 
that have significantly less harmful 
impact on people’s health (Ref. 36). 
In its 2007 Report, the IOM concluded 
that the current U.S. warnings fail to 
convey relevant health information in 
an effective way (Ref. 5 at p. 291). The 
IOM cited an International Tobacco 
Control Policy Evaluation Study, which 
found that 85 percent of Canadian 
respondents cited packages (which, in 
Canada, contain prominent text and 
graphic health warnings) as a source of 
health information, while only 47 
percent of U.S. smokers cited packages 
as a health information source (Id. at 
294, citing Ref. 37). 
Studies also have shown that the 
current warnings do not motivate 
consumers to look at them long enough 
to consider the concept being 
communicated. For example, 
researchers have found that the warning 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:19 Nov 10, 2010 Jkt 223001 PO 00000 Frm 00008 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\12NOP2.SGM 12NOP2em
cd
on
al
d 
on
 D
SK
2B
SO
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
69531 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 218 / Friday, November 12, 2010 / Proposed Rules 
statements fail to attract attention or to 
make the consumer appropriately aware 
of the health risks of smoking (Ref. 38). 
In a study of U.S. and Canadian smokers 
and nonsmokers, researchers found that 
participants voluntarily examined 
warnings on Canadian packages, which 
include prominent text and graphics, for 
longer durations than U.S. package 
warnings, because the current text-only 
messages used in the United States are 
not memorable for consumers (Id.). The 
mere textual presentation of vague 
hazard information in the current U.S. 
warnings is not sufficient to motivate 
perceptions of risk (Id.). 
The content and format of the current 
warnings have failed to successfully 
draw and hold consumers’ attention, 
especially when placed in competition 
with the other text, images, and graphics 
that cigarette companies have used on 
packaging and in advertising, which 
have been thoroughly tested, regularly 
updated, and artfully crafted by tobacco 
companies. According to the most 
recent data from the FTC, tobacco 
companies spent approximately $12.49 
billion on advertising and promotion in 
2006 (Ref. 39 at p. 1). Tobacco 
companies frequently have employed 
marketing and advertising experts to 
craft campaigns with messages targeted 
to certain demographics (Ref. 40 at p. 7). 
The messages developed by companies 
in cigarette advertisements cover 96 
percent of the space, are continuously 
updated to incorporate current trends, 
and are targeted based on market 
research. In contrast, the current health 
warnings cover only 4 percent of 
advertising space, are solely textual, are 
not targeted to any population group, 
and consist of only four rotating 
messages that have not been updated for 
more than two and a half decades. On 
cigarette packages, these warnings 
appear only on one side panel. As a 
result, the important health messages 
frequently are functionally invisible in 
comparison to the rest of the 
advertisement and package (Ref. 33 at p. 
88). 
Moreover, even if consumers notice 
the current warnings, those with less 
education may not be able to adequately 
comprehend the text-only messages. In 
its 2007 Report, the IOM expressed 
concern about the ability of consumers 
with less education to recall the 
information included in text-based 
messages (Ref. 5 at p. 295). The IOM 
cited a study of Canadian smokers’ 
knowledge about the country’s prior 
warning requirements, which, like the 
current U.S. health warnings, only 
contained four textual warning 
statements. In that study, researchers 
noted that comparatively few women 
with lower educational attainment were 
aware of messages warning of the 
impacts of smoking on life expectancy, 
heart disease, or pregnancy (Ref. 41). 
Because the current U.S. smoking 
population has various levels of 
education (including a high percentage 
of people with low educational 
attainment) and includes teenagers (who 
have yet to complete their education), 
the current text-only warnings are 
inadequate. 
B. Larger, Graphic Warnings 
Communicate More Effectively: 
International Experience 
In 2001, Canada introduced graphic 
health warnings depicting the adverse 
health consequences of smoking on the 
upper 50 percent of the two primary 
panels of cigarette packages. Those 
warnings, like the warnings proposed 
here, include a photograph or other 
image, a marker word ‘‘WARNING,’’ and 
a warning statement. By mid-2009, 28 
countries also required graphic 
warnings and more countries are 
planning to do so. 
In its 2007 Report, the IOM concludes 
that the available scientific evidence 
indicates that larger, graphic health 
warnings would promote greater public 
knowledge of the health risks of using 
tobacco and would help reduce 
consumption (Ref. 5 at p. 295). 
Similarly, an article published by WHO 
concludes that, taken as a whole, the 
research on graphic health warnings 
show that they are (1) more likely to be 
noticed than text-only warnings, (2) 
more effective for educating smokers 
about the health risks of smoking and 
for increasing the time smokers spend 
thinking about the health risks, and (3) 
associated with increased motivation to 
quit smoking (Ref. 42). 
1. Getting Consumers’ Attention 
Several design features are associated 
with greater salience (i.e., noticeability 
and readability) of health warnings, 
including the size and position of 
warnings on the cigarette package. 
Smokers are more likely to recall larger 
warnings, as well as warnings that 
appear on the front of packages (Ref. 5 
at p. C–3). Warnings that include 
pictures or graphics likewise are more 
noticeable and more likely to be recalled 
than text-only warnings (Id. at p. C–4). 
In Canada, awareness of warnings on 
cigarette packages was almost universal 
among smokers and very high even 
among nonsmokers after that country 
required cigarette packages to display 
large, graphic warnings on the front and 
rear panels. In a 2001 cross-sectional 
survey sponsored by the Canadian 
Cancer Society, 90 percent of Canadian 
smokers and 49 percent of nonsmokers 
noticed changes to the Canadian health 
warnings after the introduction of 
pictorial warnings (Ref. 43). Similarly, a 
survey of youth sponsored by Health 
Canada showed that 73 percent of those 
who have never smoked, 86 percent of 
‘‘puffers’’ (i.e., those who had tried 
smoking but never smoked a whole 
cigarette), and 90 percent of those who 
have smoked beyond puffing reported 
seeing health warnings on cigarette 
packages in 2002, a year after the 
introduction of graphic warnings in 
Canada (Ref. 44). In a study of young 
adults, 98.5 percent of smokers, 88.9 
percent of occasional smokers, and 67.5 
percent of those who have never 
smoked reported that they were aware 
of the Canadian graphic health warnings 
(Ref. 45). 
Survey evidence also shows that 
awareness of health warnings on 
cigarette packages increased 
significantly after Australia required 
large, graphic warnings in 2006. In one 
study, smokers were more likely to 
report that over the past month they 
noticed the enhanced warnings and read 
or looked closely at them compared to 
the old warnings (Ref. 46). Among 
students in year levels 8 to 12 in 
Melbourne, cognitive processing of 
cigarette warnings (i.e., reading, 
attending to, thinking and talking about 
the warnings) increased in the year that 
Australia adopted graphic warnings 
(Ref. 47). Developmental focus group 
research conducted for Australia as it 
considered whether to require graphic 
warnings similarly reported that graphic 
warnings on cigarette packs were 
potentially more likely to help people 
remember the health effects and 
warnings (Ref. 48). 
Experimental studies also indicate 
that requiring large, graphic warnings 
would significantly increase the 
salience of health warnings on cigarette 
packages. In one experimental study, 
U.S. college students were shown 
images of the Canadian cigarette 
warnings and the current warnings 
appearing on cigarette packs sold in the 
United States. Compared to the U.S. 
warnings, the Canadian graphic 
warnings significantly increased aided 
recall of the warnings, increased depth 
of message processing, and increased 
the perceived strength of the message 
(Ref. 49). Similarly, in focus group 
research conducted among young adults 
in the United States, participants 
reported that the Canadian warnings 
were more visible and more informative 
than the warnings appearing on 
cigarette packages in the United States 
(Ref. 50). 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:19 Nov 10, 2010 Jkt 223001 PO 00000 Frm 00009 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\12NOP2.SGM 12NOP2em
cd
on
al
d 
on
 D
SK
2B
SO
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
69532 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 218 / Friday, November 12, 2010 / Proposed Rules 
2. Influencing Consumers’ Awareness of 
Cigarette-Related Health Risks 
Large, pictorial warnings graphically 
convey the harm and danger that 
tobacco use causes, eliciting an 
immediate impact. Effective 
communication of the health risks 
associated with cigarette use is critical 
from a public health perspective, as 
smokers who perceive a greater health 
risk from smoking are more likely to 
want to quit and to be successful in 
their quit attempts (Ref. 37). National 
surveys conducted on behalf of Health 
Canada indicate that approximately 95 
percent of youth smokers and 75 
percent of adult smokers report that the 
Canadian pictorial warnings have been 
effective in providing them with 
important health information (Ref. 5 at 
p. 294). The 2001 survey conducted by 
the Canadian Cancer Society found that 
the country’s pictorial warnings, which 
had recently been introduced, resulted 
in 58 percent of smokers reporting that 
they thought about the health effects of 
smoking more frequently than 
previously (Ref. 43). Among Canadian 
adult smokers in Ontario, 51 percent of 
study participants reported that the 
pictorial warnings made them think 
about the health effects of smoking (Ref. 
51). Canadian smokers were more likely 
to report cigarette packages as a source 
of information about the health risks of 
smoking than smokers in the United 
States and other countries with text- 
only warnings (Ref. 37). 
Similarly, a study conducted for 
officials in Australia found that graphic 
warnings increased participants’ 
knowledge and awareness of the health 
risks of smoking, especially among 
current smokers and recent quitters (Ref. 
52). A street intercept study in Australia 
suggests that graphic warnings may also 
increase smokers’ perceptions of their 
personal risks of smoking. In that study, 
51 percent of participants stated that the 
graphic warnings on cigarette packs 
increased their perceived risk of dying 
from smoking (Ref. 53). 
Graphic warnings appear to influence 
risk perceptions among youth as well as 
adults. In a cross-sectional survey of 
middle and high school students in 
Greece, participants were shown several 
graphic warnings prepared by the 
European Union as well as text-only 
warnings. Study participants 
consistently selected the graphic 
warnings as more effective in making 
them think about the effects of smoking 
on health (Ref. 54). Similarly, in a youth 
survey conducted by Health Canada, 
approximately two-thirds of youth 
nonsmokers reported looking at the 
pictorial warnings at least once a week 
and, as indicated above, 95 percent 
agreed that the warnings had been 
effective in providing them with 
important information about the health 
effects of smoking (Ref. 5 at p. C–5). 
In an Internet-based study of current 
and former young adult smokers in the 
United States, the Canadian graphic 
warnings were rated as significantly 
more effective than the current U.S. 
warnings on cigarette packs for 
conveying concerns about the health 
risks of smoking (Ref. 55). 
3. Impacting Smoking Intentions and 
Behaviors 
In addition to increasing consumer 
awareness of the health risks of 
smoking, the proposed graphic warnings 
also seek to impact changes in smoking 
behavior. There are some studies 
indicating that large, graphic warnings 
increase smokers’ intentions to quit 
smoking or motivate them to quit 
smoking. 
The 2001 survey sponsored by the 
Canadian Cancer Society shows that 44 
percent of adult smokers stated that the 
Canadian graphic health warnings 
increased their motivation to quit 
smoking (Ref. 43). In another study of 
Canadian young adults (ages 20 to 24), 
37 percent of male participants and 48 
percent of female participants reported 
that the warnings on cigarette packs led 
them to think about quitting smoking 
(Ref. 45). In this same study, 36 percent 
of male participants and 34 percent of 
female participants also indicated that 
the cigarette warnings might make 
young people less likely to start 
smoking. Some studies indicate that 
exposure to graphic warnings increases 
quit intentions among youth smokers as 
well. A study of Australian adolescents 
shows that experimental and 
established youth smokers thought more 
about quitting after the introduction of 
graphic warnings in Australia (Ref. 47). 
There is also evidence suggesting that 
graphic warnings may be more effective 
at preventing youth initiation than text- 
only warnings. For example, in a cross- 
sectional survey of middle and high 
school students in Greece where 
participants were shown several graphic 
warnings prepared by the European 
Union as well as text-only warnings, the 
adolescents rated the graphic warning 
labels as more effective in preventing 
them from smoking (Ref. 54). 
A few studies also indicate that large 
graphic health warnings may increase 
quit attempts. In Canada, smokers who 
quit smoking after the introduction of 
graphic warnings were 2.78 times more 
likely to identify health warnings as a 
motivation for their quitting than former 
smokers who quit during the two years 
before graphic warnings appeared on 
Canadian cigarette packages (Ref. 29). In 
one Australian study, participants 
reported increased attempts to quit 
smoking after cigarette packs displayed 
graphic warnings, although there was no 
association with short-term quit success 
(Ref. 46). 
Some studies also indicate that large, 
graphic warnings may induce 
individual smokers to reduce 
consumption. The Canadian Cancer 
Society survey indicated that 21 percent 
of smokers reported that on one or more 
occasions they chose not to smoke a 
cigarette due to the warnings on 
cigarette packages (Ref. 43). The survey 
also indicated that 27 percent of 
participants reported that the then-new 
graphic warnings motivated them to 
smoke less inside their homes (Id.). In 
another study involving young adults in 
Canada, 22.6 percent of current male 
smokers and 26.6 percent of current 
female smokers reported that in the past 
month, noticing the warning on 
cigarette packages led them to decide 
not to have a cigarette (Ref. 45). In a 
study of Australian youth smoking 
behavior, adolescents who were 
experimenting with smoking or were 
established smokers indicated that they 
thought more about forgoing cigarettes 
after graphic warnings appeared on 
cigarette packages in 2006 (Ref. 47). 
One study suggests that graphic 
warnings may help persons who have 
quit smoking remain abstinent from 
smoking. In that study, 26 percent of 
former smokers in Canada reported that 
the then-new graphic warnings on 
cigarette packages helped them remain 
abstinent (Ref. 29). 
Canadian national survey data also 
suggest that graphic warnings may 
reduce smoking rates. Smoking 
prevalence among Canadians aged 15 or 
older dropped from 24 percent in 2000 
(before the graphic warnings were 
introduced) to 22 percent in 2001 and 
21 percent in 2002 (Ref. 56). It is not 
possible to draw a direct causal 
connection between the graphic 
warnings and these data because other 
smoking control initiatives, including 
an increase in the cigarette tax and new 
restrictions on public smoking also 
occurred during the same period. At the 
same time, however, these data are 
suggestive that large graphic warnings 
may reduce smoking consumption. 
After considering the available 
scientific evidence, the IOM concluded 
in its 2007 Report that ‘‘[o]n the basis of 
the evidence accumulated thus far, 
[larger,] graphic warnings of the kind 
required in Canada, Brazil and Thailand 
‘would promote greater public 
understanding of the risks’ of using 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:19 Nov 10, 2010 Jkt 223001 PO 00000 Frm 00010 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\12NOP2.SGM 12NOP2em
cd
on
al
d 
on
 D
SK
2B
SO
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
69533 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 218 / Friday, November 12, 2010 / Proposed Rules 
tobacco and would help reduce 
consumption’’ in the United States (Ref. 
5 at p. 295). 
C. Benefits of FDA’s Proposed Required 
Warnings 
FDA has carefully assessed the 
scientific literature studying the impact 
of graphic images on the salience (i.e., 
noticeability and readability) of 
warnings, on the effective 
communication of the health risks of 
smoking, and on changes to smoking 
behavior. Although much of the 
available research involved comparisons 
of warnings that differ in more than one 
aspect (i.e., text size, use of graphics, 
and number of images), the overall body 
of available research has illustrated that 
the use of large text, color graphics, and 
multiple rotating health statements will 
significantly improve the 
communication of the health risks of 
smoking to the general public in the 
United States and delay wear-out of 
these important health messages. 
Our assessment of the literature and 
our experience as a public health agency 
provide support for requiring that the 
nine textual warning statements listed 
in section 4(a)(1) of FCLAA (15 U.S.C. 
1333(a)(1)) appear on cigarette packages 
and in cigarette advertisements, and that 
each textual warning statement be 
accompanied by a specified color 
graphic image. It also supports the 
proposal that the required warnings 
should comprise the top 50 percent of 
the area of each of the front and rear 
panels of cigarette packages and 20 
percent of the area of cigarette 
advertisements in the United States in 
accordance with section 4 of FCLAA (15 
U.S.C. 1333(b)). The statute and this 
proposal is consistent with the 
international consensus reflected in the 
WHO’s Framework Convention on 
Tobacco Control, i.e., the proposed 
warnings would be rotating, large, clear, 
visible, and legible, and would occupy 
‘‘50 percent or more of the principal 
display areas’’ of packages. WHO FCTC 
art. 11.1(b). Further, we believe that the 
available evidence demonstrates that the 
addition of color graphics to the nine 
new textual warning statements would 
ensure that warnings on packages and in 
advertisements effectively provide 
critical information to consumers while 
continuing to afford tobacco 
manufacturers and retailers ample space 
(over 50 percent of packages and 80 
percent of advertisements) to convey 
other information regarding the product. 
1. The Addition of Graphic Images Will 
Have a Significant, Positive Impact on 
Public Health 
As summarized in section III.B, 
research on cigarette warnings with a 
graphic component has found that they 
are more effective in educating 
consumers about smoking risks than 
text-only warnings (Ref. 42), and are 
more likely to be effective in impacting 
smoking behaviors (Ref. 27). Moreover, 
the available scientific literature 
suggests that cigarette packages with 
larger, text-only warnings are inferior to 
cigarette warnings with a graphic 
component in both communicating 
health information and encouraging 
smoking cessation. 
For example, data comparing the 
Canadian graphic warnings and the 
United Kingdom (UK) text-only 
warnings, after the UK substantially 
increased the number and size of its 
warnings (from 6 warnings that covered 
6 percent of the front and back of 
cigarette packages to 16 warnings that 
covered 30 percent of the front and 40 
percent of the back of the packages), 
found that the Canadian pictorial 
warnings had a greater impact on 
smokers than the new UK warnings 
(Ref. 36). Specifically, data collected 2.5 
years after the implementation of the 
Canadian pictorial warnings and 2.5 
years after the implementation of the 
larger, text-only UK warnings found 
that, while the UK respondents reported 
greater levels of salience (i.e., noticing 
and reading the warnings) than 
Canadian smokers, Canadian smokers 
were significantly more likely to stop 
smoking a cigarette as a result of the 
graphic warnings and to report that the 
graphic warnings had led them to think 
about quitting. Canadian smokers also 
were significantly more likely than 
those in the UK to report that the 
warnings made them think about the 
health risks of smoking. 
Likewise, data comparing the impact 
of Australia’s graphic warnings 
(introduced in 2005) and the UK’s 
larger, text-only warnings showed 
similar support for the use of a graphic 
component (Ref. 46). Specifically, 
researchers found greater increases in 
the two strongest predictors of 
subsequent quitting—cognitive 
responses (i.e., thinking about the health 
risks of smoking) and foregoing 
cigarettes—after Australia introduced its 
graphic warnings than after the UK 
introduced its enhanced text-only 
warnings. This is especially noteworthy, 
given that when the border is taken into 
account, the graphic warnings on the 
front of the packages in Australia were 
smaller than the UK’s text-only 
warnings on the front of the packages. 
It is worth noting that the UK 
amended its Tobacco Products 
(Manufacture, Presentation and Sale) 
(Safety) regulations in 2007 to require 
graphic warnings to appear on all 
cigarette packages as of October 2009. 
Furthermore, although both text and 
graphic cigarette warnings are subject to 
wear-out over an extended period of 
time, research has shown that graphic 
warnings maintain their impact longer 
than text-only warnings. Approximately 
four years after the introduction of the 
16 Canadian graphic warnings, youth 
and adult smokers reported little or no 
decrease in their effectiveness (Ref. 42; 
Ref. 36; Ref. 5 at C–4). Similarly, the use 
of color graphics in the proposed 
required warnings, coupled with the 
increase in the number of rotating 
health statements required under 
section 4 of FCLAA (15 U.S.C. 1333) 
and this proposed rule from four to 
nine, will help ensure that the new 
cigarette health warnings being 
proposed will retain beneficial effects 
over time (Ref. 5 at C–4). 
2. The Revised Textual Statements Will 
Communicate More Effectively 
The proposed required warnings 
would also modify the textual warning 
statements currently required on 
cigarette packages and in 
advertisements. Section 201(a) of the 
Tobacco Control Act sets forth nine text 
statements that will replace the four 
statements currently required under 
FCLAA once any final rule becomes 
effective. These nine statements 
objectively communicate some of the 
major health risks associated with 
smoking in a more effective manner 
compared to the warning statements 
currently required in the United States. 
As the IOM explained, specific, 
unambiguous warnings (e.g., ‘‘cigarettes 
cause lung cancer’’) are more likely to be 
noticed and less likely to be discounted 
than vague warnings (e.g., ‘‘cigarettes are 
hazardous to your health’’), and 
warnings should target an appropriate 
literacy level (Id. at C–3). The new 
textual warning statements set forth in 
the Tobacco Control Act represent an 
improvement over the current warnings 
in that they are specific and 
unambiguous and they succinctly 
describe documented outcomes of 
cigarette use and exposure. For 
example, the vague warning that 
‘‘Cigarette Smoke Contains Carbon 
Monoxide’’ will no longer be used, and 
two of the longer warnings currently in 
use, ‘‘Smoking Causes Lung Cancer, 
Heart Disease, Emphysema, and May 
Complicate Pregnancy’’ and ‘‘Smoking 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:19 Nov 10, 2010 Jkt 223001 PO 00000 Frm 00011 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\12NOP2.SGM 12NOP2em
cd
on
al
d 
on
 D
SK
2B
SO
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
69534 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 218 / Friday, November 12, 2010 / Proposed Rules 
by Pregnant Women May Result in Fetal 
Injury, Premature Birth, and Low Birth 
Weight,’’ will be replaced with shorter, 
more readable statements (e.g., 
‘‘Cigarettes cause fatal lung disease,’’ 
‘‘Cigarettes cause cancer,’’ ‘‘Cigarettes 
cause strokes and heart disease,’’ 
‘‘Smoking during pregnancy can harm 
your baby,’’ and ‘‘Smoking can kill 
you’’). The proposed required warnings 
also will be easier to understand 
because of the addition of the graphic 
component (Id. at 295). 
Thus, the nine specific textual 
warning statements set forth in section 
201(a) of the Tobacco Control Act would 
effectively convey the major health risks 
of smoking, which will help discourage 
nonsmokers from initiating cigarette 
use, and encourage current smokers to 
consider cessation, particularly when 
combined with graphic images 
depicting the negative consequences of 
smoking. We intend to monitor the 
effects of these required warnings once 
they are put into use. In addition, there 
will continue to be social science 
research conducted regarding the 
relative efficacy of various required 
warnings. We will use the results of our 
monitoring and such research to 
determine whether any of the textual 
warning statements or accompanying 
graphic images should be revised in a 
future rulemaking. 
D. FDA’s Process for Development and 
Plan for Selection of the Required 
Warnings 
Section 4(d) of FCLAA (15 U.S.C. 
1333(d)), as amended by section 201 of 
the Tobacco Control Act, requires FDA 
to issue ‘‘regulations that require color 
graphics depicting the negative health 
consequences of smoking’’ to 
accompany the textual warning 
statements specified in section 4(a)(1) of 
FCLAA (15 U.S.C. 1333(a)(1)). In 
considering and developing appropriate 
color graphics to accompany the textual 
warning statements, FDA assessed the 
graphic warnings that other countries 
have required for tobacco products. In 
addition, FDA worked with various 
experts in the fields of health 
communications, marketing research, 
graphic design and advertising to 
develop the required warnings 
published with the proposed regulation. 
The proposed required warnings, 
consisting of the color graphics FDA 
developed and the textual warning 
statements, are available as electronic 
files in portable document format (PDF) 
in this docket and on FDA’s Web site at 
http://www.fda.gov/cigarettewarnings. 
For the final rule, the required warnings 
will be contained in documents titled 
‘‘Cigarette Required Warnings—English 
and Spanish’’ and ‘‘Cigarette Warnings— 
Other Foreign Language 
Advertisements,’’ as is further discussed 
in section IV.D. Drafts of these two 
documents are included in the docket as 
well. 
The set of required warnings available 
with this proposed rule encompasses a 
variety of themes and graphic 
techniques. The required warnings are 
designed to communicate risk 
information to a diverse range of 
audiences, including youth, young 
adults, and adults, and of smokers as 
well as potential smokers. The images in 
some of the required warnings are 
photographic while others are graphic 
illustrations. Some images are more 
visually disturbing than others. The 
fonts, typography, and layouts vary. 
FDA believes that the graphics in the 
proposed required warnings 
appropriately depict the negative health 
consequences of smoking. Further, FDA 
believes that these graphics are 
consistent with the types of pictorial 
warnings required or developed by 
other international governmental 
authorities, such as Canada, the 
European Union, and Australia, whose 
sets of warnings include a balance of 
images, some more visually disturbing 
than others. FDA also believes that 
including a varied set of warnings is 
consistent with the existing scientific 
literature concerning the effectiveness of 
graphic health warnings. 
The existing research shows that the 
effectiveness of health warnings in 
communicating the health risks of 
smoking may vary according to the 
audience, reflecting factors such as 
socioeconomic background, gender, age, 
and smoking status and behavior (Ref. 
57 at p. 22). A variety of health 
warnings facilitates better targeting of 
specific groups whose primary concerns 
about smoking tend to vary (Id. at p. 46). 
Specific issues that may make smoking 
desirable (or undesirable) for one group 
might be quite different for another 
group (Id. at p. 44). Similarly, using a 
variety of different warnings has been 
found to be significant in counteracting 
over-exposure and wear-out of health 
warnings (Id. at p. 46). In addition, in 
some cases, the strength of the content 
of the message is what determines its 
impact, while in other cases, peripheral 
factors, such as how and where the 
message is delivered and its visual 
impact are the most significant 
determinants (Id. at p. 28). In order to 
be effective with a broad audience, 
health warnings should be developed 
with these different factors in mind 
(Id.). 
The existing research indicates that a 
balanced set of graphic warnings that 
includes a range and variety of images 
is effective. For example, the use of 
health warnings with ‘‘frightening’’ or 
‘‘disturbing’’ tonal qualities appears 
effective (Id. at pp. 37–39). Consistent 
with this research, some of the images 
published with the proposed regulation 
are more ‘‘frightening’’ or visually 
disturbing than others. 
Research also indicates that other 
types of graphic warnings, including 
those that do not include ‘‘frightening’’ 
or ‘‘disturbing’’ imagery, can be effective 
(Ref. 52 at pp. 24–25). For example, 
graphic health warnings that convey the 
risks of secondhand smoke for babies 
and children without being 
‘‘frightening’’ or ‘‘disturbing’’ appear to 
have widespread impact (Id.; Ref. 57 at 
pp. 34–35). The set of proposed required 
warnings includes health warning 
statements and accompanying images 
that convey the risk of secondhand 
smoke on children and babies and the 
risk of smoking while pregnant. 
Similarly, evidence also shows that 
warnings about specific health risks, 
such as cancer, heart disease, and 
stroke, are more effective than general 
warnings, and that the effectiveness of 
graphic warnings relating to specific 
health concerns tends to vary for 
different smoker groups, reflecting their 
perceived relevance (Ref. 52 at pp. 24– 
25; Ref. 57 at p. 34). The statements and 
images published with this proposed 
rule portray specific health risks using 
a variety of themes and techniques in 
order to reach different smoker groups. 
According to the existing research, 
graphic warnings that focus on the 
benefits of quitting may also be effective 
(Ref. 57 at p. 35). The set of published 
images includes warnings addressing 
the benefits of quitting. 
In addition to the types of messages 
and images, the salience or noticeability 
of health warnings is enhanced by the 
use of larger type size, contrasting 
colors, and different typography (Id. at 
p. 28). Research assessing responses to 
warnings on tobacco product packaging, 
as well as responses to safety warnings 
generally, indicate that the effectiveness 
of warnings is enhanced through 
techniques such as larger font sizes, 
upper case lettering, and bold type (Id. 
at p. 33). A number of the proposed 
required warnings utilize these 
techniques. 
Although FDA expects that any final 
rule will include a total of nine different 
required warnings, it has developed a 
larger set of images for the proposed 
rule. FDA is seeking comments on what 
required warnings to include in the final 
rule, including comments on the color 
graphics that are included in this 
proposal. 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:19 Nov 10, 2010 Jkt 223001 PO 00000 Frm 00012 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\12NOP2.SGM 12NOP2em
cd
on
al
d 
on
 D
SK
2B
SO
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
69535 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 218 / Friday, November 12, 2010 / Proposed Rules 
In addition to seeking comment on 
what color graphics to require in the 
final rule, FDA is conducting research 
on the proposed required warnings. The 
larger set of required warnings 
developed for this proposed rule will 
allow for more productive research into 
the relative efficacy of the different 
proposed color graphics. The research 
will: (1) Measure consumer attitudes, 
beliefs, and intended behaviors related 
to cigarette smoking in response to the 
proposed color graphics and their 
accompanying textual warning 
statements; (2) determine whether 
consumer responses to the proposed 
color graphics and their accompanying 
textual warning statements differ across 
various groups based on smoking status, 
age, or other demographic variables; and 
(3) evaluate the relative effectiveness of 
the proposed color graphics and their 
accompanying textual warning 
statements at conveying information 
about various health risks of smoking, 
and additionally, at encouraging 
smoking cessation and discouraging 
smoking initiation (See 75 FR 7604 
(February 22, 2010); 75 FR 52352 
(August 25, 2010)). FDA is in the 
process of conducting this research. 
Once the research is complete and final 
analyses of the results are available, 
FDA will place a report of the results of 
the analyses in the docket and announce 
the report’s availability by a notice in 
the Federal Register so the public has 
an opportunity to comment on the 
results. 
After considering the public 
comments, research results, and 
scientific literature, FDA plans to select 
a set of nine required warnings for the 
final rule, each of which is comprised 
of one color graphic that is paired with 
one of the nine textual warning 
statements. Thus, FDA intends to select 
nine images from among the larger set 
of images in this proposed rule for 
actual use. The agency believes that 
nine required warnings will be 
sufficient to achieve its goal of 
effectively communicating the health 
risks of smoking and to prevent wear- 
out of the proposed required warnings 
for several years. 
In addition, another set of color 
graphics is proposed for use solely in 
advertisements with a small surface area 
(i.e., less than 12 square inches). The 
color graphics in this set differ in their 
composition from the other color 
graphics in that the details of the images 
should be clear, conspicuous, and 
legible even when the graphics are 
reduced in size to be placed on surfaces 
with a relatively small area. FDA 
proposes that the final version of 
‘‘Cigarette Required Warnings—English 
and Spanish’’ also contain graphics from 
this set, which would only be used in 
advertisements with a small surface 
area. But even an advertisement with a 
relatively small surface area would need 
to be large enough so that the required 
graphic and accompanying textual 
warning statement are clear, 
conspicuous, and legible. 
IV. Description of Proposed Regulations 
The Tobacco Control Act mandates 
that FDA issue regulations requiring 
color graphics depicting the negative 
health consequences of smoking to 
accompany the nine health warning 
statements that must appear on cigarette 
packages and in cigarette 
advertisements under FCLAA (15 U.S.C. 
1333). FDA proposes to implement this 
requirement for cigarette packages and 
advertisements by adding a new part 
1141 to title 21 of the Code of Federal 
Regulations governing cigarette package 
and advertising warnings. 
The graphic warnings rule, when 
finalized, is intended to help educate 
consumers about the health risks of 
cigarettes, to support intentions among 
current smokers to quit or decrease 
cigarette consumption, and to 
discourage nonsmokers, particularly 
youth, from initiating cigarette use. We 
seek comment on the proposed part 
1141 described below. If you have 
comments on specific provisions of the 
proposed regulation, we request that 
you identify these provisions in your 
comments. In addition, if you have 
concerns that would be addressed by 
alternative text, we request that you 
provide this alternative text in your 
comments. 
A. Section 1141.1—Scope 
Proposed § 1141.1 would set forth the 
scope of the proposed regulations. 
Proposed § 1141.1(a) explains that part 
1141 would set forth the requirements 
for the display of the health warnings on 
cigarette packages and advertisements 
required by section 4 of FCLAA (15 
U.S.C. 1333), as amended by the 
Tobacco Control Act. This paragraph 
would also indicate that FDA has the 
authority to require additional 
statements on cigarette packages and 
advertisements in accordance with the 
FD&C Act or other authorities (such as 
FCLAA). For example, section 4 of 
FCLAA, as amended by section 206 of 
the Tobacco Control Act, requires the 
agency to initiate a rulemaking to 
determine whether cigarette and other 
tobacco product manufacturers should 
be required to disclose the tar and 
nicotine yields in advertisements and/or 
on packages. In addition, section 906(d) 
of the FD&C Act authorizes FDA to issue 
regulations restricting the sale or 
distribution of cigarettes and other 
tobacco products, including restrictions 
on the advertising and promotion of 
such products, if FDA determines the 
restriction is appropriate for protecting 
public health. 
Proposed § 1141.1(b) would limit the 
applicability of the proposed 
requirements by clarifying that these 
requirements would not apply to 
manufacturers or distributors of 
cigarettes that do not manufacture, 
package, or import cigarettes for sale or 
distribution in the United States. 
In accordance with section 4(a)(4) of 
FCLAA (15 U.S.C. 1333(a)(4)), proposed 
§ 1141.1(c) would provide that a 
cigarette retailer would not be in 
violation of the proposed rule if 
cigarette packages displayed or sold by 
the retailer do not comply with all the 
requirements set forth in the proposed 
rule, so long as the packages contain a 
health warning, are supplied by a 
license- or permit-holding tobacco 
product manufacturer, importer, or 
distributor, and are not altered by the 
retailer in a way that materially impacts 
the display of the required warnings on 
the packages. Thus, manufacturers, 
importers, and distributors would have 
primary responsibility for ensuring that 
the required warnings on cigarette 
packages comply with all the provisions 
of proposed part 1141, but retailers 
would have some responsibility as well. 
Specifically, retailers would be 
responsible for ensuring that all 
cigarette packages they display or sell 
contain a warning regarding the health 
risks associated with smoking cigarettes. 
In addition, retailers could not alter the 
warning in a way that is material to the 
requirements of FCLAA and this 
proposed rule, including by obscuring 
the warning (e.g., by placing a sticker or 
other item on top of it), by shrinking or 
severing the warning (in whole or in 
part), or by otherwise changing it in a 
material way. However, retailers would 
not be responsible for verifying that the 
warnings on packages they display or 
sell contain the combination of textual 
statements and accompanying color 
graphics required by FCLAA, or that 
they comply with other specifications 
required in FCLAA or proposed part 
1141. 
Similarly, proposed § 1141.1(d) 
implements section 4(c)(4) of FCLAA 
(15 U.S.C. 1333(c)(4)) and would 
provide that a retailer would not be 
considered in violation of part 1141 if 
it posts an advertisement that does not 
comply with all of the proposed 
requirements, so long as the 
advertisement was not created by or on 
behalf of the cigarette retailer and the 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:19 Nov 10, 2010 Jkt 223001 PO 00000 Frm 00013 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\12NOP2.SGM 12NOP2em
cd
on
al
d 
on
 D
SK
2B
SO
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
69536 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 218 / Friday, November 12, 2010 / Proposed Rules 
retailer is not otherwise responsible for 
inclusion of the required warnings. Note 
that, in accordance with section 4(b) of 
FCLAA (15 U.S.C. 1333(b)), any 
manufacturer, distributor, importer, or 
retailer who is responsible for the 
creation of a cigarette advertisement is 
responsible for compliance with FCLAA 
and proposed part 1141. This paragraph 
also specifies that this provision would 
not relieve a retailer of liability if it 
publicly displays an advertisement that 
fails to contain a health warning or if it 
alters an advertisement in a way that 
materially impacts the display of the 
required warning. Therefore, except for 
when it is responsible for the creation 
of an advertisement or otherwise 
responsible for the inclusion of the 
warning, a retailer is not responsible for 
ensuring that its cigarette 
advertisements contain the combination 
of textual statements and accompanying 
color graphics required by FCLAA, or 
that they comply with other 
specifications required in FCLAA or 
proposed part 1141. However, retailers 
must ensure that their cigarette 
advertisements contain a warning of 
smoking’s risks. They are also 
responsible for complying with the 
other requirements applicable to 
retailers, including those in part 1140 of 
Title 21 of the Code of Federal 
Regulations. 
B. Section 1141.3—Definitions 
Proposed § 1141.3 would establish 
definitions of terms used in the 
proposed rule. 
Proposed § 1141.3 would define the 
terms ‘‘cigarette,’’ ‘‘commerce,’’ 
‘‘package,’’ ‘‘person,’’ and ‘‘United 
States,’’ respectively, for the purposes of 
part 1141, as those terms are defined in 
section 3 of FCLAA (15 U.S.C. 1332). 
Proposed § 1141.3 would define 
‘‘distributor,’’ for the purposes of part 
1141, as any person who furthers the 
distribution of cigarettes at any point 
from the original place of manufacture 
to the person who sells or distributes 
the product to individuals for personal 
consumption. In addition, this 
paragraph would specify that common 
carriers are not considered distributors 
for the purposes of part 1141. 
Proposed § 1141.3 would define the 
terms ‘‘front panel’’ and ‘‘rear panel’’ as 
the two largest display surfaces of the 
cigarette package. FDA is proposing this 
definition to ensure that all entities 
properly identify the sides or surfaces of 
the cigarette package on which the 
required warnings must appear. On 
almost all cigarette packages, these two 
panels are oriented directly opposite 
from one another and are the same size. 
Proposed § 1141.3 would define 
‘‘importer,’’ for purposes of this part, as 
any person who introduces into 
commerce any cigarette that (1) was not 
manufactured in the United States and 
(2) is intended for sale or distribution to 
consumers in the United States. 
Proposed § 1141.3 would define 
‘‘manufacturer’’ as any person, including 
any repacker or relabeler, who 
manufactures, fabricates, assembles, 
processes, or labels a finished cigarette 
product. 
Proposed § 1141.3 would provide a 
definition of ‘‘required warning.’’ This 
term is used to refer to the combination 
of one of the textual warning statements 
and the accompanying color graphic 
depicting the negative health 
consequences of smoking required 
under section 4 of FCLAA and this part. 
Proposed § 1141.3 would define 
‘‘retailer’’ as any person who sells 
cigarettes to individuals for personal 
consumption, or who operates a facility 
where vending machines or self-service 
displays of cigarettes are permitted. 
C. Section 1141.10—Required Warnings 
The Tobacco Control Act directs FDA 
to require that color graphics depicting 
the negative health consequences of 
smoking accompany each of the textual 
warning statements that must be 
randomly displayed (i.e., in each 12- 
month period, all of the different 
warnings must appear in as equal a 
number of times as is possible on each 
brand of the product and be randomly 
distributed in all areas of the United 
States in which the product is marketed) 
on cigarette packages and rotated 
quarterly in alternating sequence in 
cigarette advertisements under FCLAA. 
FDA is proposing that cigarette packages 
and advertisements contain such a 
combination graphic-textual warning in 
proposed § 1141.10. 
Proposed paragraph (a) would set 
forth the requirements specific to 
cigarette packages. Proposed 
§ 1141.10(a)(1) would require that each 
cigarette package sold, offered for sale, 
distributed, or imported for sale or 
distribution within the United States 
contain a required warning. This 
required warning would have to appear 
on both the front and rear panels of the 
cigarette package. As defined in 
proposed § 1141.3, this required 
warning would consist of one of the 
nine textual warning statements set 
forth in FCLAA (15 U.S.C. 1333) and the 
accompanying color graphic depicting 
the negative health consequences of 
smoking. 
Proposed § 1141.10(a)(2) would 
provide that the warnings required 
under paragraph (a)(1) must be obtained 
from the document titled ‘‘Cigarette 
Required Warnings—English and 
Spanish.’’ Due to the multi-color nature 
of the required warnings, they cannot be 
printed in the Code of Federal 
Regulations, and due to the visual 
complexity of the images, it will not be 
feasible to accurately describe the 
images and their colors in the Code of 
Federal Regulations. Thus, FDA 
proposes to provide the required 
warnings for regulated entities in 
‘‘Cigarette Required Warnings—English 
and Spanish,’’ which will contain 
downloadable electronic files used to 
generate each required warning. This 
approach would also help regulated 
entities ensure that their packages 
contain required warnings that are 
consistent with the requirements of 
FCLAA and proposed part 1141, when 
finalized. 
Proposed § 1141.10(a)(2) would also 
mandate that the required warnings be 
accurately reproduced from the 
electronic images in ‘‘Cigarette Required 
Warnings—English and Spanish.’’ Thus, 
regulated entities would have to ensure 
that the required warnings they place on 
packages are not distorted or otherwise 
inaccurately reproduced from the 
electronic images in ‘‘Cigarette Required 
Warnings—English and Spanish.’’ For 
example, the colors used to display the 
required images would have to be 
reproduced accurately from the colors 
used in ‘‘Cigarette Required Warnings— 
English and Spanish.’’ The use of the 
electronic files from ‘‘Cigarette Required 
Warnings—English and Spanish’’ to 
generate the required warnings should 
enable companies to reproduce the 
warnings with relative ease. FDA 
recognizes that there may be minor 
variations in the exact colors used to 
reprint the required warnings across all 
cigarette packages due to differences in 
inks and printing processes, but FDA 
expects that the colors in the graphics 
that appear on packages and in 
advertisements will look the same as the 
colors in the graphics set forth in 
‘‘Cigarette Required Warnings—English 
and Spanish.’’ 
Finally, proposed § 1141.10(a)(2) 
would also specify that the electronic 
images obtained from ‘‘Cigarette 
Required Warnings—English and 
Spanish’’ must be adapted as necessary 
to meet the requirements of section 4 of 
FCLAA (15 U.S.C. 1333) and this part, 
and the electronic files provided in 
‘‘Cigarette Required Warnings—English 
and Spanish’’ would be in a format that 
could be modified as necessary to 
comply with this proposed rule. 
Specifically, regulated entities would be 
able to modify the size of the required 
warnings to ensure they are the required 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:19 Nov 10, 2010 Jkt 223001 PO 00000 Frm 00014 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\12NOP2.SGM 12NOP2em
cd
on
al
d 
on
 D
SK
2B
SO
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
69537 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 218 / Friday, November 12, 2010 / Proposed Rules 
size and occupy the required area of the 
cigarette package. However, any 
modifications to such files would need 
to result in an accurate reproduction of 
the electronic images contained in 
‘‘Cigarette Required Warnings—English 
and Spanish,’’ as proposed by 
§ 1141.10(a)(2). For example, the width- 
to-height ratio (i.e., the aspect ratio) of 
the images should be preserved when 
the images are compressed or expanded, 
so that the resulting image is not 
distorted. 
Proposed § 1141.10(a)(3) would 
mandate that the required warnings 
appear directly on the package and be 
clearly visible underneath the 
cellophane or other clear wrapping. In 
order for the required warnings to 
appear conspicuously and legibly as 
mandated by section 4 of FCLAA (15 
U.S.C. 1333), they must not be obscured. 
Thus, any outer wrappings on the 
package must be clear so that the 
warnings can be seen and read by 
consumers. Similarly, any other 
material that is placed on the outside of 
packages, such as price information or 
promotional material (e.g., coupons), 
must not be placed over or otherwise 
obscure the required warning. 
As required under section 4 of FCLAA 
(15 U.S.C. 1333), proposed 
§ 1141.10(a)(4) would mandate that the 
required warnings occupy at least 50 
percent of the area of the front panel 
and rear panel of each cigarette package. 
These area requirements would help 
ensure that the required warnings are 
prominent and conspicuous enough to 
gain consumers’ notice in the first 
instance, and are easily viewed and read 
by consumers once they are noticed. 
This will help ensure that consumers 
comprehend the critical information 
conveyed in the required warnings. As 
to location, proposed § 1141.10(a)(4) 
states that the required warnings must 
occupy at least the top 50 percent of the 
area of the front and rear panels of the 
packages. For cigarette cartons, where 
the front and rear panels have 
significantly longer horizontal than 
vertical axes, the textual warning 
statement and accompanying graphic 
might be distorted if they were placed 
on the top 50 percent of these panels 
because the top runs along the longer 
horizontal axis. Thus, under section 
4(b)(4) and (d) of FCLAA, proposed 
§ 1141.10(a)(4) would specify a format 
for these warnings so that they occupy 
at least the left 50 percent of the front 
and rear panels. With this format, the 
required warnings can be sized for 
placement on cigarette cartons without 
distortion. 
Proposed § 1141.10(a)(5) would 
mandate that the required warnings and 
the other information on the panels be 
oriented in the same direction. Thus, for 
example, if the front panel of a cigarette 
package contains information, such as 
the brand name of the product, in a left 
to right orientation, the required 
warning must not be placed such that it 
appears at a right angle to this text. 
Rather, the required warning and its 
component textual statement should 
also appear in a left to right orientation. 
This requirement would help ensure the 
required warnings on cigarette packages 
are conspicuous and legible to 
consumers, as required by section 4 of 
FCLAA. In addition, FDA is proposing 
this restriction under section 906(d) of 
the FD&C Act (21 U.S.C. 387f(d)). 
Requiring all the text on the panel of a 
cigarette package that contains a 
required warning to be oriented in the 
same direction would help ensure that 
the warnings are noticed and read by 
consumers and, therefore, would be 
appropriate for the protection of the 
public health. 
Proposed paragraph (b) of proposed 
§ 1141.10 would set forth the 
requirements specific to cigarette 
advertisements. Proposed 
§ 1141.10(b)(1) would mandate that 
manufacturers, importers, distributors, 
and retailers include required warnings 
in all their cigarette advertising within 
the United States. Thus, all 
advertisements, regardless of form— 
which could include materials such as 
magazine and newspaper ads, 
pamphlets, leaflets, brochures, coupons, 
catalogues, retail or point-of-sale 
displays (including functional items 
such as clocks or change mats), posters, 
billboards, direct mailers, and Internet 
advertising (e.g., Web pages, banner ads, 
etc.)—would have to contain required 
warnings. 
Consistent with section 4(b) of 
FCLAA (15 U.S.C. 1333(b)), proposed 
§ 1141.10(b)(2) would mandate that the 
textual component of the required 
warning appear in the English language, 
with two exceptions. First, per proposed 
§ 1141.10(b)(2)(i), if an advertisement 
appears in a non-English language 
publication, the textual portion of the 
required warning would need to appear 
in the predominant language of the 
publication. The predominant language 
is the primary language used in the non- 
sponsored content in the publication. 
For example, in the case of a newspaper 
where the non-sponsored content (e.g., 
news stories, articles of opinion, and 
features) are in a foreign language but 
the sponsored content (e.g., advertising) 
is wholly or partially in English, the 
predominant language would be the 
foreign language used in the non- 
sponsored content, and the required 
warning would have to appear in that 
foreign language. Because such non- 
English language publications in the 
United States are targeted towards 
consumers who speak the predominant 
language of the publication, this will 
help ensure that the required warning 
effectively communicates to the target 
audience that will view the 
advertisement. Second, per proposed 
§ 1141.10(b)(2)(ii), if an advertisement is 
in an English language publication but 
is presented in a language other than 
English, the textual portion of the 
required warning would need to be 
presented in the same foreign language 
principally used in the advertisement. 
English language publications in the 
United States are generally targeted 
towards the consumer population as a 
whole or towards consumers with a 
particular interest in the subject matter 
of the publication rather than towards 
consumers who speak a particular 
language; however, foreign language 
advertisements in English-language 
publications are targeted towards 
consumers who speak the foreign 
language used in the advertisement. 
Therefore, requiring foreign language 
advertisements in English-language 
publications to present the required 
warning in the same language that is 
used elsewhere in the advertisement 
will help ensure that the target audience 
of the advertisement is able to read and 
understand both the promotional 
content and the important warning 
information. 
Proposed § 1141.10(b)(3) would 
require that English and Spanish 
language required warnings be obtained 
and accurately reproduced from 
‘‘Cigarette Required Warnings—English 
and Spanish.’’ As discussed above, the 
required warnings cannot be accurately 
reprinted or described in the Code of 
Federal Regulations, and FDA is thus 
proposing to provide the required 
warnings for regulated entities in 
‘‘Cigarette Required Warnings—English 
and Spanish,’’ which will contain 
downloadable copies of the electronic 
files used to generate each required 
warning. In addition to offering the 
English-language versions of the 
required warnings that would be used 
on all packages and in most 
advertisements, the document would 
offer Spanish-language versions of the 
required warnings for use in 
advertisements that either appear in 
Spanish-language publications or that 
are presented primarily in Spanish (see 
15 U.S.C. 1333(b)). These versions are 
offered in recognition of the fact that 
Spanish is the foreign language most 
commonly used for cigarette 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:19 Nov 10, 2010 Jkt 223001 PO 00000 Frm 00015 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\12NOP2.SGM 12NOP2em
cd
on
al
d 
on
 D
SK
2B
SO
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
69538 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 218 / Friday, November 12, 2010 / Proposed Rules 
advertisements in the United States. 
However, color graphics for other 
foreign language warnings would need 
to be obtained from the document titled 
‘‘Cigarette Required Warnings—Other 
Foreign Language Advertisements,’’ as is 
discussed in more detail below. As with 
cigarette packages, the required 
warnings placed in cigarette 
advertisements would have to be 
accurate reproductions of those set forth 
in ‘‘Cigarette Required Warnings— 
English and Spanish.’’ In addition, the 
required warnings would need to be 
adapted as necessary to meet the 
requirements of section 4 of FCLAA (15 
U.S.C. 1333) and part 1141. The 
electronic files provided in ‘‘Cigarette 
Required Warnings—English and 
Spanish’’ would be in a format that 
would allow regulated entities to resize 
the required warnings as necessary to 
comply with the other provisions of this 
part, though any modifications made 
would need to result in an accurate 
reproduction of the electronic images 
contained in the documents. 
Proposed § 1141.10(b)(4) would 
require regulated entities to obtain color 
graphics for foreign language required 
warnings, other than Spanish language 
warnings, from the electronic files 
contained in ‘‘Cigarette Required 
Warnings—Other Foreign Language 
Advertisements,’’ into which they must 
insert a true and accurate translation of 
the textual warning language required 
by FCLAA. ‘‘Cigarette Required 
Warnings—Other Foreign Language 
Advertisements’’ would offer 
downloadable electronic files of the 
color graphics and specify (in English) 
the text that is to accompany each color 
graphic. These files would allow for 
insertion of foreign language 
translations of the required textual 
statements, so that regulated entities can 
generate the appropriate required 
warnings for their foreign language 
advertisements, as well as for their 
advertisements that appear in foreign 
language publications. Advertisers 
would need to ensure that the required 
English textual statements are 
accurately and appropriately translated 
into the appropriate foreign language. If 
a warning statement is not accurately 
translated, the advertisement would be 
in violation of FCLAA. In addition to 
ensuring accurate translation, it would 
be the advertiser’s responsibility to 
ensure that the foreign language text 
complies with the format specifications 
set forth in section 4 of FCLAA (15 
U.S.C. 1333). Thus, for example, the text 
should not be placed in a manner that 
interferes with the accompanying color 
graphic. Proposed § 1141.10(b)(4) would 
also mandate that the required warnings 
be adapted as necessary to meet any 
other requirements of section 4 of 
FCLAA (15 U.S.C. 1333) and proposed 
part 1141. The electronic files provided 
in ‘‘Cigarette Required Warnings—Other 
Foreign Language Advertisements’’ 
would allow regulated entities to resize 
the required warnings as necessary to 
comply with the other provisions of part 
1141, though any modifications would 
need to result in accurate reproductions 
of the electronic images contained in the 
documents. 
As required by section 4 of FCLAA 
(15 U.S.C. 1333), proposed 
§ 1141.10(b)(5) would mandate that the 
required warnings comprise at least 20 
percent of the area of each 
advertisement. This will help ensure 
that the required warnings are 
appropriately clear, conspicuous, and 
legible by consumers, so that the 
important health information in the 
required warnings can be adequately 
seen and comprehended. Proposed 
§ 1141.10(b)(5) would also specify that 
the required warnings are to be placed 
in accordance with the other 
requirements set forth in FCLAA for the 
display of such warnings. For example, 
section 4 of FCLAA (15 U.S.C. 1333) 
contains requirements related to the 
placement of the required warnings, as 
well as requirements related to the 
border that must enclose each warning 
in cigarette advertising. FDA intends to 
separately address some of these other 
FCLAA requirements, as well as the 
provisions in section 4(c) of FCLAA (15 
U.S.C. 1333(c)) related to the 
submission of plans regarding the 
random display of warnings on 
packages and rotation of warnings in 
advertisements. 
Proposed § 1141.10(c) would mandate 
that the required warnings be indelibly 
printed on or permanently affixed to 
packages and advertisements. 
Removable or impermanent warning 
displays on packages and in 
advertisements would not comply with 
the requirements of FCLAA, in that the 
required warnings could become 
separated from the package or 
advertisement and thus would not meet 
the requirement that they be 
conspicuous on the package or 
advertisement. The purpose of the 
amendments made to FCLAA by the 
Tobacco Control Act is to strengthen the 
warnings for greater impact on 
consumers. Removable warnings would 
run counter to this purpose. For 
example, if the required package 
warning was printed or stickered on a 
clear outer wrapper, and this wrapper 
was meant to be removed in order for 
the package (or cigarettes within the 
package) to be accessed, the consumer 
could access the package of cigarettes 
numerous times without viewing the 
warning and receiving the impact of the 
critical health message. 
D. Section 1141.12—Incorporation by 
Reference of Required Warnings 
Section 1141.12 proposes that two 
documents, ‘‘Cigarette Required 
Warnings—English and Spanish’’ and 
‘‘Cigarette Required Warnings—Other 
Foreign Language Advertisements,’’ be 
incorporated by reference in accordance 
with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 CFR part 51. 
Any final regulation will provide 
information on how to obtain the two 
documents. Draft versions of both 
documents are available in the docket. 
These draft versions of the documents 
contain placeholders for the color 
graphics; once FDA selects the required 
warnings for the final rule, it intends to 
include the electronic files for these 
required warnings in the final versions 
of both documents. The material 
incorporated by reference must meet the 
Office of the Federal Register’s 
requirements for incorporating material 
by reference, and thus the way these 
two documents are displayed may be 
changed for the final rule to meet such 
requirements. 
Section 1141.12(a) proposes the 
incorporation by reference of ‘‘Cigarette 
Required Warnings—English and 
Spanish.’’ This document would contain 
the required warnings that must be 
included on all cigarette packages, and 
in cigarette advertisements in which the 
text of the required warning must be set 
forth in the English language or the 
Spanish language. Regulated entities 
would utilize ‘‘Cigarette Required 
Warnings—English and Spanish’’ to 
obtain the required warnings and 
reproduce them on cigarette packages 
and in advertisements in accordance 
with proposed part 1141. This 
document would offer downloadable 
electronic files for each of the required 
warnings. 
FDA expects that the final version of 
‘‘Cigarette Required Warnings—English 
and Spanish’’ will provide a total of nine 
different images, each of which is 
comprised of one color graphic that is 
paired with one of the nine textual 
warning statements set forth in FCLAA. 
In addition, for each of these nine sets, 
FDA expects that the final version 
would include six formatting options in 
accordance with sections 4(a)(2) and 
4(b)(2) of FCLAA (15 U.S.C. 1333(a)(2) 
and (b)(2)). Specifically, each of the nine 
sets would have one formatting option 
where the textual portion of the 
required warning is presented in black 
text on a white background and one 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:19 Nov 10, 2010 Jkt 223001 PO 00000 Frm 00016 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\12NOP2.SGM 12NOP2em
cd
on
al
d 
on
 D
SK
2B
SO
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
69539 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 218 / Friday, November 12, 2010 / Proposed Rules 
formatting option where the textual 
portion of the required warning is 
presented in white text on a black 
background for use on packages. In 
addition, each of these sets would 
include a version of the two previous 
formatting options enclosed in a 
rectangular border for use in 
advertisements in accordance with 
section 4(b)(2) of FCLAA (15 U.S.C. 
1333(b)(2)). Furthermore, each of the 
nine sets would contain an English 
version of these advertisement 
formatting options and a Spanish 
version of these advertising formatting 
options. FDA is requesting comments on 
the different proposed required 
warnings (i.e., the combinations of the 
textual warning statements and 
accompanying color graphics). For more 
information regarding FDA’s research 
analyses, see section III.D. 
In addition, FDA is proposing a subset 
of color graphics for use in 
advertisements with a small surface area 
(i.e., less than 12 square inches). These 
color graphics differ in their 
composition from the other color 
graphics in this document. FDA is 
proposing this subset of color graphics 
to ensure that the details of the images 
are clear, conspicuous, and legible even 
when the image is reduced in size to 
occupy 20 percent of a surface with an 
area of less than 12 square inches. FDA 
proposes that a final version of 
‘‘Cigarette Required Warnings—English 
and Spanish’’ contain such options, 
which would be used (in combination 
with one of the nine textual statements) 
only in advertisements with a small 
surface area. However, even an 
advertisement with a relatively small 
surface area would need to be large 
enough so that the required graphic and 
accompanying textual warning 
statement are clear, conspicuous, and 
legible. 
Section 1141.12(b) proposes the 
incorporation by reference of ‘‘Cigarette 
Required Warnings—Other Foreign 
Language Advertisements.’’ This 
document would contain the electronic 
files that are to be used to generate the 
required warnings for advertisements in 
which the text of the required warning 
must be set forth in a foreign language 
(other than Spanish) under proposed 
§ 1141.12(b). Regulated entities would 
utilize ‘‘Cigarette Required Warnings— 
Other Foreign Language 
Advertisements’’ to generate the 
required warnings for such 
advertisements. This document will 
offer downloadable files of the color 
graphic for each of the required 
warnings and specify (in English) the 
text that is to accompany each color 
graphic. The downloadable files would 
allow for insertion of foreign language 
translations of the required textual 
statements, so that regulated entities can 
generate the appropriate required 
warnings for their foreign language 
advertisements, as well as for their 
advertisements that appear in foreign 
language publications. 
E. Section 1141.14—Misbranding of 
Cigarettes 
Section 1141.14(a) proposes that a 
cigarette shall be deemed to be 
misbranded unless its labeling and 
advertising bear one of the required 
warnings. Under section 903(a)(1) and 
(a)(7)(A) of the FD&C Act (21 U.S.C. 
387c(a)(1) and (a)(7)(A)), a tobacco 
product, including a cigarette, is 
deemed misbranded if its labeling or 
advertising is false or misleading in any 
particular. Under 201(n) of the FD&C 
Act (21 U.S.C. 321(n)), in determining 
whether something is misleading, it: 
‘‘shall be taken into account * * * not 
only representations made or suggested 
* * * but also the extent to which the 
labeling or advertising fails to reveal 
facts * * * material with respect to 
consequences which may result from 
the use of the article to which the 
labeling or advertising relates * * * 
under such conditions of use as are 
customary or usual.’’ The required 
warnings, which concern risks 
associated with the use of cigarettes, are 
clearly material with respect to 
consequences that may result from the 
use of cigarettes. These required 
warnings convey information about the 
addictive nature of cigarettes (which is 
inextricably linked to all the health 
harms caused by cigarettes) as well as 
the major, potentially deadly health 
consequences of smoking, including the 
causal relationship between smoking 
and cancer (cigarettes have been shown 
to cause more than 10 different cancers), 
fatal lung disease (e.g., COPD, which is 
a major public health problem in the 
United States), heart disease and stroke 
(the first and third leading causes of 
death in the United States), and negative 
pregnancy outcomes. In addition, the 
warnings provide information on the 
negative, potentially fatal health effects 
cigarettes can have for non-users, 
including the harm tobacco smoke can 
cause to children and non-smoking 
adults (e.g., fatal lung disease). The 
warnings also provide critical 
information on the significant health 
benefits of quitting. Overall, the 
required warnings provide highly 
material information that every 
consumer should know about the 
consequences of cigarettes under 
customary conditions of use. 
In order to ensure that the required 
warnings are conspicuous, prominent, 
and legible, each individual cigarette 
package or advertisement is required to 
contain only one of the nine required 
warnings under this proposed rule, 
although all nine statements are 
material for cigarettes in general. It 
generally would not be feasible to fit all 
nine statements and their accompanying 
color graphics and have them be 
conspicuous, prominent, and legible. 
Moreover, while any individual package 
or advertisement will not convey the 
information from all nine required 
warnings, all nine warnings will be on 
public display at any given time as the 
Tobacco Control Act requires the 
warnings to be randomly displayed in as 
equal a number of times as possible on 
cigarette packages for all cigarette 
brands and in quarterly rotation in 
advertisements under section 4(c) of 
FCLAA (15 U.S.C. 1333(c)). Thus, 
consumers will be exposed to 
conspicuous, prominent, and legible 
displays of all nine warning statements 
(which apply to all cigarettes) in the 
marketplace at any given time, and as a 
result will receive a summary of the 
major risks of smoking. 
It is worth noting that the warning 
disclosure requirements for tobacco 
products are different than the 
disclosure requirements that apply to 
other products that FDA regulates, as (1) 
the warning information for cigarettes is 
different in its applicability than the 
warning information for other products, 
(2) the disclosure requirements for other 
products have a different purpose than 
the cigarette warnings, and (3) the 
mechanisms for exposure to warning 
information are different for tobacco 
products than for other products FDA 
regulates. For example, medical 
products such as drugs and devices 
have risks that are specified for each 
particular product; these risks are set 
forth in the FDA-required product 
labeling for each product. The statutory 
and regulatory requirements for 
prescription and restricted medical 
products require that each product’s 
labeling and advertising disclose all 
material risk information about the 
particular product (See 21 U.S.C. 352(a), 
(c), (f), (n), (q) and (r); 321(n); see also 
21 CFR 201.100(d)(1) and (d)(3); 
201.105(c)(1); 801.109(d); and 21 CFR 
part 202). This information also has a 
different purpose than cigarette warning 
information. For example, disclosure of 
all the material risk information 
associated with a particular prescription 
or restricted medical product helps 
healthcare professionals by giving them 
some of the information they need to 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:19 Nov 10, 2010 Jkt 223001 PO 00000 Frm 00017 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\12NOP2.SGM 12NOP2em
cd
on
al
d 
on
 D
SK
2B
SO
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
69540 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 218 / Friday, November 12, 2010 / Proposed Rules 
know about the medical product that 
will enable them to safely use or 
prescribe it. Similarly, this risk 
information helps consumers know 
whether medical products may be 
appropriate for them as well as what 
they should tell their healthcare 
professionals about before taking or 
using or while taking or using a product. 
It also lets consumers know what risks 
they might experience and what steps 
they need to take for safety reasons (e.g., 
no driving) because of taking or using a 
product. It would not be appropriate to 
provide partial information of this type 
because the full summary of information 
is needed to ensure safe use. 
In contrast, the warnings for cigarette 
products set forth in FCLAA apply to 
every cigarette product. Cigarettes have 
health risks that are associated with 
their use generally. Furthermore, there 
is no safe method of using cigarette 
products, so this warning information 
has a different purpose than medical 
product warning information, in that it 
is intended to influence awareness of 
cigarette-related health risks and, as a 
result, encourage cessation and 
discourage initiation, rather than to help 
ensure that a particular cigarette 
product is safely used. 
The exposure to product information 
is also different for medical products 
versus cigarette products. For cigarette 
products, the warnings will be printed 
prominently and conspicuously on all 
packages. These required warnings will 
thus be seen by smokers, such as each 
time that smokers buy cigarettes or take 
a cigarette out of its package (as 
discussed in Section III.A, pack-a-day 
smokers can be exposed to warnings 
more than 7,000 times per year). All 
nine of the required warnings also will 
be seen by potential smokers each time 
they are at a point-of-sale considering 
purchasing a package of cigarettes. The 
same is not true of prescription or 
restricted medical products, as the risk 
information is specific to each product, 
is not commonly displayed prominently 
and conspicuously for all products at 
the point of purchase, and is not likely 
to be seen by consumers each time they 
take or use a product. 
In addition, section 1141.14(b) 
proposes that a cigarette advertisement 
or package will be deemed to include a 
brief statement of relevant warnings for 
the purposes of section 903(a)(8) of the 
FD&C Act (21 U.S.C. 387c(a)(8)) if it 
bears one of the required warnings. 
Under section 903(a)(8)(B) of the FD&C 
Act (21 U.S.C. 387c(a)(8)(B)), a tobacco 
product is deemed misbranded unless 
the manufacturer, packer, or distributor 
includes in all advertisements and other 
descriptive printed matter a brief 
statement of, among other things, the 
relevant warnings. The warnings 
required by section 4 of FCLAA for 
cigarette advertising and packages are 
‘‘relevant warnings’’ with respect to 
cigarettes as that phrase is used in 
section 903. For the purpose of this 
provision, ‘‘descriptive printed matter’’ 
includes the product package label, 
which, under this proposed rule, would 
be required to bear certain warnings. 
FDA is thus proposing that packages 
and advertisements that bear one of the 
required warnings in accordance with 
the proposed rule would satisfy the 
requirement to include a brief statement 
of the relevant warnings for the 
purposes of section 903(a)(8). Similarly, 
FDA is proposing that a cigarette 
distributed or offered for sale in any 
State shall be deemed to be misbranded 
under section 903(a)(8) unless the 
manufacturer, packer, or distributor 
includes in all advertisements and 
packages issued or caused to be issued 
by the manufacturer, packer, or 
distributor with respect to the cigarette 
one of the required warnings. 
F. Section 1141.16—Disclosures 
Regarding Cessation 
Section 1141.16 proposes that one or 
more of the required warnings include 
specified information about an 
appropriate smoking cessation resource. 
The goal would be to provide a place 
where smokers and other members of 
the public can obtain smoking cessation 
information from staff trained 
specifically to help smokers quit by 
delivering unbiased and evidence-based 
information, advice, and support. There 
are a number of possible alternatives 
here, including use of an existing or 
new quitline or Web site, where 
smokers and other members of the 
public can obtain current unbiased, 
factual smoking cessation information. 
We are proposing that the final rule 
require that a specified reference to a 
smoking cessation resource be included 
in the required warnings. We propose 
that the resource that is required to be 
referenced must meet specific criteria 
designed to ensure that the cessation 
information, advice, and support 
provided are unbiased and evidence- 
based. Specifically, we are proposing 
that the referenced resource must meet 
the following criteria: 
• It must provide factual information 
about the harms to health from smoking 
and the health benefits of quitting. 
• It must provide factual information 
about what to expect when trying to quit 
smoking (e.g., common withdrawal 
symptoms and their duration, 
circumstances that can trigger cravings). 
• It must provide practical advice 
(problem-solving/skills training) about 
how to deal with common issues faced 
by users trying to quit (e.g., how to deal 
with cravings and withdrawal). 
• It must provide evidence-based 
advice about how to formulate a plan to 
quit smoking. 
• It must provide evidence-based 
information about effective relapse 
prevention strategies. 
• It must provide factual information 
on smoking cessation treatments, 
including FDA-approved cessation 
medications. 
• The information, advice, and 
support provided must be evidence- 
based; must be unbiased, including with 
respect to products, services, persons, 
and other entities; and must be relevant 
to tobacco cessation. For example, it can 
include factual information about the 
health risks of smoking but it cannot 
include derogatory statements regarding 
cigarette manufacturers, importers, 
distributors, or retailers or advocate 
public policy changes. 
• Other than as described in the 
criteria for what information may or 
must be provided, the resource must not 
advertise or promote any particular 
product or service. The resource may 
provide one or more FDA-approved 
over-the-counter cessation products, 
provided it does so in a manner that 
does not advertise or promote a 
particular product. 
• It must not selectively present 
information about a subset of FDA- 
approved cessation products or product 
categories while failing to mention other 
FDA-approved cessation products or 
product categories or reference any drug 
or other medical product that FDA has 
not approved for tobacco cessation. 
• It must not encourage the use of any 
non-evidence based smoking cessation 
practices. 
If the resource chosen is a Web site, 
we propose that it meet the following 
additional criteria: 
• The Web site must not contain a 
link to any Web site unless it meets all 
of the listed criteria. 
• The Web site may refer to one or 
more toll-free telephone numbers, 
provided they meet the applicable 
criteria. 
If the resource chosen is a toll-free 
telephone number, we propose that it 
meet the following additional criteria: 
• The staff that provide smoking 
cessation information and advice are 
trained specifically to help smokers quit 
by delivering unbiased and evidence- 
based information, advice, and support. 
• The service has appropriate 
controls to ensure the applicable criteria 
are met. 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:19 Nov 10, 2010 Jkt 223001 PO 00000 Frm 00018 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\12NOP2.SGM 12NOP2em
cd
on
al
d 
on
 D
SK
2B
SO
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
69541 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 218 / Friday, November 12, 2010 / Proposed Rules 
The smoking cessation information 
would be included as part of one or 
more of the required warnings and 
therefore would not appear outside of 
the areas specified for the required 
warning (i.e., 50 percent of the area of 
each of the front and rear panels of 
cigarette packages and 20 percent of the 
area of advertisements). Thus, no 
additional space on cigarette packages 
or in advertising would be needed to 
display this information. Some or all of 
the images in the two documents that 
will be incorporated by reference in the 
final rule would contain this smoking 
cessation referral information where this 
information, along with the textual 
warning statement and accompanying 
graphic, are clear, legible, and fit within 
the specified area. FDA requests 
comments regarding the selection of an 
appropriate smoking cessation resource 
and the applicable criteria identified in 
the bullets above. 
Reducing the number of Americans 
who smoke by increasing the likelihood 
that smokers will quit smoking would 
provide substantial public health 
benefits by reducing the life-threatening 
consequences associated with continued 
cigarette use. Moreover, studies have 
found that health warnings are more 
effective if they are combined with 
cessation-related information (Ref. 5 at 
p. C–7). Thus, FDA is proposing to 
require information about an 
appropriate smoking cessation resource 
under section 906(d) of the FD&C Act as 
appropriate for the protection of the 
public health. 
G. Proposed Effective Date 
Section 201(b) of the Tobacco Control 
Act specifies that the requirements for 
health warnings on cigarette packages 
and advertisements for cigarettes are 
effective fifteen months after the 
issuance of the regulations that FDA is 
proposing in this proposed rule, and 
that a final rule must be issued not later 
than 24 months after the date of 
enactment of the Tobacco Control Act. 
Therefore, FDA proposes that any final 
rule will become effective fifteen 
months after the date the final rule 
publishes in the Federal Register. 
During this time, parties should take 
whatever steps they need to plan and 
implement business operations that will 
comply with the final rule. As of the 
effective date, no tobacco product 
manufacturer, importer, distributor, or 
retailer of cigarettes may advertise or 
cause to be advertised within the United 
States any cigarette product unless the 
advertising complies with the final 
regulation. Also, cigarette packages that 
do not comply with the requirements of 
the final rule must not be manufactured 
for sale or distribution in the United 
States as of the effective date. 
As specified in section 201(b) of the 
Tobacco Control Act, however, if a 
packaged cigarette product was 
manufactured prior to the effective date 
of the final rule but does not contain the 
warning statements and graphics 
required under the final rule, the 
product may be introduced into 
commerce in the United States within 
thirty days from such effective date. 
Therefore, manufacturers, distributors, 
importers, and retailers may continue to 
introduce into domestic commerce 
existing inventory that may not contain 
the warning statements and graphics 
required under the final rule for an 
additional thirty days after the effective 
date of any final rule. After the 30-day 
period, manufacturers must not 
introduce into domestic commerce any 
cigarette packages that do not contain 
the warning statements and graphics 
required under the final rule, 
irrespective of the date of manufacture. 
While this limitation only applies to 
manufacturers, we note that keeping 
products without the new, updated 
warnings on the market for an extended 
period of time is not in the interest of 
public health. We request comments 
regarding mechanisms for enforcing this 
rule and its effective date, such as ways 
to differentiate cigarette packages sold 
from existing inventory from those that 
were manufactured after the effective 
date. 
V. Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 
The required warning disclosures are 
the ‘‘public disclosure of information 
originally supplied by the Federal 
government to the recipient for th[at] 
purpose,’’ and are, therefore, not within 
the scope of the Paperwork Reduction 
Act. See 5 CFR 1320.3(c)(2). 
VI. Executive Order 13132: Federalism 
FDA has analyzed this proposed rule 
in accordance with the principles set 
forth in Executive Order 13132. FDA 
has determined that the proposed rule, 
if finalized, would not contain policies 
that would have substantial direct 
effects on the States, on the relationship 
between the National Government and 
the States, or on the distribution of 
power and responsibilities among the 
various levels of government. 
Accordingly, the agency tentatively 
concludes that the proposed rule does 
not contain policies that have 
federalism implications as defined in 
the Executive order and, consequently, 
a federalism summary impact statement 
is not required. 
VII. Environmental Impact 
FDA has determined under 21 CFR 
25.30(k) that this action is of a type that 
does not individually or cumulatively 
have a significant effect on the human 
environment. Therefore, neither an 
environmental assessment nor an 
environmental impact statement is 
required. 
VIII. Analysis of Impacts 
A. Introduction and Summary 
FDA has examined the impacts of the 
proposed rule under Executive Order 
12866, the Regulatory Flexibility Act 
(5 U.S.C. 601–612), and the Unfunded 
Mandates Reform Act of 1995 (Pub. L. 
104–4). Executive Order 12866 directs 
agencies to assess all costs and benefits 
of available regulatory alternatives and, 
when regulation is necessary, to select 
regulatory approaches that maximize 
net benefits (including potential 
economic, environmental, public health 
and safety, and other advantages; 
distributive impacts; and equity). This 
proposed rule would be an 
economically significant regulatory 
action under the Executive order. 
The Regulatory Flexibility Act 
requires agencies to analyze regulatory 
options that would minimize any 
significant impact of a rule on small 
entities. This proposed rule would have 
a significant economic impact on a 
substantial number of small entities. 
Section 202(a) of the Unfunded 
Mandates Reform Act of 1995 requires 
that agencies prepare a written 
statement, which includes an 
assessment of anticipated costs and 
benefits, before proposing ‘‘any rule that 
includes any Federal mandate that may 
result in the expenditure by State, local, 
and tribal governments, in the aggregate, 
or by the private sector, of $100,000,000 
or more (adjusted annually for inflation) 
in any one year.’’ The current threshold 
after adjustment for inflation is $135 
million, using the most current (2009) 
Implicit Price Deflator for the Gross 
Domestic Product. This proposed rule 
would result in a 1-year expenditure 
that would meet or exceed this amount. 
FDA’s estimate of the benefits of the 
proposed rule is determined by the 
predicted reduction in the number of 
U.S. smokers and the consequent 
reduction in the number of people who 
will ultimately become ill or die from 
causes related to smoking. FDA 
estimates that this proposed rule will 
reduce the number of smokers by 
537,000 in 2013, with small additional 
reductions over the following 20 years. 
We estimate the present value of the 
rule-induced benefits at a 3 percent 
discount rate to be $10.1 to $28.4 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:19 Nov 10, 2010 Jkt 223001 PO 00000 Frm 00019 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\12NOP2.SGM 12NOP2em
cd
on
al
d 
on
 D
SK
2B
SO
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
69542 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 218 / Friday, November 12, 2010 / Proposed Rules 
billion, including $8.96 to $26.89 billion 
in gained life-years, $202.1 to $606.2 
million in reduced non-fatal 
emphysema, $393.1 million in reduced 
fire losses, and $498.9 million in 
medical cost reductions. At a 7 percent 
discount rate, our estimates of total 
benefits become $2.29 to $6.03 billion, 
including $1.80 to $5.41 billion due to 
the increase in life-years, $64.9 to 
$194.7 million in reduced emphysema, 
$180.6 million in reduced fire losses 
and $244.0 million in medical cost 
reductions. The annualized benefits 
range from $676.0 million to $1.91 
billion with a 3 percent discount rate 
and from $216.6 to $569.6 million with 
a 7 percent discount rate. Most of the 
public health benefits from the 
proposed rule would be realized in the 
future; perhaps several decades after the 
rule took effect. In other words, the 
benefits estimated here for the typical 
dissuaded smoker consist of health 
gains to be realized decades in the 
future. 
The estimated totals may understate 
the full public health benefits of the 
proposed rule because they fail to 
quantify reductions in smokers’ non- 
fatal illnesses other than emphysema, 
the reduction in external effects 
attributable to passive smoking, and the 
reduction in infant and child fatalities 
caused by mothers’ smoking during 
pregnancy. 
TABLE E1—BENEFITS OF REGULATION 
Impacts of the rule 
Annualized benefits ($ mil) 
3 percent 7 percent 
Low Medium High Low Medium High 
Smokers’ Life-Years Saved ............................................. 602.5 1,205.0 1,807.5 170.4 340.7 511.1 
Emphysema Reductions .................................................. 13.6 27.2 40.7 6.1 12.2 18.4 
Fire Loss Averted ............................................................. 26.4 26.4 26.4 17.1 17.1 17.1 
Medical Expenditure Reduction ....................................... 33.5 33.5 33.5 23.0 23.0 23.0 
Total .......................................................................... 676.0 1,292.1 1,908.2 216.6 393.1 569.6 
Note: Table entries are annualized over twenty years, but many of the benefits represented will not be realized until well beyond the twentieth 
year of the proposed rule’s implementation. 
The total estimated costs of the final 
rule include $219.2 million to $529.5 
million in one-time costs and $6.2 
million in annual costs. Annualized 
over 20 years, the total costs range from 
$20.3 million to $40.6 million with a 3 
percent discount rate and from $25.1 
million to $52.5 million with a 7 
percent discount rate, as shown in Table 
E2. These costs will arise primarily due 
to the need to change cigarette package 
labels and remove point-of-sale 
promotions that do not comply with the 
new restrictions. FDA could not 
quantify every regulatory cost. Some 
commercial sectors will experience 
costs for short-term dislocations of 
current business activities, but the costs 
would be mitigated for those businesses 
that anticipate the industry’s 
adjustments. 
In addition to the costs described 
above, the rule will lead to private costs 
in the form of reduced revenues for 
many firms in the affected sectors. 
These sector-specific revenue 
reductions are for the most part 
distributional effects and cannot be 
counted as social costs. 
TABLE E2—COSTS OF REGULATION 
Requirements of the rule 
Annualized costs ($ mil) 
3 percent 7 percent 
Low Medium High Low Medium High 
Private Sector 
Labeling Change ....................................................... 11.0 20.0 29.2 14.9 27.0 39.4 
Market Testing .......................................................... 0.3 0.7 2.4 0.4 1.0 3.3 
Point-of-Sale Advertising .......................................... 3.0 3.0 3.0 4.0 4.0 4.0 
Subtotal .............................................................. 14.3 23.7 34.6 19.3 32.0 46.7 
Government 
FDA ........................................................................... 6.0 6.0 6.0 5.8 5.8 5.8 
Subtotal .............................................................. 6.0 6.0 6.0 5.8 5.8 5.8 
Total ............................................................ 20.3 29.7 40.6 25.1 37.8 52.5 
As tobacco industry revenues decline, 
state and Federal tobacco tax revenues 
will also fall. If excise tax rates on 
tobacco products remain at current 
levels, annual state tax revenues would 
fall by approximately $106.1 million 
and annual Federal tax revenues by 
$80.5 million. 
B. Need for Rule 
According to the nation’s health 
experts, tobacco use remains the most 
important preventable cause of 
morbidity and premature mortality in 
the United States, accounting each year 
for over 400,000 deaths (Ref. 58; Ref. 1). 
Written with the goal of ameliorating 
the enormous toll on the public health 
that is directly attributable to the 
consumption of cigarettes, the Tobacco 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:19 Nov 10, 2010 Jkt 223001 PO 00000 Frm 00020 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\12NOP2.SGM 12NOP2em
cd
on
al
d 
on
 D
SK
2B
SO
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
69543 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 218 / Friday, November 12, 2010 / Proposed Rules 
6 The effects of anti-smoking policies occur over 
a long period of time, so we want to include at least 
one full generation in our analysis. Using a twenty- 
year time horizon allows us to do this while still 
avoiding the extreme uncertainty regarding effects 
occurring in the more distant future. 
7 In their multivariate regression analysis, Sloan 
et al. control for alcohol intake, body mass index, 
financial planning horizon, race, education and 
marital status. 
Control Act mandates the publication of 
this proposed rule. Section 201 of the 
Tobacco Control Act modifies section 4 
of FCLAA (15 U.S.C. 1333) to require 
that nine new health warning 
statements, along with color graphics 
depicting the negative health 
consequences of smoking, appear on 
cigarette packages and in cigarette 
advertisements. In the following 
analysis, we estimate the costs and 
benefits of this statutory requirement. 
C. Benefits 
We estimate the benefits of the 
proposed rule by comparing expected 
life-cycle events of smokers with those 
of nonsmokers. Nonsmokers tend to live 
longer and contract fewer lung and 
other diseases, so the benefits in our 
analysis include the discounted value of 
life-years gained, cases of emphysema 
avoided and medical services freed for 
other uses. We also include an estimate 
of the monetary value of the property 
and lives saved as a result of the rule- 
induced reduction in the number of 
accidental fires caused by smoking. 
1. Reduced Smoking Rates 
The changes outlined in this proposed 
rule are projected to decrease smoking 
initiation and increase smoking 
cessation. For each of the first twenty 
years of the proposed rule’s 
implementation (2012–2031),6 FDA 
calculates the predicted decrease in the 
number of U.S. smokers by multiplying 
together the following: 
(a) The estimated effect (a percentage 
point change) of cigarette warning labels 
on the national smoking rate, and 
(b) The population in a particular year 
in the absence of the proposed 
regulation (as projected by the U.S. 
Census Bureau). 
To obtain estimates of the effect of 
cigarette warning labels on smoking 
rates (item (a) in the list above), we look 
to the experience of Canada, which has 
required the use of graphic warning 
labels since December, 2000 (Ref. 59). 
The advantage of this approach lies in 
our ability to observe actual consumer 
behavior—in the form of changes in 
smoking rates—before and after a 
graphic warning label requirement went 
into effect. The warning labels to be 
required in the proposed rule are 
generally similar to those developed by 
Health Canada and other international 
authorities. As in Canada, the labels 
required by the proposed rule would 
occupy at least half the front and rear 
display panels of a cigarette package. 
Moreover, under the proposed rule, 
there would be a mix of warning 
statements and images that depict the 
negative consequences of smoking. 
Although the proposed rule would 
follow much the same approach as the 
Canadian warning label requirements, it 
would differ in some ways: Canada has 
16 labels in rotation, rather than 9; 
warning statements appear in English 
on one side of a package and in French 
on the other; and health and cessation 
information is included on leaflets 
within Canadian cigarette packages (Ref. 
60). These details, combined with 
general differences in legal and social 
trends, indicate that Canada’s 
experience with warning labels can give 
only a general idea of the changes in 
smoking rates to be expected as a result 
of the proposed rule. In addition, other 
smoking control initiatives, including 
an increase in the cigarette tax and new 
restrictions on public smoking also 
occurred in both the United States and 
Canada during the period of our 
analysis. These and other confounding 
factors make our estimate of the effect 
of proposed warning labels highly 
uncertain. 
Health Canada (Ref. 61) reports 
Canadian smoking rates for ages 15 and 
above for each year from 1999 through 
2008. FDA obtained smoking rates for 
adults, aged 18 and above, in the United 
States from the National Health 
Interview Survey (Ref. 62). We used the 
results from these two reports to 
calculate the U.S.-Canada smoking rate 
difference for each year. 
Using data from Health Canada (Ref. 
63), the National Institutes of Health 
(Ref. 64) and the National Health 
Interview Survey (Ref. 62), FDA finds 
that Canadian smoking rates followed a 
roughly linear downward trend from 
1985–2000, while U.S. smoking rates 
declined logarithmically over the same 
time period; the predicted smoking rate 
decrease was 0.67 percentage points per 
year in Canada and, as of the year 2000, 
0.24 percentage points per year in the 
United States. Using the estimated 
trends, we predict smoking rates for the 
United States and Canada, and the 
difference between them, for each year 
up to 2008. We then subtract the 
predicted U.S.-Canada smoking rate 
differences from the actual differences 
observed in the data. Implicit in this 
method is the assumption that these 
otherwise unexplained differences may 
be attributed solely to the presence in 
Canada of graphic warning labels. We 
do not account for potential 
confounding variables; our method is 
therefore a rudimentary approach to 
estimating the smoking reduction that 
would be effected by the proposed 
warning labels and may be producing 
results that are off by one or more orders 
of magnitude. FDA requests comments 
on this issue. 
Using this rudimentary approach, 
FDA estimates that the average 
unexplained difference between the 
United States and Canada in national 
smoking rates is 0.212 percentage points 
higher for the 2001–2008 period than for 
1999–2000. Applying this estimate to 
population projections (Ref. 65) and 
summing over all age groups yields an 
estimate that the rule would reduce 
(either through cessation or avoided 
initiation) the United States’ smoking 
population by approximately 537,000 in 
2013, with the total decrease rising to 
approximately 619,000 in 2031 due to 
population growth. 
2. Expected Life-Years Saved 
The largest health consequence of 
smoking is the increased rate of 
mortality from cardiovascular disease, 
cancer, and certain other illnesses. As a 
result, the largest benefits of this 
proposed rule stem from the increased 
life expectancies for those individuals 
who, in the absence of this proposed 
rule, would be smokers and thus 
susceptible to premature mortality from 
one of these often-fatal diseases. We 
calculate the number of life-years saved 
using differences in the probabilities of 
survival for smokers and nonsmokers. 
Sloan et al. (Ref. 66) construct life tables 
for various categories of individuals, 
including ‘‘non-smoking smokers’’ and 
typical 24-year-old smokers. A non- 
smoking smoker is someone who does 
not use cigarettes but otherwise exhibits 
the lifestyle and personal 
characteristics 7 of the average smoker. 
A typical 24-year-old smoker does not 
necessarily smoke for his or her entire 
life, but instead faces cessation 
probabilities that are in line with values 
observed for all ages in the National 
Health Interview Survey; the life 
expectancy effects of cessation at older 
ages are netted out of life expectancy 
effects of avoiding smoking at age 24 
(results reported below). Sloan et al.’s 
life tables allow us to calculate how 
many additional deaths, per 100,000 
population, may be expected among 
typical smokers than among non- 
smoking smokers between the 24th and 
25th birthdays, the 25th and 26th, and 
so on until the 100th birthday. (To 
simplify the calculation, FDA assumes 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:19 Nov 10, 2010 Jkt 223001 PO 00000 Frm 00021 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\12NOP2.SGM 12NOP2em
cd
on
al
d 
on
 D
SK
2B
SO
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
69544 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 218 / Friday, November 12, 2010 / Proposed Rules 
8 Chronic obstructive bronchitis is a smoking- 
related illness that is closely related to emphysema 
so that the two conditions are now generally 
categorized together as chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD). Because the sources we 
use in this section only report the health and 
welfare effects of emphysema, our resulting benefits 
estimates include only a portion of the total social 
gains associated with rule-induced COPD 
reductions. 
that differences in survival probabilities 
for smokers and nonsmokers are 
negligible below age 24 and above age 
100.) Overall, Sloan et al. find that a 
typical 24-year-old female smoker can 
expect to live another 55.5 years, while 
a comparable nonsmoker can expect 
another 57.8 years of life, producing an 
overall regulation-induced gain of 2.4 
life-years per individual who is 
prevented from starting to smoke. 
Comparing male 24-year-old typical and 
non-smoking smokers, life expectancy 
increases from 49.8 to 54.2 years, 
producing a gain of 4.4 years. The gap 
between male and female life 
expectancy results may be due to 
different physiological responses to 
equal amounts of smoking, different 
lifetime cessation patterns or different 
smoking intensities. Taylor et al. (Ref. 
67), for instance, find that male smokers 
are more likely than female smokers to 
consume more than a pack a day. Sloan 
et al. do not report how much of the 
male-female difference in their 
estimated life expectancy effects may be 
attributed to each possible mechanism. 
While FDA considers Sloan et al.’s 
methodology to be the most suitable in 
the literature for purposes of the present 
analysis, several other studies of 
survival probabilities among smokers 
who quit early in life compared with 
smokers who persist in smoking into 
later decades suggest that the average 
life expectancy gains of not smoking 
may be much higher for both males and 
females. Since these other studies have 
found larger increases in life expectancy 
attributable to smoking avoidance, the 
Sloan et al. results may be considered 
conservative. 
We assume that each person who 
reaches age 24 during the twenty years 
(2012–2031) of our analysis and is 
dissuaded from smoking extends his or 
her life by the gender-specific amount 
Sloan and co-authors report. For older 
individuals, whose post-smoking 
cessation survival probabilities cannot 
be plausibly assumed to equal those of 
individuals who were nonsmokers at 
age 24, we predict life extensions using 
former smoker life tables that we 
construct using Sloan et al.’s results and 
cessation probabilities from the 1998 
National Health Interview Survey (Ref. 
62). 
3. Benefits of Reduced Premature 
Mortality 
OMB Circular A–4 (Ref. 68) advises 
that the best means of valuing benefits 
of reduced fatalities is to measure the 
affected group’s willingness-to-pay to 
avoid fatal risks. Three life-year values 
(also known as values of a statistical 
life-year, or VSLY) used frequently in 
the literature and in previous analyses 
are $100,000, $200,000 and $300,000 
(Ref. 69; Ref. 70; 74 FR 33030, July 9, 
2009), which we update to $105,000, 
$210,000 and $315,000 in 2009 prices. 
These values constitute our estimates of 
willingness-to-pay for a year of life 
preserved in the present. The economic 
assessment of a future life-year requires 
discounting its value to make it 
commensurate with the value of present 
events. For this analysis, we use 3 
percent and 7 percent discount rates to 
calculate the present value of the life- 
years we predict will be saved. 
For each dissuaded smoker, we 
multiply a VSLY by the relevant age- 
and gender-specific life extension and 
then discount appropriately to arrive at 
a per-person value of reduced mortality. 
For 24-year-olds, this value ranges from 
$9,166 (for a female applying a VSLY of 
$105,000 and a 7 percent discount rate 
to her 2.4 life-years gained due to 
smoking avoidance) to $358,864 (for a 
male applying a VSLY of $315,000 and 
a 3 percent discount rate to his 4.4 life- 
years gained due to smoking avoidance). 
Multiplying the per-person values by 
the predicted number of dissuaded 
smokers yields estimates of rule- 
induced mortality benefits that range 
from $3.61 to $53.78 billion. 
This range tends to overstate the net 
benefits of reduced smoking because it 
does not account for lost consumer 
surplus associated with the activity of 
smoking. Cutler (Ref. 69) suggests that 
lost consumer surplus might equal 
around fifty percent of the dollar value 
of life-year gains, which necessitates 
dividing the estimated gross benefits in 
half. This adjustment is based on a very 
simple linear model of cigarette demand 
that is not definitive; a more data- 
intensive model may produce an 
adjustment factor very different from 
fifty percent. FDA requests comments, 
additional data and research on this 
adjustment. Net benefits estimates, for 
all VSLY ($105,000, $210,000 and 
$315,000) and both discount rates (3 
percent and 7 percent) and produced 
using the Cutler adjustment factor, 
appear in Table E3. 
These totals may understate the full 
value of rule-induced reductions in 
mortality because they fail to quantify 
any reduction in either the external 
effects attributable to passive smoking 
or the infant and child fatalities caused 
by mothers’ smoking during pregnancy. 
Sloan et al. (Ref. 66) indicate that, 
historically, the inclusion of spouse and 
infant deaths increased estimates of 
smoking’s mortality effects by 
approximately 26.3 percent. We do not 
incorporate this adjustment into our 
analysis, however, since recent public 
smoking restrictions and educational 
campaigns have reduced external 
smoking exposure to well below 
historical levels, though not to zero. 
TABLE E3—PRESENT VALUE OF LIFETIME REDUCED SMOKER MORTALITY 
Value of a Statistical Life-Year = $105,000 Value of a Statistical Life-Year = $210,000 Value of a Statistical Life-Year = $315,000 
3% Discount rate 7% Discount rate 3% Discount rate 7% Discount rate 3% Discount rate 7% Discount rate 
$8,963,863,457 $1,804,953,192 $17,927,726,915 $3,609,906,384 $26,891,590,372 $5,414,859,576 
4. Reduced Emphysema 
In the previous section, we estimated 
the benefits that will accrue as a result 
of the rule-induced reduction in 
premature deaths from lung cancer, 
cardiovascular disease and other 
smoking-related illnesses. Cigarette 
smoking is also a major risk factor for 
diseases that are less immediately fatal. 
As with premature death, individuals 
are assumed to be willing to give up 
valuable resources in the present in 
order to avoid the pain and distress 
associated with these non-fatal illnesses. 
Emphysema, a form of COPD,8 is 
perhaps the most notable such illness. 
Sloan et al. (Id.) estimate young 
smokers’ lifetime illness profiles and 
report that smoking has a larger effect 
on expected years with emphysema 
than on expected years with cancer, 
coronary heart disease or any of the 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:19 Nov 10, 2010 Jkt 223001 PO 00000 Frm 00022 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\12NOP2.SGM 12NOP2em
cd
on
al
d 
on
 D
SK
2B
SO
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
69545 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 218 / Friday, November 12, 2010 / Proposed Rules 
9 Due to the slow progressive nature of 
emphysema, patients with emphysema experience 
a diminished quality of life for longer periods than 
do patients with other smoking-related illnesses, 
which more rapidly progress to death. 
10 One of the first states to enact these laws, New 
York, requires cigarettes to self-extinguish 75% of 
the time (Ref. 73). First-year (2004) data in New 
York show a reduction in smoking-caused fires by 
about 33% from the average of the three previous 
years of complete data (Ref. 74). 
other conditions they study.9 In order to 
quantify the value of rule-induced 
reductions in years spent experiencing 
emphysema, we scale our estimates of 
the value of a statistical life-year 
($105,000, $210,000 and $315,000, as 
discussed in section VIII.C.3) by a ratio 
representing the tradeoff individuals are 
willing to make between perfect health 
and the state of having emphysema. 
Sullivan and Ghushchyan (Ref. 71) 
estimate this tradeoff with a regression 
of EQ–5D health index scores on disease 
indicators. EQ–5D survey responses—to 
questions about five areas of health, 
including mobility, pain, and ability to 
perform usual activities—are mapped so 
that a score of one represents best- 
measurable health, a score of zero 
represents death, and fractional values 
represent intermediate levels of health. 
Sullivan and Ghushchyan’s regression 
analysis indicates that a year with 
emphysema decreases, on average, a 
patient’s welfare as much as the loss of 
0.0667 years of perfect health. 
Multiplying this average welfare loss by 
life-year values of $105,000, $210,000 
and $315,000 yields estimates of $7,000, 
$14,000 and $21,000 for the amounts 
individuals are willing to pay to avoid 
a year of emphysema. 
Sloan et al. (Ref. 66) estimate that a 
24-year-old smoker can expect, on 
average, an extra 0.46 discounted years 
(using a discount rate of 3 percent) or 
0.22 discounted years (using a discount 
rate of 7 percent) of emphysema over his 
or her lifetime, as compared with an 
otherwise equivalent nonsmoker. Sloan 
and co-authors do not report the effect 
of smoking on emphysema years for 
members of other age cohorts, so FDA 
takes the conservative approach of 
estimating benefits only for those 
individuals who reach age 24 sometime 
during the first twenty years of the 
proposed rule’s implementation. 
(Smoking cessation brought about by 
this rule will almost certainly reduce 
emphysema for some individuals who 
are over age 24 at the time of the rule’s 
implementation. However, due to data 
constraints, we omit the benefits to 
these older individuals; this is why we 
describe our estimate as conservative.) 
Multiplying our predictions of per- 
smoker decreased discounted disease- 
years by Sullivan and Ghushchyan’s 
welfare loss per year of emphysema and 
FDA’s estimates of the rule-induced 
reduction in the number of smokers (see 
section VIII.C.1 for a discussion of 
methodology), discounting 
appropriately, and dividing in half (per 
Ref. 69) yields a rule-induced welfare 
gain of $64.9 to $606.2 million. Results 
appear in Table E4. Smokers also suffer 
from other non-fatal illnesses but we do 
not include those losses in this analysis. 
Since we do not quantify reductions in 
smokers’ non-fatal illnesses other than 
emphysema, these estimates represent 
lower bounds on the value of rule- 
induced morbidity reductions. 
TABLE E4—PRESENT VALUE OF 24-YEAR-OLDS’ LIFETIME REDUCED EMPHYSEMA 
Value of a Statistical Life-Year = $105,000 Value of a Statistical Life-Year = $210,000 Value of a Statistical Life-Year = $315,000 
3% Discount rate 7% Discount rate 3% Discount rate 7% Discount rate 3% Discount rate 7% Discount rate 
$202,075,479 $64,886,926 $404,150,958 $129,773,852 $606,226,437 $194,660,778 
5. Reduced Fire Costs 
Each year, fires started by lighted 
tobacco products kill and injure people 
and destroy structures and other 
property. In the United States in 2007, 
civilian deaths caused by smoking- 
related fires totaled 720, with direct 
property damage of $530 million (Ref. 
72). A reduction in the number of 
smokers, and the coinciding number of 
cigarettes smoked, will reduce the 
number of future fires. 
The percentage reduction in fires may 
not equal the percentage reduction in 
cigarette consumption, however, 
because since 2003 forty-nine states 
have passed legislation that requires 
cigarettes to be self-extinguishing or 
fire-safe (with the effectiveness dates of 
some of these state laws extending into 
2011). FDA acknowledges some 
uncertainty in the effectiveness rate of 
fire-safe cigarettes; 10 for this analysis, 
we estimate that 50 percent of 
apparently rule-induced future fire 
reductions would have been avoided 
even without the proposed rule due to 
fire-safe cigarette design. 
Using a $7.9 million value of a 
statistical life (Ref. 75, which is the 2006 
value updated to 2009 dollars using Ref. 
76), FDA projects fire-cost savings of 
$393.1 million (at a three percent 
discount rate) or $180.6 million (at a 
seven percent discount rate); of these 
totals, 9.7% consists of averted property 
damage and the rest of lives saved. 
These estimated savings may 
significantly underestimate the potential 
benefits because they exclude the value 
of reduction in fire-caused non-fatal 
injuries. 
6. Medical Services 
Sloan et al. (Ref. 66) estimate that 
smokers use more medical services over 
their life cycles than do comparable 
nonsmokers, with a specific net cost of 
$3,757 per female 24-year-old smoker 
and $2,617 per male 24-year-old smoker 
(in 2000 dollars and with a 3 percent 
discount rate). If these payments are 
distributed equally from ages 24 to 100, 
given FDA’s projected 20-year 
reductions in smoking prevalence, 
smoking-related medical expenditures 
would fall by $1.87 billion, of which 
$997.7 million would be realized as 
savings by smokers themselves and 
$870.6 million by nonsmokers (in the 
form of decreases in private insurance 
premiums or taxes used to fund 
government health programs such as 
Medicare). With a 7 percent discount 
rate, the total decrease in expenditure 
becomes $915.5 million, with $488.0 
million of those savings accruing to 
smokers and $427.5 million to 
nonsmokers. 
In the absence of the rule, some 
portion of smoking-related medical 
expenditures accrues to health service 
providers as economic rent (also known 
as producer surplus). Any reduction of 
this portion would not contribute to the 
social benefit of the rule but would 
instead be a transfer of value from 
producers to consumers and other 
payers. If, however, the supply of 
smoking-related medical services is 
highly elastic, especially in the long 
run, producer surplus would be small. 
For this reason, FDA does not adjust for 
potential rent transfer. We do, however, 
include only the decrease in medical 
expenditure by smokers as a 
contribution to the rule’s benefits. 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:19 Nov 10, 2010 Jkt 223001 PO 00000 Frm 00023 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\12NOP2.SGM 12NOP2em
cd
on
al
d 
on
 D
SK
2B
SO
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
69546 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 218 / Friday, November 12, 2010 / Proposed Rules 
Because nonsmokers’ payments take the 
form of a subsidy for smoking-related 
medical services, some portion of their 
expenditure in the absence of the rule 
is greater than smokers’ own 
willingness-to-pay for medical services. 
Hence, the avoidance of this portion of 
the spending would transfer value from 
smokers to nonsmokers but not 
contribute to an overall social benefit of 
the rule. We do not know the size of this 
portion relative to nonsmokers’ overall 
rule-induced expenditure change, so we 
take the conservative approach of 
excluding nonsmokers’ expenditures 
from our benefits calculation. 
As a final adjustment, we divide the 
remaining expenditure change in half to 
account for smokers’ lost consumer 
surplus associated with the activity of 
smoking. This yields a rule-induced 
benefit of $498.9 million (at a 3 percent 
discount rate) or $244.0 million (at a 7 
percent discount rate). 
7. Summary of Benefits 
The discussion above demonstrates 
the considerable magnitude of the 
economic benefits available from 
smoking reduction efforts. Estimates are 
summarized in Table E5. FDA requests 
comments on the sources and methods 
used to produce these results. 
TABLE E5—PRESENT VALUE OF BENEFITS ($ MIL) 
VSLY = $105,000 VSLY = $210,000 VSLY = $315,000 
3% 
Discount rate 
7% 
Discount rate 
3% 
Discount rate 
7% 
Discount rate 
3% 
Discount rate 
7% 
Discount rate 
Life-Years ................................................. 8,963.9 1,805.0 17,927.7 3,609.9 26,891.6 5,414.9 
Non-Fatal Emphysema ............................ 202.1 64.9 404.2 129.8 606.2 194.7 
Fire Loss .................................................. 393.1 180.6 393.1 180.6 393.1 180.6 
Medical Expenditure Reduction ............... 498.9 244.0 498.9 244.0 498.9 244.0 
Total .................................................. 10,057.9 2,294.5 19,223.8 4,164.3 28,389.8 6,034.1 
8. Uncertainty Analysis 
Estimation of the effectiveness of the 
proposed rule (on reducing the future 
U.S. smoking rate) is subject to a large 
uncertainty that is not fully reflected in 
the benefits estimates appearing in the 
preceding sections, which only reflect 
different estimates of the value of a 
statistical life year. In this section, we 
show the uncertainty associated with 
our estimate of the effectiveness of the 
proposed rule. 
Our primary estimate, that the U.S. 
smoking rate will decrease by 0.212 
percentage points, was calculated in the 
following steps. First, we found the 
decrease in Canadian smoking rates 
since 1999 over and above what would 
have been expected using the pre-2001 
trend. We then subtracted the analogous 
unexplained decrease in the U.S. 
smoking rate over the same period. This 
middle step was driven by the idea that 
the U.S. experience could proxy for 
recent social or policy changes (such as 
public smoking restrictions) that may 
have had effects on Canada’s smoking 
rate and thus needed to be subtracted in 
order to isolate the effect of graphic 
warning labels. The last step was to 
calculate the difference between U.S. 
and Canadian unexplained decreases in 
smoking before and after graphic 
warning labels were introduced in 
Canada. We attributed the remaining 
unexplained difference to graphic 
warning labels. 
However, the U.S. social and policy 
climate may have been so different from 
Canada’s during the years 1999–2008 
that this proxy is inappropriate. To 
account for this possibility, we calculate 
the unexplained difference in Canadian 
smoking rates before and after graphic 
warning labels were introduced, this 
time omitting any U.S. adjustments. 
(Anti-smoking policies and programs 
other than the graphic warning labels 
are assumed to be incorporated in the 
pre-2001 trend, with no additional 
effects of these variables occurring post- 
introduction of graphic warning labels.) 
This approach indicates that graphic 
warning labels may have been 
responsible for a 1.648 percentage point 
decrease in the Canadian smoking rate. 
If the proposed rule were to achieve this 
effectiveness level in the United States, 
benefits would be approximately eight 
times larger than those reported earlier 
in this analysis. 
On the other hand, because FDA has 
had access to very small data sets, our 
effectiveness estimates are in general 
not statistically distinguishable from 
zero; we therefore cannot reject the 
possibility that the proposed rule would 
not change the U.S. smoking rate. In this 
case, the proposed rule would not 
generate any quantifiable benefits, so 
the appropriate lower bound on benefits 
is zero. Ranges of benefits, representing 
the zero-effect case and the Canada-only 
modeling approach, appear in Table E6. 
The wide ranges shown in the table 
highlight the uncertainty inherent in our 
approach. 
TABLE E6—PRESENT VALUE OF BENEFITS, RANGES ($ BILLION) 
VSLY = $105,000 VSLY = $210,000 VSLY = $315,000 
3% 
Discount rate 
7% 
Discount rate 
3% 
Discount rate 
7% 
Discount rate 
3% 
Discount rate 
7% 
Discount rate 
Life-Years ................................................. [0, 69.7] [0, 14.0] [0, 139.3] [0, 28.1] [0, 209.0] [0, 42.1] 
Non-Fatal Emphysema ............................ [0, 1.6] [0, 0.5] [0, 3.1] [0, 1.0] [0, 4.7] [0, 1.5] 
Fire Loss .................................................. [0, 3.1] [0, 1.4] [0, 3.1] [0, 1.4] [0, 3.1] [0, 1.4] 
Medical Expenditure Reduction ............... [0, 3.9] [0, 1.9] [0, 3.9] [0, 1.9] [0, 3.9] [0, 1.9] 
Total .................................................. [0, 78.2] [0, 17.8] [0, 149.4] [0, 32.4] [0, 220.1] [0, 46.9] 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:19 Nov 10, 2010 Jkt 223001 PO 00000 Frm 00024 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\12NOP2.SGM 12NOP2em
cd
on
al
d 
on
 D
SK
2B
SO
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
69547 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 218 / Friday, November 12, 2010 / Proposed Rules 
11 All of the up-front costs of this rule are 
assumed to occur at the beginning of the first period 
of the time horizon of this rule (2011). The cost 
tables present raw undiscounted calculations of 
these up-front costs. For summary tables requiring 
a present value, these costs are discounted 1 year 
to the present (2010). 
D. Costs 
The proposed rule would create new 
burdens for cigarette manufacturers. In 
particular, manufacturers would incur 
the large up-front costs associated with 
a major labeling change.11 Cigarette 
manufacturers and retailers would be 
responsible for the removal of 
noncompliant point-of-sale advertising. 
Consumers are likely to ultimately bear 
a share of these costs in the form of 
increased prices. In addition, the 
tobacco industry and possibly other 
sectors will experience lost sales and 
employment, but these revenue transfers 
will be offset by gains to other sectors, 
as discussed in the ‘‘Distributional 
Effects’’ section of this document. 
1. Number of Affected Entities 
Labeling and advertising requirements 
would affect domestic cigarette 
manufacturers and importers of foreign- 
made cigarettes. Statistics of U.S. 
Businesses’ data show that there were 
24 cigarette manufacturing firms in the 
United States in 2007 (Ref. 77). An 
undetermined number of importers 
would also be affected. 
Noncompliant point-of-sale 
advertising would be removed by 
manufacturers (or importers) and 
retailers. We use detailed data from the 
2002 Economic Census report on 
product line sales for establishments 
with payroll to estimate the percentage 
of various types of retail establishments 
that sell tobacco products. Searching by 
the Economic Census product line 
20150 (cigars, cigarettes, tobacco, and 
smokers’ accessories), we find 
accommodation and food service 
establishments (NAICS 72) and retail 
trade establishments (NAICS 44–45) that 
report tobacco sales (Ref. 78, Ref. 79). 
Although some establishments in other 
industries may have unreported sales of 
tobacco products, the product line sales 
data provide a reasonable basis to 
determine which types of 
establishments would be affected by the 
proposed rule. 
TABLE E7—ESTABLISHMENTS WITH PAYROLL THAT SELL TOBACCO PRODUCTS, 2002 ECONOMIC CENSUS 
Kind of business NAICS Number in NAICS 
Number selling 
tobacco 
products 
Percentage 
selling tobacco 
products 
General merchandise .................................................................................... 452 ................... 40,723 6,991 17 
Food & beverage .......................................................................................... 445 excluding 
44512.
119,592 65,255 55 
Convenience a ............................................................................................... 44512 ............... 29,212 24,871 85 
Gasoline stations with convenience a ........................................................... 44711 ............... 93,691 86,152 92 
Gasoline stations .......................................................................................... 44719 ............... 27,755 8,745 32 
Health & personal care ................................................................................. 446 ................... 81,797 17,761 22 
Other retail establishments ........................................................................... (a) ...................... 595,558 3,470 1 
Accommodation and food services ............................................................... 72 excluding 
7224.
516,734 12,347 2 
Drinking places ............................................................................................. 7224 ................. 48,856 11,490 24 
Tobacco stores ............................................................................................. 453991 ............. 6,184 6,184 100 
Nonstore retailers .......................................................................................... 454 ................... 49,000 848 2 
Vending machine operators .......................................................................... 4542 ................. 5,921 892 15 
Total ....................................................................................................... ........................... 1,615,023 245,006 15 
a Includes NAICS 441, 443, 444, 448, 451, 453 excluding 453991. 
Sources: Ref. 79; Ref. 78. 
Because the 2007 Census data on 
product line sales for retail 
establishments with employees are not 
yet available, we update the number of 
various types of retail establishments 
using 2007 Statistics of U.S. Businesses 
data but assume the share of 
establishments selling tobacco products 
is unchanged (since 2002) within each 
category. Likewise, we lack 2007 Census 
data on product line sales for 
nonemployer establishments. Without 
additional information, we assume that, 
within a NAICS category, the share of 
establishments selling tobacco products 
will be the same for nonemployer 
establishments in 2007 as for 
establishments with payroll in the 2002 
Census. As shown in Table E8, we 
estimate that about 249,000 retail 
establishments with payroll and 126,000 
nonemployer establishments sell 
tobacco products. 
TABLE E8—ESTABLISHMENTS THAT SELL TOBACCO PRODUCTS 
Kind of business NAICS 
Percentage 
selling tobacco 
products a 
Establishments with payroll Nonemployer establishments 
Number b 
Estimated 
number selling 
tobacco 
products 
Number c 
Estimated 
number selling 
tobacco 
products 
General merchandise stores ................. 452 ................... 17 47,456 8,147 32,978 5,661 
Food & beverage stores ....................... 445 excluding 
44512.
55 122,858 67,037 104,026 56,761 
Convenience stores .............................. 44512 ............... 85 28,173 23,986 (e) 
Gasoline stations with convenience 
stores.
44711 ............... 92 95,389 87,713 (e) 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:19 Nov 10, 2010 Jkt 223001 PO 00000 Frm 00025 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\12NOP2.SGM 12NOP2em
cd
on
al
d 
on
 D
SK
2B
SO
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
69548 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 218 / Friday, November 12, 2010 / Proposed Rules 
12 Rotogravure, the most expensive printing 
method, is used for cigarette labeling. 
TABLE E8—ESTABLISHMENTS THAT SELL TOBACCO PRODUCTS—Continued 
Kind of business NAICS 
Percentage 
selling tobacco 
products a 
Establishments with payroll Nonemployer establishments 
Number b 
Estimated 
number selling 
tobacco 
products 
Number c 
Estimated 
number selling 
tobacco 
products 
Gasoline stations .................................. 44719 ............... 32 20,144 6,347 9,454 2,979 
Health and personal care stores .......... 446 ................... 22 89,406 19,413 138,800 30,138 
Other retail stores ................................. (d) ...................... 1 600,537 3,499 735,266 4,284 
Accommodation and food services ....... 72 excluding 
7224.
2 585,541 13,991 281,104 6,717 
Drinking places ..................................... 7224 ................. 24 46,948 11,041 27,170 6,390 
Tobacco stores ..................................... 453991 ............. 100 6,458 6,458 (e) 
Nonstore retailers .................................. 454 excluding 
4542.
2 42,565 737 782,759 13,547 
Vending machine operators .................. 4542 ................. 15 5,158 777 27,595 4,157 
Total ............................................... ........................... 15 1,690,633 249,147 2,139,152 126,477 
a Percentage of establishments with payroll from Table E7. 
b Ref. 77. 
c Ref. 80. 
d Includes NAICS 441, 443, 444, 448, 451, 453 excluding 453991. 
e Data on nonemployer establishments unavailable for this NAICS category. 
2. Costs of Changing Cigarette Labels 
In order to estimate the cost of 
changing cigarette labels to comply with 
the proposed rule, FDA used three 
sources. The ‘‘Methodology Report’’ for 
the forthcoming ‘‘Model to Estimate 
Costs of Using Labeling as a Risk- 
Reduction Strategy for Consumer 
Products Regulated by the Food and 
Drug Administration’’ provided the 
basic framework (Ref. 81). The 
Methodology Report contains few 
numerical values, but we obtained 
preliminary estimates of several cost 
components and updated product 
counts through personal communication 
with our contractor, RTI International 
(Ref. 82). Because the forthcoming 
model is not yet complete, we filled in 
missing pieces using the RTI Final 
Report entitled ‘‘FDA Labeling Cost 
Model,’’ which describes an earlier 
model developed by RTI for FDA to 
estimate the cost of food label changes 
(Ref. 83). We were able to combine the 
models because the older food labeling 
model serves as the basis for the 
forthcoming general labeling model. 
The front and back of every cigarette 
package must be redesigned to 
incorporate graphic warnings occupying 
the entire top half. This type of change 
requires what is known as a complete 
redesign in the 2003 model or as a major 
change in the forthcoming model. In 
addition, the requirement to incorporate 
9 different warnings will increase costs 
beyond what the labeling models 
estimate. FDA accounted for the 
additional warnings by first calculating 
the cost of a complete redesign for 
cigarettes and then inflating the specific 
cost components expected to increase 
due to the requirement for 9 warnings. 
The RTI labeling models incorporate 
three potential cost components of a 
labeling change: label design costs 
(incurred on a per-UPC basis), testing 
costs (incurred on a per-formulation 
basis), and inventory costs (incurred on 
a per-unit basis). For this analysis, we 
restrict the calculation of market testing 
costs to the largest firms and perform 
certain other modifications to make the 
estimated cost match the likely effects of 
the proposed rule. The large cigarette 
manufacturers can plausibly be 
expected to conduct quantitative studies 
and focus group testing for each of their 
brands to gauge the effect of the new 
graphic warnings and to study how they 
might best be able to mitigate their 
effects. By contrast, small manufacturers 
with lower sales revenues are highly 
unlikely to conduct expensive market 
testing in response to the new 
requirements. 
We estimate that 3,234 cigarette UPCs 
(Ref. 82), would be affected by this 
proposed rule. FDA conservatively 
assumes that because the required 
change is so radical, none of the labeling 
changes can be coordinated with a 
previously-scheduled labeling change. 
Based on communication with RTI 
about the forthcoming model (Id.), FDA 
estimates that, per UPC, administrative 
labor costs are $375 to $1,014, graphic 
design labor costs are $1,120 to $3,206, 
prepress labor costs are $1,482 to 
$3,816, recordkeeping labor costs are 
$33 to $434, prepress materials costs are 
$100 to $2,439, and printing plate costs 
are $4,840 to $10,580.12 Summing these 
costs yields a per-UPC design cost of 
$7,950 to $21,489. Multiplying by the 
number of affected UPCs and inflating 
by 10 percent to account for rush 
charges associated with a compliance 
period shorter than 24 months results in 
total label design costs of $28 million to 
$76 million (Ref. 83). 
Manufacturers incur inventory costs if 
they discard unused inventory at the 
end of the compliance period. Because 
cigarette manufacturers do not keep 
large inventories of labels, FDA assumes 
that all inventory will be exhausted 
during the 15-month compliance period, 
leaving no inventory cost. Table E9 
summarizes the total costs of a standard 
label redesign for cigarettes. 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:19 Nov 10, 2010 Jkt 223001 PO 00000 Frm 00026 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\12NOP2.SGM 12NOP2em
cd
on
al
d 
on
 D
SK
2B
SO
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
69549 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 218 / Friday, November 12, 2010 / Proposed Rules 
TABLE E9—COST OF A LABEL REDESIGN FOR CIGARETTES 
Low Medium High 
Label Design Cost a 
Number of UPCs ......................................................................................................................... 3,234 3,234 3,234 
Administrative labor cost ($) ................................................................................................. 375 695 1,014 
Graphic design labor cost ($) ............................................................................................... 1,120 2,163 3,206 
Prepress labor cost ($) ......................................................................................................... 1,482 2,649 3,816 
Recordkeeping labor cost ($) ............................................................................................... 33 234 434 
Prepress materials ($) .......................................................................................................... 100 1,225 2,439 
Printing plate cost ($) ........................................................................................................... 4,840 7,710 10,580 
Cost per product UPC ($) ............................................................................................................ 7,950 14,676 21,489 
Total label design cost, 24-month compliance ($) ...................................................................... 25,710,300 47,462,184 69,495,426 
Total label design cost, < 24-month compliance ($) ................................................................... 28,281,330 52,208,402 76,444,969 
Total Cost ($) ............................................................................................................................... 28,281,330 52,208,402 76,444,969 
a Undiscounted costs assumed to be incurred at the start of the first period of the time horizon of this rule. 
Administrative costs, recordkeeping 
costs, and labor costs associated with 
graphic design and prepress activities 
would probably be unaffected by the 
requirement to use 9 different picture- 
warning pairs. By contrast, we expect 
printing plate costs and prepress 
materials costs to be 9 times as large as 
previously calculated because of the 
requirement for 9 warnings. Table E10 
shows the total costs of the cigarette 
labeling change, adjusted for the 9 
warnings. The labeling cost increases to 
$169 million to $447 million. 
TABLE E10—COST OF A LABEL REDESIGN WITH NINE WARNING LABELS 
Low Medium High 
Label Design Cost a 
Number of UPCs ......................................................................................................................... 3,234 3,234 3,234 
Administrative labor cost ($) ................................................................................................. 375 695 1,014 
Graphic design labor cost ($) ............................................................................................... 1,120 2,163 3,206 
Prepress labor cost ($) ......................................................................................................... 1,482 2,649 3,816 
Recordkeeping labor cost ($) ............................................................................................... 33 234 434 
Prepress materials ($) .......................................................................................................... 900 11,025 21,951 
Printing plate cost ($) ........................................................................................................... 43,560 69,390 95,220 
Cost per UPC ($) ......................................................................................................................... 47,470 86,156 125,641 
Total label design cost, 24-month compliance ($) ...................................................................... 153,517,980 278,628,504 406,322,994 
Total label design cost, < 24-month compliance ($) ................................................................... 168,869,778 306,491,354 446,955,293 
Total Cost ($) ............................................................................................................................... 168,869,778 306,491,354 446,955,293 
a Undiscounted costs assumed to be incurred at the start of the first period of the time horizon of this rule. 
3. Market Testing Costs Associated With 
Changing Cigarette Package Labels 
As stated above, FDA expects that 
only the large manufacturers will 
conduct market tests for their brands. 
Using several state directories of 
certified tobacco products, FDA 
estimates that 75 brands are marketed 
by the 4 largest domestic manufacturers 
(Refs. 84–89). The cost of focus group 
tests is estimated to range from $18 to 
$42 thousand; the cost of a quantitative 
study is estimated to range from $47 to 
$453 thousand (Ref. 82). The total cost 
of both types of market testing is 
estimated to be $65 to $495 thousand 
per brand. Multiplying by 75 brands 
yields a total cost estimate ranging from 
$5 to $37 million with a medium 
estimate of $11 million, as shown in 
Table E11. We assume that the 
requirement to use 9 different warning- 
text pairs does not affect these costs. 
TABLE E11—COST OF MARKET TESTING 
Low Medium High 
Market Testing Cost a 
Number of brands to be tested ................................................................................................... 75 75 75 
Cost of focus group testing ($) ............................................................................................. 18,000 30,000 42,000 
Cost of quantitative studies ($) ............................................................................................ 47,000 114,000 453,000 
Market testing cost per brand ($) ................................................................................................ 65,000 144,000 495,000 
Total Market Testing Cost ($) ...................................................................................................... 4,875,000 10,800,000 37,125,000 
a Undiscounted costs assumed to be incurred at the start of the first period of the time horizon of this rule. 
4. Advertising Restrictions: Removal of 
Noncompliant Point-of-Sale Advertising 
The principal effect of the restrictions 
on advertising in the proposed rule stem 
from the requirement that retailers and 
manufacturers of cigarettes remove any 
point-of-sale advertising for cigarettes 
that fails to conform to the 
requirements. In this analysis, we 
estimate the social resource costs for the 
removal. In the analysis of FDA’s 1996 
final tobacco rule, we based much of our 
estimate of the cost of removing 
noncompliant point-of-sale advertising 
on a report from the Barents Group that 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:19 Nov 10, 2010 Jkt 223001 PO 00000 Frm 00027 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\12NOP2.SGM 12NOP2em
cd
on
al
d 
on
 D
SK
2B
SO
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
69550 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 218 / Friday, November 12, 2010 / Proposed Rules 
used average removal costs for seven 
types of retail establishments, calculated 
using in-store surveys conducted by 
A.T. Kearney, Inc (61 FR 44580). We use 
the same baseline and retain our 
assumptions from 1996 about the level 
of effort required. We acknowledge, 
however, that this approach may 
overstate or understate the costs for a 
particular action or type of business. 
Table E12 regroups the information 
from Table E8 according to the 
categories studied by AT Kearney. 
Because our analysis considers only the 
removal of point-of-sale advertising 
from physical retail locations, we do not 
include non-store establishments. Table 
E13 shows that in current dollars one- 
time per-establishment costs range from 
about $12 for ‘‘other establishments’’ to 
about $198 for convenience stores. To 
estimate the total costs to comply with 
the restriction on point-of-sale 
advertising, we apply the updated per- 
establishment costs from Table E13 to 
affected establishments. As shown in 
Table E14, the one-time costs to remove 
point-of-sale materials would total $45.4 
million. 
TABLE E12—ESTIMATED NUMBER OF ESTABLISHMENTS SELLING CIGARETTE PRODUCTS AFFECTED BY THE PROPOSED 
RULE 
Kind of business 
Establish-
ments with 
payroll a 
Nonemployer 
establish-
ments a 
Total 
AT Kearney Category 
General Merchandise ........................................................................................................... 8,147 5,661 13,808 
Supermarket & Grocery ........................................................................................................ 67,037 56,761 123,799 
Convenience Stores ............................................................................................................. 23,986 ........................ 23,986 
Convenience Stores with Gas .............................................................................................. 87,713 ........................ 87,713 
Service Stations .................................................................................................................... 6,347 2,979 9,326 
Drug Stores .......................................................................................................................... 19,413 30,138 49,552 
Specialty Tobacco Stores ..................................................................................................... 6,458 ........................ 6,458 
Other establishments b ......................................................................................................... 28,531 17,391 45,922 
Total ............................................................................................................................... 247,633 112,931 360,564 
a Source: Table E8. 
b Includes miscellaneous retail establishments and accommodations and food services establishments (including drinking places), but excludes 
nonstore retailers. 
TABLE E13—ESTIMATED AVERAGE PER-ESTABLISHMENT COSTS TO REMOVE PROHIBITED MATERIALS a 
AT Kearney business category 
Remove promotional materials ($) 
1996 dollars Current dollars 
General Merchandise .................................................................................................................................. 23.42 30.94 
Supermarket & Grocery ............................................................................................................................... 125.14 165.30 
Convenience Stores .................................................................................................................................... 150.02 198.16 
Convenience Stores with Gas ..................................................................................................................... 146.43 193.42 
Service Stations ........................................................................................................................................... 36.09 47.67 
Drug Stores .................................................................................................................................................. 11.72 15.48 
Specialty Tobacco Stores ............................................................................................................................ 123.21 162.75 
Other establishments b ................................................................................................................................. 9.37 12.38 
a Sources: 61 FR 44585, Table 8; 1996 to 2009 (most recent) GDP deflator rose 32.1% (Ref. 76). 
b Excludes adult-only establishments, nonstore retailers and vending machine operators. 
TABLE E14—ESTIMATED ONE-TIME COSTS TO REMOVE POINT-OF-SALE MATERIALS FROM AFFECTED ESTABLISHMENTS 
A.T. Kearney category Number of es-tablishments 
Average cost 
($) 
Total one-time 
costs b 
($ million) 
General Merchandise .................................................................................................................. 13,808 30.94 0.4 
Supermarket & Grocery ............................................................................................................... 123,799 165.30 20.5 
Convenience Stores .................................................................................................................... 23,986 198.16 4.8 
Convenience Stores with Gas ..................................................................................................... 87,713 193.42 17.0 
Service Stations ........................................................................................................................... 9,326 47.67 0.4 
Drug Stores .................................................................................................................................. 49,552 15.48 0.8 
Specialty Tobacco Stores ............................................................................................................ 6,458 162.75 1.1 
Other establishments a ................................................................................................................. 45,922 12.38 0.6 
Total ...................................................................................................................................... 360,564 ........................ 45.4 
a Excludes adult-only establishments and non-store retailers. 
b Undiscounted costs assumed to be incurred at the start of the first period of the time horizon of this rule. 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:19 Nov 10, 2010 Jkt 223001 PO 00000 Frm 00028 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\12NOP2.SGM 12NOP2em
cd
on
al
d 
on
 D
SK
2B
SO
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
69551 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 218 / Friday, November 12, 2010 / Proposed Rules 
Sources: Tables E12 and E13. 
5. Government Administration and 
Enforcement Costs 
FDA’s estimated internal costs for 
administering and enforcing this 
regulation are uncertain. As a best 
estimate, however, FDA projects that 25 
full-time equivalent employees (FTEs) 
would be needed to implement the 
proposed rule. Fully loaded employee 
costs vary with the type of employee 
(e.g. field inspectors versus 
administrative), but an average of 
$247,049 per FTE places the dollar cost 
at approximately $6.2 million per year. 
6. Summary of Costs 
Table E15 summarizes the cost 
estimates from the preceding sections 
and Table E16 displays the present 
value and annualized value of costs. 
TABLE E15—SUMMARY OF COSTS 
Requirements of the rule Annual ($m) a 
One-Time ($m) b 
Low Medium High 
Private Sector 
Labeling Change ...................................................................................... ........................ 168.9 306.5 447.0 
Market Testing .......................................................................................... ........................ 4.9 10.8 37.1 
Point-of-Sale Advertising .......................................................................... ........................ 45.4 45.4 45.4 
Subtotal ............................................................................................. ........................ 219.2 362.7 529.5 
Government 
FDA ........................................................................................................... 6.2 ........................ ........................ ........................
Subtotal ............................................................................................. 6.2 ........................ ........................ ........................
Total ................................................................................................... 6.2 219.2 362.7 529.5 
a Undiscounted annual costs assumed to be incurred at the end of each period for a total of 20 years. 
b Undiscounted one-time costs assumed to be incurred at the start of the first period of the time horizon of this rule. 
TABLE E16—PRESENT VALUE AND ANNUALIZED VALUE OF COSTS a 
Requirements of the rule 
Present value ($ mil) Annualized costs ($ mil) 
3 percent 7 percent 3 percent 7 percent 
Low Med. High Low Med. High Low Med. High Low Med. High 
Private Sector 
Labeling Change ............................... 164.0 297.6 433.9 157.8 286.4 417.7 11.0 20.0 29.2 14.9 27.0 39.4 
Market Testing .................................. 4.7 10.5 36.0 4.6 10.1 34.7 0.3 0.7 2.4 0.4 1.0 3.3 
Point-of-Sale Advertising .................. 44.1 44.1 44.1 42.5 42.5 42.5 3.0 3.0 3.0 4.0 4.0 4.0 
Subtotal ...................................... 212.8 352.2 514.1 204.8 339.0 494.9 14.3 23.7 34.6 19.3 32.0 46.7 
Government 
FDA ................................................... 89.2 89.2 89.2 61.2 61.2 61.2 6.0 6.0 6.0 5.8 5.8 5.8 
Subtotal ...................................... 89.2 89.2 89.2 61.2 61.2 61.2 6.0 6.0 6.0 5.8 5.8 5.8 
Total .................................... 302.0 441.4 603.3 266.0 400.2 556.0 20.3 29.7 40.6 25.1 37.8 52.5 
a The present value of upfront costs differs from previous tables because here these costs have been discounted 1 year back to 2010. Simi-
larly, annual costs have been discounted back to 2010 before being annualized, resulting in a slight difference between annual and annualized 
costs. 
E. Cost-Effectiveness Analysis 
We measure the effectiveness of the 
proposed rule as the sum of saved life- 
years and quality-adjusted life years. In 
order to assess the cost-effectiveness of 
the proposed rule, we must adjust the 
costs to account for effects that are not 
captured by life-years or quality- 
adjusted life years. As shown in detail 
in the previous section, we calculated 
the first twenty years’ costs attributable 
to the proposed rule and found present 
values of $266.0 to $556.0 million 
(using a 7 percent discount rate) or 
$302.0 to $603.3 million (using a 3 
percent discount rate). We add to each 
total the estimated monetary value of 
lost consumer surplus (previously 
netted out of life-years and emphysema 
benefits estimates); this yields overall 
costs of $2.14 to $6.17 billion (using a 
7 percent discount rate) or $9.47 to 
$28.10 billion (using a 3 percent 
discount rate). In order to focus on the 
costs associated with extensions of 
quality-adjusted life (see Ref. 68 at pp. 
11–12), we then subtract both medical 
cost reductions and the value of 
property savings due to reductions in 
accidental fires and arrive at a net cost 
of $1.88 to $5.91 billion (using a 7 
percent discount rate) or $8.93 to $27.57 
billion (using a 3 percent discount rate). 
Discounting over the same twenty- 
year time period, we calculate that this 
proposed rule would lead to 476,000 to 
549,000 discounted smoking 
preventions or cessations. Similarly, we 
find that 34,627 to 171,660 discounted 
quality-adjusted life-years would be 
saved (this includes both fractional life- 
years associated with reduced 
emphysema and full life-years 
associated with reduced premature 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:19 Nov 10, 2010 Jkt 223001 PO 00000 Frm 00029 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\12NOP2.SGM 12NOP2em
cd
on
al
d 
on
 D
SK
2B
SO
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
69552 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 218 / Friday, November 12, 2010 / Proposed Rules 
13 This total reflects reduced premature mortality 
for smokers themselves and for others caught in the 
path of cigarette-related fires. The National Fire 
Protection Association (Ref. 90) reports the 
percentages of fire fatalities by age category; along 
with the CDC’s estimate of average American life 
expectancy (Ref. 91), these data allow FDA to 
calculate that the expected number of life-years lost 
by fire victims is 37.3. 
mortality).13 This yields a cost per 
smoking prevention of $3,940 to 
$50,204, and a cost per life-year saved 
of $52,047 to $170,552. 
TABLE E17—COST-EFFECTIVENESS 
Cost ($) 
3 Percent 7 Percent 
Low Medium High Low Medium High 
Per Smoking Prevention .................................................. 16,271 33,217 50,204 3,940 8,149 12,403 
Per Life-Year Saved ........................................................ 52,047 106,255 160,594 54,176 112,050 170,552 
F. Distributional Effects 
This proposed rule would bring about 
a variety of distributional effects not yet 
discussed in detail. Sectors affiliated 
with tobacco and tobacco products 
would lose sales revenues. 
Simultaneously, non-tobacco-related 
industries would gain sales, because 
dollars not spent for tobacco products 
would be spent on other commodities. 
1. Tobacco Manufacturers, Distributors, 
and Growers 
FDA estimates that implementation of 
the proposed regulation may reduce the 
annual cigarette consumption of U.S. 
smokers by 80 million packs. 
Meanwhile, the FTC (Ref. 39) reports 
that, in 2006, 1.75 billion cigarette packs 
were manufactured and distributed to 
consumers. These numbers imply that 
tobacco manufacturer revenues would 
be 0.68 percent lower in the rule’s first 
year, and 0.79 percent lower in 2031, 
than they were in 2006. The U.S. Census 
Bureau (Ref. 92) reports that tobacco 
manufacturers’ revenues totaled $41.6 
billion in 2006; hence, the rule-induced 
decrease in annual tobacco sales would 
range from approximately $284 to $328 
million. These estimates would rise 
somewhat higher if we were accounting 
for the decrease in price that 
accompanies the decrease in demand for 
a good (in this case, cigarettes). 
Experimental evidence from Mexico 
(Ref. 93) indicates that graphic warning 
labels may decrease smokers’ 
willingness-to-pay for cigarettes by 17 
percent; however, without supply 
elasticity data, we cannot determine 
how much this decline in willingness- 
to-pay would change cigarettes’ market 
price. 
We estimate that the tobacco 
manufacturing, warehousing and 
wholesale trade sectors employ about 
74,000 full-time workers (Ref. 77). 
Under the assumption of constant 
production-to-employment ratio, we 
project that a 0.68–0.79 percent 
reduction in sales would result in the 
displacement of 500–600 jobs among 
manufacturers, warehouses, and 
wholesalers. 
Effects of the rule would also be 
observed in the agricultural sector. 
According to USDA’s 2007 Census of 
Agriculture (Ref. 94), there are 16,234 
tobacco farms. Upon implementation of 
the proposed rule, these farms may shift 
some of their acreage from growing 
tobacco to producing other agricultural 
products. 
2. National and Regional Employment 
Patterns 
Several studies estimate the 
contribution of tobacco to the U.S. 
economy or, alternatively, the losses to 
the U.S. economy that would follow a 
decline in tobacco-related consumption. 
Economists have shown both 
theoretically and empirically that, for 
the nation as a whole, employment 
gains from spending on other products 
would offset any employment losses 
from reduced spending on tobacco 
products (Ref. 95). The major tobacco- 
growing states, however, would 
experience some adverse economic 
effects. An economic simulation of the 
regional impacts of spending on tobacco 
products carried out in 1994 found that 
after 8 years, a 2 percent per year fall in 
tobacco consumption (which 
substantially exceeds the FDA forecast 
for this regulation) would cause the loss 
of 36,600 jobs for the Southeast Tobacco 
region of the United States (0.2 percent 
of regional employment), whereas the 
nontobacco regions of the United States 
would gain 56,300 jobs (Ref. 96). That 
study, if carried out today, would find 
a much smaller net effect because total 
employment in tobacco-related 
industries has fallen. Overall, FDA finds 
that the income and employment 
impacts associated with reduced 
tobacco consumption would be quite 
small. 
3. Retail Sector 
As would tobacco growers, 
distributors and manufacturers, tobacco 
retailers would be affected by any 
decrease in cigarette sales. Retailers 
would, however, be in a position to shift 
shelf space and promotional activities to 
non-tobacco products, in order to take 
advantage of the increase in demand for 
other products that would be expected 
to accompany the decrease in spending 
on cigarettes. 
4. Advertising Industry 
The overall impact of the proposed 
rule on the advertising industry is 
uncertain. Advertiser revenue may 
decrease because advertisements with 
graphic warning labels are less desirable 
from a cigarette seller’s standpoint and 
thus tobacco manufacturers would 
choose to conduct less advertising. On 
the other hand, advertising industry 
revenue may increase due to cigarette 
sellers’ need to re-design ads to 
accommodate new warning labels and 
to devise new promotional strategies. In 
either case, few net social costs or 
benefits would be generated. Moreover, 
the effect on advertising would likely be 
relatively small since spending on 
cigarette advertising has been declining 
substantially in recent decades. By 
2006, expenditures on magazine 
advertising had fallen to about $50 
million and outdoor advertising to 
under $1 million. Most of the remaining 
affected advertising expenditures were 
point-of sale promotions, which totaled 
$240 million (Ref. 39). 
5. Excise Tax Revenues 
In 2009, Federal tobacco tax revenues 
totaled $16.3 billion, while state and 
local tax revenues totaled $16.5 billion 
(Ref. 97). The proposed rule would 
decrease government tobacco tax 
revenues as fewer Americans consume 
cigarettes. 
FDA estimates this change in excise 
tax revenues by multiplying together the 
percentage change in smoking, whose 
calculation was described in section C1, 
the projected population in a given year 
(Ref. 65), age-appropriate discounted 
lifetime cigarette consumption (in 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:19 Nov 10, 2010 Jkt 223001 PO 00000 Frm 00030 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\12NOP2.SGM 12NOP2em
cd
on
al
d 
on
 D
SK
2B
SO
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
69553 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 218 / Friday, November 12, 2010 / Proposed Rules 
packs) per smoker, and current Federal 
and average state tax rates (Ref. 98; Ref. 
99). FDA calculates average 
consumption for 15-year-olds, 16- to 17- 
year-olds, and 18- to 23-year-olds using 
the May 2006, August 2006, and January 
2007 Tobacco Use Supplements to the 
Current Population Survey (Ref. 100). 
Sloan et al. (Ref. 66) report lifetime 
discounted consumption for typical 24- 
year-old smokers. 
FDA estimates that annual rule- 
induced decreases in excise tax 
collections would be approximately 
$106 million for state governments and 
$80.5 million for the Federal 
government. Assuming that excise taxes 
rise, on average, at the rate of inflation 
allows us to sum these values over the 
time horizon of our analysis, yielding an 
overall revenue loss to state 
governments of $1.35 to $2.93 billion 
and to the Federal government of $1.03 
to $2.23 billion. Given inelastic cigarette 
demand (Ref. 95), some state 
governments could raise tobacco 
product excise rates to offset these 
revenue losses. 
G. International Effects 
Of the $87.9 billion worth of tobacco 
products consumed in the United States 
in 2009 (Ref. 101), only $156 million 
consisted of imported cigarettes, with 
another $897 million imported as 
tobacco in a less-processed state (Ref. 
102; Ref. 103). As in the United States, 
foreign manufacturers, distributors, and 
growers of tobacco and tobacco products 
would lose revenue as a result of the 
proposed rule, though their loss would 
be a small fraction of the overall 
revenue loss. As consumers who would 
have been smokers purchase other 
products, there would be a shift in 
patterns of international trade. If the 
preferred substitute products are 
American-made, there would be a (very 
small) decrease in overall imports into 
the United States; otherwise, there 
would be a small increase in imports 
from the source countries of the newly- 
demanded goods and services and a 
corresponding decrease in imports from 
tobacco-producing countries. 
The proposed rule does not apply to 
cigarettes manufactured for export, 
whose value totaled $417 million in 
2009 (Ref. 102). 
H. Regulatory Alternatives 
We compare the proposed rule to two 
hypothetical alternatives: An otherwise 
identical rule with a 24-month 
compliance period and an otherwise 
identical rule with a 6-month 
compliance period. Even though we 
estimate costs and benefits for these 
alternatives, they do not provide viable 
regulatory options, as they are 
inconsistent with FDA’s statutory 
mandate. 
1. 24-Month Compliance Period 
The cost of the labeling changes for 
this proposed rule depends far less than 
most labeling rules on the compliance 
period. The main effect of a longer 
compliance period would be to 
eliminate the 10 percent premium for 
overtime and rush charges added to the 
per-UPC label design activities for 
compliance periods shorter than 24 
months (Ref. 83). All other costs are the 
same as in the 15-month analysis. 
Table E18 shows that extending the 
compliance period to 24 months would 
reduce the up-front labeling change cost 
by $15 to $41 million, to a total of $154 
to $406 million. 
TABLE E18—COST OF A CIGARETTE LABEL REDESIGN WITH NINE WARNINGS WITH A 24–MONTH COMPLIANCE PERIOD a 
Low Medium High 
Label Design Cost 
Number of UPCs ......................................................................................................................... 3,234 3,234 3,234 
Administrative labor cost ($) ................................................................................................. 375 695 1,014 
Graphic design labor cost ($) ............................................................................................... 1,120 2,163 3,206 
Prepress labor cost ($) ......................................................................................................... 1,482 2,649 3,816 
Recordkeeping labor cost ($) ............................................................................................... 33 234 434 
Prepress materials ($) .......................................................................................................... 900 11,025 21,951 
Printing plate cost ($) ........................................................................................................... 43,560 69,390 95,220 
Cost per product UPC ($) ............................................................................................................ 47,470 86,156 125,641 
Total label design cost, 24-month compliance ($) ............................................................... 153,517,980 278,628,504 406,322,994 
Total Cost ($) ........................................................................................................................ 153,517,980 278,628,504 406,322,994 
Change from 15-month Compliance Period ................................................................................ ¥15,351,798 ¥27,862,850 ¥40,632,299 
a Undiscounted costs assumed to be incurred at the start of the first period of the time horizon of this rule. 
Extending the compliance period to 
24 months would delay the accrual of 
health and fire reduction benefits by 
nine months. An approximation of the 
effect of this delay may be found by 
discounting, at three and seven percent 
discount rates, the previously-calculated 
total benefits. As shown in Table E19, 
FDA finds that a 24-month compliance 
period would decrease benefits by 
between $113.5 and $622.5 million. 
TABLE E19—PRESENT VALUE OF BENEFITS WITH 24-MONTH COMPLIANCE PERIOD ($ MIL) 
VSLY = $105,000 VSLY = $210,000 VSLY = $315,000 
3% 
Discount rate 
7% 
Discount rate 
3% 
Discount rate 
7% 
Discount rate 
3% 
Discount rate 
7% 
Discount rate 
Life-Years ................................................. 8,767.3 1,715.6 17,534.7 3,431.3 26,302.0 5,146.9 
Non-Fatal Emphysema ............................ 197.6 61.7 395.3 123.4 592.9 185.0 
Fire Loss .................................................. 384.5 171.7 384.5 171.7 384.5 171.7 
Medical Expenditure Reduction ............... 487.9 231.9 487.9 231.9 487.9 231.9 
Total .................................................. 9,837.4 2,180.9 18,802.4 3,958.3 27,767.3 5,735.6 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:19 Nov 10, 2010 Jkt 223001 PO 00000 Frm 00031 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\12NOP2.SGM 12NOP2em
cd
on
al
d 
on
 D
SK
2B
SO
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
69554 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 218 / Friday, November 12, 2010 / Proposed Rules 
14 The AC Nielsen data for total equivalent units 
show sales totaling 38,632 million sticks in 2008 
(Ref. 104), whereas The Maxwell Report states that 
industry volume was 345,300 million sticks in 2008 
(Ref. 105). Thus the Nielsen data capture 38,632/ 
345,300 = 11.2 percent of cigarettes sold. Nielsen 
data show total sales units of 1.195 billion in 2008. 
Dividing by 0.112 yields an estimate of 10.7 billion 
sales units per year. 
TABLE E19—PRESENT VALUE OF BENEFITS WITH 24-MONTH COMPLIANCE PERIOD ($ MIL)—Continued 
VSLY = $105,000 VSLY = $210,000 VSLY = $315,000 
3% 
Discount rate 
7% 
Discount rate 
3% 
Discount rate 
7% 
Discount rate 
3% 
Discount rate 
7% 
Discount rate 
Change from 15-Month Compliance Pe-
riod ........................................................ ¥220.5 ¥113.5 ¥421.5 ¥206.0 ¥622.5 ¥298.6 
2. Six-Month Compliance Period 
In the 2003 labeling-cost model, 
overtime and rush charges equal 10 
percent of the per-UPC label design 
costs with a 6-month compliance 
period. The model further assumes that 
12 months is the shortest compliance 
period that can be met without resorting 
to covering up the old labels with 
stickers as a temporary solution. 
Therefore, the cost of discarded 
inventory is the same as under a 12- 
month compliance period, but there is 
an additional cost for applying 
appropriate stickers to cover the old 
package label design for a period of 6 
months. 
FDA assumes that no additional 
inventory will remain unused after 6 
months of applying stickers. The 
number of units sold annually is about 
10.7 billion.14 Therefore, 5.3 billion 
units would be relabeled with stickers. 
We estimate the per-unit cost for the 
sticker and application cost to be 
between $0.017 and $0.045 (Ref. 83). 
Reducing the compliance period to 6 
months would then increase compliance 
costs by $91 to $239 million to a total 
of $259 to $686 million. The use of 9 
graphic-text combinations is not 
expected to materially affect this cost. 
TABLE E20—COST OF A CIGARETTE LABEL REDESIGN WITH NINE WARNINGS WITH A SIX-MONTH COMPLIANCE PERIOD a 
Low Medium High 
Label Design Cost 
Number of UPCs ......................................................................................................................... 3,234 3,234 3,234 
Administrative labor cost ($) ................................................................................................. 375 695 1,014 
Graphic design labor cost ($) ............................................................................................... 1,120 2,163 3,206 
Prepress labor cost ($) ......................................................................................................... 1,482 2,649 3,816 
Recordkeeping labor cost ($) ............................................................................................... 33 234 434 
Prepress materials ($) .......................................................................................................... 900 11,025 21,951 
Printing plate cost ($) ........................................................................................................... 43,560 69,390 95,220 
Cost per product UPC ($) ............................................................................................................ 47,470 86,156 125,641 
Total label design cost, 24-month compliance ($) ...................................................................... 153,517,980 278,628,504 406,322,994 
Total label design cost, < 24-month compliance ($) ................................................................... 168,869,778 306,491,354 446,955,293 
Sticker Costs 
Stick and application costs per unit ($) ................................................................................ 0.017 0.031 0.045 
Number of units sold in 6 months ........................................................................................ 5,338,051,475 5,338,051,475 5,338,051,475 
Total sticker cost ($) ............................................................................................................. 90,501,325 168,073,889 239,182,072 
Total Cost ($) ............................................................................................................................... 259,371,103 474,565,243 686,137,366 
Change from 15-month Compliance Period ................................................................................ 90,501,325 168,073,889 239,182,072 
a Undiscounted costs assumed to be incurred at the start of the first period of the time horizon of this rule. 
Reducing the compliance period to 
six months would hasten the accrual of 
health and fire reduction benefits by 
nine months. An approximation of the 
effect of this change in timing may be 
found by compounding, at three and 
seven percent discount rates, the 
previously-calculated total benefits. As 
shown in Table E21, FDA finds that a 
six-month compliance period would 
increase benefits by between $119.4 and 
$636.4 million. 
TABLE E21—PRESENT VALUE OF BENEFITS WITH SIX-MONTH COMPLIANCE PERIOD ($ MIL) 
VSLY = $105,000 VSLY = $210,000 VSLY = $315,000 
3% 
Discount rate 
7% 
Discount rate 
3% 
Discount rate 
7% 
Discount rate 
3% 
Discount rate 
7% 
Discount rate 
Life-Years ................................................. 9,164.8 1,898.9 18,329.6 3,797.8 27,494.4 5,696.7 
Non-Fatal Emphysema ............................ 206.6 68.3 413.2 136.5 619.8 204.8 
Fire Loss .................................................. 401.9 190.0 401.9 190.0 401.9 190.0 
Medical Expenditure Reduction ............... 510.0 256.7 510.0 256.7 510.0 256.7 
Total .................................................. 10,283.4 2,413.9 19,654.8 4,381.1 29,026.2 6,348.2 
Change from 15-Month Compliance Pe-
riod ........................................................ 225.5 119.4 430.9 216.8 636.4 314.1 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 18:26 Nov 10, 2010 Jkt 223001 PO 00000 Frm 00032 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\12NOP2.SGM 12NOP2em
cd
on
al
d 
on
 D
SK
2B
SO
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
69555 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 218 / Friday, November 12, 2010 / Proposed Rules 
3. Summary of Regulatory Alternatives 
Table E22 summarizes the regulatory 
alternatives by displaying ranges for the 
present values of the total benefits and 
total costs. Estimated ranges for the cost 
ratios (per smoking prevention and per 
life-year saved) of the proposed rule and 
its regulatory alternatives appear in 
Table E23. 
TABLE E22—SUMMARY OF REGULATORY ALTERNATIVES 
Compliance period 
Present value of total benefits ($ mil) a Present value of total costs ($ mil) b 
3% 7% 3% 7% 
24-Month Total ................................................. 9,837.4 to 27,767.3 ... 2,180.9 to 5,735.6 ..... 285.2 to 561.9 ........... 248.6 to 515.0. 
(Proposed Rule) 15-Month Total ..................... 10,057.9 to 28,389.8 2,294.5 to 6,034.1 ..... 302.0 to 603.3 ........... 266.0 to 556.0. 
6-Month Total ................................................... 10,283.4 to 29,026.2 2,413.9 to 6,348.2 ..... 391.9 to 837.5 ........... 353.8 to 782.7. 
a Range in benefits is based on a VSLY of $105,000 to $315,000. 
b Range in costs is based on low cost and high cost values. 
TABLE E23—INCREMENTAL COST-EFFECTIVENESS OF REGULATORY ALTERNATIVES 
Discount rate = 3 percent Discount rate = 7 percent 
Low Incremental CE * High 
Incremental 
CE * Low 
Incremental 
CE * High 
Incremental 
CE * 
24-Month Compliance: 
Per Smoking Prevention ... $16,252 N/A $50,152 N/A $3,819 N/A $12,024 N/A 
Per Life-Year Saved ......... 51,986 N/A 160,426 N/A 52,512 N/A 165,336 N/A 
15-Month Compliance: 
Per Smoking Prevention ... 16,271 $17,121 50,204 $52,545 3,940 $9,337 12,403 $29,324 
Per Life-Year Saved ......... 52,047 54,768 160,594 168,081 54,176 128,383 170,552 403,225 
6-Month Compliance: 
Per Smoking Prevention ... 16,419 23,021 50,597 68,133 4,207 16,118 13,170 47,376 
Per Life-Year Saved ......... 52,521 73,641 161,852 217,946 57,847 221,637 181,095 651,438 
* As the compliance period decreases, the number of rule-induced smoking preventions and life-years saved increases. Hence, the incremental 
costs of 15-Month Compliance are calculated relative to 24-Month Compliance, and the incremental costs of 6-Month Compliance are calculated 
relative to 15-Month Compliance. 
I. Impact on Small Entities 
The Regulatory Flexibility Act 
requires agencies to prepare an initial 
regulatory flexibility analysis if a 
proposed rule would have a significant 
effect on a substantial number of small 
entities. We expect this proposed rule to 
have a significant effect on a substantial 
number of small entities. Consequently, 
this analysis, together with other 
relevant sections of this document, 
serves as the Initial Regulatory 
Flexibility Analysis, as required under 
the Regulatory Flexibility Act. 
1. Description and Number of Affected 
Small Entities 
The proposed rule would affect small 
entities in several industries, from 
tobacco farming to the retail industry. 
Most of the nation’s 16,234 tobacco 
farms are small; between 90.7 and 95.8 
percent (between 14,732 and 15,555) of 
the farms growing tobacco in 2007 had 
total farm sales under the U.S. Small 
Business Administration (SBA) small 
business size standard of $750,000 (Ref. 
94; Ref. 106). 
Table E24 shows the breakdown of 
domestic cigarette manufacturers by 
employment size. Census data indicate 
that most cigarette manufacturing firms 
are small businesses, with only 4 of 24 
firms employing more than 500 
employees, while the small business 
size standard established by the SBA for 
this industry is 1,000, so a minimum of 
20 small cigarette manufacturers would 
be affected (Ref. 77; Ref. 106). 
TABLE E24—CIGARETTE MANUFAC-
TURERS BY NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES 
Size by number of employees Number of firms 
Less than 20 ............................. 9 
20 to 99 .................................... 7 
100 to 499 ................................ 4 
Source: Ref. 106. 
SBA size standard: 1,000 employees. 
Statistics of U.S. Businesses data 
show that 1,067 of 1,159 tobacco 
wholesale trade firms (92 percent) 
employ fewer than the 100-employee 
threshold that constitutes a small 
business according to the SBA (Ref. 77; 
Ref. 106). If the size distribution of 
cigarette importers is similar to that of 
all tobacco wholesale trade firms, then 
92 percent of them would be affected 
small businesses. 
Also likely to be affected by the 
regulation are small retail and service 
entities that sell cigarettes. Retail 
establishments bear shared 
responsibility with manufacturers for 
the cost of removing noncompliant 
advertising. SBA size standards for the 
retail trade and the accommodations 
and food services industries differ from 
size categories used by the U.S. Census. 
Table E25 shows the 2002 Census size 
categories that most closely match the 
SBA size standards. In all cases, the 
closest Census size category is smaller 
than the SBA size standard. As a 
consequence, any estimate based on the 
Census size categories may 
underestimate the number of small 
entities. 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:19 Nov 10, 2010 Jkt 223001 PO 00000 Frm 00033 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\12NOP2.SGM 12NOP2em
cd
on
al
d 
on
 D
SK
2B
SO
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
69556 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 218 / Friday, November 12, 2010 / Proposed Rules 
TABLE E25—SBA SIZE STANDARDS AND CENSUS SIZE CATEGORIES FOR RETAIL AND SERVICE FIRMS IN NAICS 
CATEGORIES WITH TOBACCO PRODUCT LINE SALES a 
NAICS with tobacco product line 
sales Description of NAICS category 
SBA size 
standard 
(employees 
or $ million) 
Census size 
category 
(employees 
or $ million) 
General Merchandise 
452990 ........................................ Other General Merchandise ........................................................................ 11 ................ 10. 
452 excluding 452990 ................ Department, Discount Department, Warehouse Clubs, and Superstores .. 27 ................ 25. 
Supermarket and Grocery 
4452 and 4453 ............................ Other Food and Beverage Stores ............................................................... 7 .................. 5. 
445110 ........................................ Supermarkets and Grocery .......................................................................... 27 ................ 25. 
445120 ........................................ Convenience Stores ..................................................................................... 27 ................ 25. 
447110 ........................................ Convenience Stores with Gas ..................................................................... 27 ................ 25. 
447190 ........................................ Service Stations ........................................................................................... 9 .................. 5. 
446 .............................................. Health and Personal Care Stores ................................................................ 7 .................. 5. 
453991 ........................................ Specialty Tobacco Stores ............................................................................ 7 .................. 5. 
B .................................................. Other Kinds of Business .............................................................................. Varies .......... Varies. 
Source: Refs. 106–108. 
a Includes only firms with payroll. 
b Includes NAICS 4413, 443112, 444, 448, 451, 4532, 453998, 72 (excluding 72231), 722310. 
The Census reports establishment 
numbers for business by product line, 
and establishment and firm size by type 
of business, but provides no size data by 
type of business and product line. To 
estimate the number of affected entities 
that SBA classifies as small, we begin by 
counting the number of firms that fall 
below the Census size standard shown 
in Table E25, including only firms in 
NAICS categories with tobacco product 
line sales. Next, we calculate the 
percentage of small firms in each NAICS 
category. Depending on the type of 
business, the percentage of small firms 
ranges from 41 percent for Discount 
Department, Warehouse Clubs, and 
Superstores to almost 100 percent for 
Convenience Stores. 
TABLE E26—ESTIMATED PERCENTAGE OF SMALL RETAIL AND SERVICE FIRMS IN NAICS CATEGORIES WITH TOBACCO 
PRODUCT LINE SALES a 
NAICS Description of NAICS category Number of firms 
Number of 
firms below 
census size 
standard b 
Percentage 
of small 
firms 
General Merchandise 
452110, 452910 ................................ Discount Department, Warehouse Clubs, and Superstores .... 88 36 40.9 
452990 .............................................. Other General Merchandise ..................................................... 7,451 7,320 98.2 
General Merchandise Subtotal ................................................................................................... 7,539 7,356 97.6 
Supermarket & Grocery 
445110 .............................................. Supermarkets & Grocery ......................................................... 34,017 33,328 98.0 
4452 and 4453 .................................. Other Food and Beverage Stores ............................................ 34,807 34,082 97.9 
Supermarket & Grocery Subtotal ................................................................................................... 68,824 67,410 97.9 
445120 .............................................. Convenience Stores ................................................................. 18,705 18,676 99.8 
447110 .............................................. Convenience Stores with Gas ................................................. 37,437 36,848 98.4 
447190 .............................................. Service Stations ....................................................................... 19,822 18,103 91.3 
4461 .................................................. Drug Stores .............................................................................. 36,198 33,894 93.6 
453991 .............................................. Tobacco Stores ........................................................................ 3,238 3,017 93.2 
Other Kinds of Business .......................................................... 589,400 572,619 97.2 
Source: Refs. 107, 108, 78, 79. 
a Includes only firms with payroll. 
b Based on the Census size standards shown in Table E25. 
Finally, we apply the percentages in 
Table E26 to our current estimate of the 
number of affected establishments with 
payroll (Table E7). This approach 
implicitly assumes that small 
establishments are similar whether or 
not they sell tobacco products. In 
addition, we classify all nonemployer 
establishments as small. In total, we 
estimate that about 355,000 small retail 
and service establishments would be 
affected by the proposed rule. This 
number represents about 98 percent of 
the estimated 361,000 establishments 
selling tobacco products. 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:19 Nov 10, 2010 Jkt 223001 PO 00000 Frm 00034 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\12NOP2.SGM 12NOP2em
cd
on
al
d 
on
 D
SK
2B
SO
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
69557 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 218 / Friday, November 12, 2010 / Proposed Rules 
15 In 2008, 9.9 billion out of 345.3 billion 
individual cigarettes sold were imported. FDA 
assumes the same proportion holds for UPCs. These UPCs should not overlap with those produced by 
the 4 largest domestic producers. 
TABLE E27—ESTIMATED NUMBER OF SMALL ESTABLISHMENTS WITH TOBACCO PRODUCT LINE SALES BY KIND OF 
BUSINESS 
Kind of business Percentage of small a 
Number with 
payroll b 
Small with 
payroll 
Non- 
employers b 
Estimated 
total number 
of small 
establishments 
General Merchandise ........................................................... 97.6 8,147 7,949 5,661 13,611 
Supermarket & Grocery ....................................................... 98.0 67,037 65,679 56,761 122,441 
Convenience Stores ............................................................. 99.8 23,986 23,949 0 23,949 
Convenience Stores with Gas ............................................. 98.4 87,713 86,333 0 86,333 
Service Stations ................................................................... 91.3 6,347 5,797 2,979 8,775 
Drug Stores .......................................................................... 93.6 19,413 18,178 30,138 48,316 
Specialty Tobacco Stores .................................................... 93.2 6,458 6,017 0 6,017 
Other Establishments ........................................................... 97.2 28,531 27,719 17,391 45,110 
Total .............................................................................. ........................ 247,633 241,621 112,931 354,552 
a From Table E26. 
b From Table E12. 
2. Description of the Potential Impacts 
of the Final Rule on Small Entities 
a. Effect on manufacturers. In order to 
estimate how much of the label design 
and inventory costs would be incurred 
by small domestic cigarette 
manufacturers, FDA subtracts the 
proportion of those costs estimated to be 
incurred by large domestic 
manufacturers and foreign 
manufacturers. Scanner data indicate 
that, approximately 55 percent of UPCs 
can be readily identified as belonging to 
a brand marketed by one of the 4 largest 
cigarette firms by volume (Ref. 105; 
Refs. 84–89). Because the costs of 
labeling changes are roughly 
proportional to the number of UPCs, 
FDA then attributes 55 percent of the 
total label design and inventory costs to 
the 4 firms employing at least 500 
people. FDA attributes an additional 3 
percent of the labeling change costs to 
foreign manufacturers.15 These 
adjustments leave 42 percent of labeling 
change costs, or $71 to $188 million, to 
be incurred by the 20 small 
manufacturers. Assuming costs are 
equal among these firms implies a per- 
firm cost of $3.5 to $9.4 million. Table 
E28 compares this estimated 
compliance cost to average annual 
receipts in order to gauge the potential 
impact of labeling change requirements 
on small cigarette manufacturing firms. 
Because the number of UPCs is probably 
larger for larger firms, costs are likely 
greater for larger firms than for smaller 
firms; if so this method overstates the 
impact on the smallest firms and 
understates the impact on the largest 
firms (within the category of firms 
employing fewer than 500 people). 
TABLE E28—POTENTIAL IMPACT OF LABELING CHANGE COMPLIANCE COSTS ON THE 20 SMALL CIGARETTE 
MANUFACTURERS 
Size by number of employees Number of firms 
Average 
annual 
receipts 
($1,000) 
Average labeling 
compliance costs ($1,000) 
Average labeling 
compliance costs as a 
percent of average annual 
receipts 
Low High 
Low High 
Less than 20 .................................................................... 9 11,195 3,546 9,386 32 84 
20 to 99 ............................................................................ 7 21,265 3,546 9,386 17 44 
100 to 499 ........................................................................ 4 147,896 3,546 9,386 2 6 
Source: Ref. 77. 
SBA size standard: 1,000 employees. 
b. Effect on retailers. As shown in 
Table E29, retail trade businesses 
account for almost all sales of tobacco 
products (Ref. 78; Ref. 79). About 90 
percent of tobacco product line sales 
occur at gasoline stations, food and 
beverage stores, general merchandise 
stores, or tobacco stores. Convenience 
stores (with gasoline stations and stand- 
alone convenience stores) account for 
about half of all tobacco product line 
sales. 
TABLE E29—SALES OF TOBACCO PRODUCT LINE BY KIND OF BUSINESS AND INDUSTRY SECTOR a 
Kind of business and industry sector 
Sales of tobacco product 
line by kind of business 
Sales of tobacco product 
line by industry sector 
($ bil) (%) ($ bil) (%) 
Retail Trade 
NAICS 447—Gasoline Stations ....................................................................................... .................... .................... 22.2 43.3 
Convenience Stores with Gas .................................................................................. 21.2 41.3 .................... ....................
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:19 Nov 10, 2010 Jkt 223001 PO 00000 Frm 00035 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\12NOP2.SGM 12NOP2em
cd
on
al
d 
on
 D
SK
2B
SO
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
69558 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 218 / Friday, November 12, 2010 / Proposed Rules 
TABLE E29—SALES OF TOBACCO PRODUCT LINE BY KIND OF BUSINESS AND INDUSTRY SECTOR a—Continued 
Kind of business and industry sector 
Sales of tobacco product 
line by kind of business 
Sales of tobacco product 
line by industry sector 
($ bil) (%) ($ bil) (%) 
Gasoline Stations ..................................................................................................... 1.0 2.0 .................... ....................
NAICS 445—Food and Beverage Stores ........................................................................ .................... .................... 13.4 26.2 
Supermarket & Grocery ............................................................................................ 7.7 15.0 .................... ....................
Convenience Stores ................................................................................................. 4.5 8.8 .................... ....................
Liquor Stores ............................................................................................................ 1.2 2.4 .................... ....................
NAICS 452—General Merchandise ................................................................................. .................... .................... 7.1 13.9 
General Merchandise ............................................................................................... 7.1 13.9 .................... ....................
NAICS 453—Miscellaneous Store Retailers ................................................................... .................... .................... 5.8 11.3 
Tobacco Stores ........................................................................................................ 5.7 11.1 .................... ....................
Miscellaneous store retailers .................................................................................... 0.1 0.3 .................... ....................
NAICS 446—Health and Personal Care Stores .............................................................. .................... .................... 1.5 3.0 
Drug Stores .............................................................................................................. 1.5 3.0 .................... ....................
NAICS 454—Nonstore Retailers ..................................................................................... .................... .................... 0.7 1.3 
Nonstore Retailers .................................................................................................... 0.5 1.0 .................... ....................
Vending machine operators ..................................................................................... 0.2 0.4 .................... ....................
Other Subsectors b ........................................................................................................... .................... .................... 0.1 0.2 
Other Kinds of Business ........................................................................................... 0.1 0.2 .................... ....................
Accommodation & Food Services 
NAICS 72 ......................................................................................................................... .................... .................... 0.4 0.8 
Other establishments ................................................................................................ 0.3 0.5 .................... ....................
Drinking places ......................................................................................................... 0.1 0.3 .................... ....................
Total ................................................................................................................... .................... .................... 51.2 100 
a Includes establishments with payroll with tobacco product line sales. 
b Includes establishments in NAICS 441320, 443112, 444130, 444220, 448110, 448320, 451110, 451211, 451212, and 451220. 
To illustrate the effects of the 
proposed rule on a typical small retail 
store, we look at one-time costs for a 
convenience store and a convenience 
store with gasoline. We select these 
businesses because, as illustrated in 
Table E29, sales of tobacco products in 
these stores account for about 50 
percent of all tobacco sales. In addition, 
tobacco products are an important part 
of overall revenue for these stores, 
composing over 12 percent of total sales 
(as shown in Table E30). 
TABLE E30—THE IMPORTANCE OF TOBACCO SALES BY KIND OF BUSINESS: RANKED BY THE PERCENTAGE OF TOTAL 
SALES FROM TOBACCO PRODUCT LINE 
Kind of business 
Sales from 
tobacco 
product 
line a ($ bil) 
Total sales 
from all 
product 
lines ($ bil) b 
Percentage 
of total 
sales from 
tobacco 
product line 
Tobacco Stores ........................................................................................................................................ 5.7 6.5 86.9 
Convenience Stores ................................................................................................................................ 4.5 18.1 25.0 
Nonstore Retailers ................................................................................................................................... 0.5 2.4 20.3 
Convenience Stores with Gas ................................................................................................................. 21.2 173.4 12.2 
Vending Machine Operators .................................................................................................................... 0.2 1.7 11.2 
Miscellaneous store retailers ................................................................................................................... 0.1 1.2 11.2 
Liquor Stores ........................................................................................................................................... 1.2 12.8 9.7 
Other Kinds of Business .......................................................................................................................... 0.1 1.4 6.5 
Drinking places ........................................................................................................................................ 0.1 3.9 3.5 
Gasoline Stations ..................................................................................................................................... 1.0 29.4 3.5 
General Merchandise .............................................................................................................................. 7.1 246.1 2.9 
Supermarket & Grocery ........................................................................................................................... 7.7 383.5 2.0 
Drug Stores .............................................................................................................................................. 1.5 80.0 1.9 
Other Accommodation & Foodservice ..................................................................................................... 0.3 33.3 0.8 
Total .................................................................................................................................................. 51.2 993.9 5.2 
a Tobacco sales from Table E29. 
b Includes total sales for firms with tobacco product line sales. Refs. 78, 79. 
For both types of convenience stores, 
Table E31 shows that for the smallest 
firms with less than $250,000 in annual 
sales, the one-time costs of the proposed 
rule would equal less than 2 percent of 
annual average sales of tobacco 
products. Furthermore, one-time costs 
total less than 0.1 percent of annual 
average sales of tobacco products for 
stores with $1 million or more in 
average annual sales. Although the 
impact on other small retail and service 
entities is uncertain, this example 
suggests that the proposed rule would 
be unlikely to create a significant direct 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:19 Nov 10, 2010 Jkt 223001 PO 00000 Frm 00036 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\12NOP2.SGM 12NOP2em
cd
on
al
d 
on
 D
SK
2B
SO
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
69559 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 218 / Friday, November 12, 2010 / Proposed Rules 
burden on small retail stores or service 
establishments. 
TABLE E31—ONE-TIME COSTS AS A PERCENTAGE OF AVERAGE SALES OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS FOR CONVENIENCE 
STORES AND CONVENIENCE STORES WITH GASOLINE 
Sales size of firm 
Number of 
establish-
ments 
Sales 
($ mil) 
Sales of tobacco products 
Average 
($ mil) 
One-time 
costs as 
percentage 
of average 
Convenience Store—NAICS 445120 a: 
Less than $250,000 .................................................................................................. 4,231 653 0.0 0.5 
$250,000 to $499,999 .............................................................................................. 5,296 1,920 0.1 0.2 
$500,000 to $999,999 .............................................................................................. 5,150 3,646 0.2 0.1 
$1,000,000 to $2,499,999 ........................................................................................ 3,586 4,915 0.3 0.1 
$2,500,000 to $4,999,999 ........................................................................................ 659 1,601 0.6 0.0 
$5,000,000 to $9,999,999 ................................................................................................ 324 712 0.5 0.0 
$10,000,000 to $24,999,999 ............................................................................................ 215 440 0.5 0.0 
Convenience Stores with Gasoline—NAICS 447110 b: 
Less than $250,000 .................................................................................................. 2,246 343 0.0 1.0 
$250,000 to $499,999 .............................................................................................. 3,801 1,425 0.0 0.4 
$500,000 to $999,999 .............................................................................................. 7,667 5,624 0.1 0.2 
$1,000,000 to $2,499,999 ........................................................................................ 14,309 22,303 0.2 0.1 
$2,500,000 to $4,999,999 ........................................................................................ 7,977 22,786 0.3 0.1 
Source: Ref. 108. 
a Tobacco product line sales account for 25.0 percent of sales for all firms in NAICS 445120 (see Table E30); One-time costs equal $198.16 
(see Table E13). 
b Tobacco product line sales account for 12.2 percent of sales for all firms in NAICS 447110 (see Table E30); One-time costs equal $193.42 
(see Table E13). 
3. Alternatives To Minimize the Burden 
on Small Entities 
a. Increase the compliance period to 
24 months for small manufacturers or 
all manufacturers. Allowing all 
manufacturers, or only small 
manufacturers, 24 months to comply 
with the labeling changes would reduce 
overtime and rush charges. Under a 24- 
month compliance period, labeling 
change costs would fall on average by 
$0.32 to $0.85 million per small firm. 
Table E32 compares the reduced 
estimated compliance cost to average 
annual receipts in order to gauge the 
potential impact of this regulatory 
alternative on cigarette manufacturing 
firms employing fewer than 500 people. 
As a comparison with Table E28 shows, 
this option would provide only modest 
relief. It would also delay the public 
health benefits of the proposed rule and 
be inconsistent with the statutory 
requirement. 
TABLE E32—POTENTIAL IMPACT OF LABELING CHANGE COMPLIANCE COSTS ON THE 20 SMALL CIGARETTE 
MANUFACTURERS WITH A 24-MONTH COMPLIANCE PERIOD 
Size by number of employees Number of firms 
Average 
annual 
receipts 
($1,000) 
Average labeling 
compliance costs 
($,1000) 
Average labeling 
compliance costs 
as a % of average 
annual receipts 
Low High Low High 
Less than 20 .................................................................... 9 11,195 3,224 8,533 29 76 
20 to 99 ............................................................................ 7 21,265 3,224 8,533 15 40 
100 to 499 ........................................................................ 4 147,896 3,224 8,533 2 6 
Source: Ref. 77 
SBA size standard: 1,000 employees 
b. Exempt small manufacturers from 
the labeling change requirements. 
Exempting small manufacturers from 
the labeling change requirements would 
eliminate their incremental labeling 
costs (an average reduction of $3.5 to 
$9.4 million), thus providing maximum 
relief. The combined market share of the 
4 largest manufacturers was 89.7 
percent in 2008 (Ref. 105). The 
immediate impact would therefore be to 
allow 10.3 percent of cigarettes to be 
marketed without graphic warning 
labels when the rule went into effect. 
This proportion would grow over time, 
however, as some consumers would be 
expected to switch to brands marketed 
without graphic warnings. This 
approach would be inconsistent with 
both the statutory mandate and the 
public health objectives of this rule. 
c. Exempt small cigarette retailers 
from the point-of-sale advertising 
requirements. Exempting small cigarette 
retailers from the point-of-sale 
advertising requirements would 
eliminate their need to remove 
noncompliant advertising, reducing 
their direct costs to zero. However, 
Table E27 shows that the overwhelming 
majority of retail establishments selling 
cigarettes are small. Although the few 
establishments operated by large firms 
might be expected to have higher 
volume, a significant proportion of 
consumers would continue to be 
exposed to advertising lacking the new 
graphic warnings. This situation would 
be inconsistent with the public health 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 18:15 Nov 10, 2010 Jkt 223001 PO 00000 Frm 00037 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\12NOP2.SGM 12NOP2em
cd
on
al
d 
on
 D
SK
2B
SO
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
69560 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 218 / Friday, November 12, 2010 / Proposed Rules 
objective of the proposed rule as well as 
FDA’s statutory mandate. 
IX. Comments 
Interested persons may submit to the 
Division of Dockets Management (see 
ADDRESSES) either electronic or written 
comments regarding this document. As 
noted above, if you have comments on 
specific provisions of the proposed 
regulation, we request that you identify 
these provisions in your comments. In 
addition, if you have concerns that 
would be addressed by alternative text 
for the regulation, we request that you 
provide this alternative text in your 
comments. It is only necessary to send 
one set of comments. It is no longer 
necessary to send two copies of mailed 
comments. Identify comments with the 
docket number found in brackets in the 
heading of this document. Received 
comments may be seen in the Division 
of Dockets Management between 9 a.m. 
and 4 p.m., Monday through Friday. 
X. References 
The following references have been 
placed on display in the Division of 
Dockets Management (see ADDRESSES) 
and may be seen by interested persons 
between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m. Monday 
through Friday. (FDA has verified Web 
site addresses, but FDA is not 
responsible for any subsequent changes 
to the Web sites after this document 
publishes in the Federal Register.) 
1. Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, ‘‘Smoking-Attributable Mortality, 
Years of Potential Life Lost, and Productivity 
Losses—United States, 2000–2004,’’ 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 
57(45); 1226–1228, Nov. 14, 2008, available 
at http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/ 
mmwrhtml/mm5745a3.htm. 
2. U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services, ‘‘The Health Consequences of 
Smoking,’’ A Report of the Surgeon General; 
2004, available at http:// 
www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/ 
smokingconsequences/index.html. 
3. U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services, ‘‘Youth & Tobacco; Preventing 
Tobacco Use Among Young People,’’ A 
Report of the Surgeon General; 1994, 
available at http://www.surgeongeneral.gov/ 
library/reports/. 
4. H.R. 1108, Family Smoking Prevention 
And Tobacco Control Act: Hearing Before the 
House Subcommittee on Health of the 
Committee on Energy and Commerce, 110th 
Cong. 42 (2007) (testimony of Richard 
Bonnie). 
5. Institute of Medicine of the National 
Academies, ‘‘Ending the Tobacco Problem: A 
Blueprint for the Nation,’’ 2007, available at 
http://www.iom.edu/Reports/2007/Ending- 
the-Tobacco-Problem-A–Blueprint-for-the- 
Nation.aspx. 
6. Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, ‘‘Vital Signs: Current Cigarette 
Smoking Among Adults Aged > 18 Years— 
United States, 2009,’’ Morbidity and Mortality 
Weekly Report, 59(35); 1135–1140, Sept. 10, 
2010, available at http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/ 
preview/mmwrhtml/mm5935a3.htm. 
7. Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, ‘‘Surveillance for Cancers 
Associated with Tobacco Use—United States, 
1999–2004,’’ Morbidity and Mortality Weekly 
Report, 57(SS08); 1–33, Sept. 5, 2008, 
available at http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/ 
preview/mmwrhtml/ss5708a1.htm. 
8. Substance Abuse and Mental Health 
Services Administration, ‘‘Results from the 
2008 National Survey on Drug Use and 
Health: National Findings,’’ Rockville, MD: 
2009, available at http:// 
www.oas.samhsa.gov/nsduh/2k8nsduh/ 
2k8Results.pdf. 
9. Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, ‘‘Tobacco Use Among Middle and 
High School Students—United States, 2000– 
2009,’’ Morbidity and Mortality Weekly 
Report, 59(33); 1063–1068, Aug. 27, 2010, 
available at http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/ 
preview/mmwrhtml/mm5933a2.htm. 
10. Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, ‘‘Trends in Smoking Initiation 
Among Adolescents and Young Adults— 
United States, 1980–1989,’’ Morbidity and 
Mortality Weekly Report, 44(28); 521–525, 
July 21, 1995, available at http:// 
www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/ 
00038190.htm. 
11. Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, ‘‘Youth Risk Behavior 
Surveillance—United States, 2009,’’ 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 2010, 
59 (No. SS–5); June 4, 2010, available at 
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/pdf/ss/ 
ss5905.pdf. 
12. Johnston, L.D., O’Malley P.M., 
Bachman J.G., and Schulenberg, J.E., 
‘‘Smoking continues gradual decline among 
U.S. teens, smokeless tobacco threatens a 
comeback.’’ University of Michigan News 
Service: Ann Arbor, MI, Dec. 14, 2009, 
available at http:// 
www.monitoringthefuture.org/data/ 
09data.html#2009data-cigs. 
13. Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, ‘‘Cigarette Use Among High 
School Students—United States, 1991–2009,’’ 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 
59(26); 797–801, July 9, 2010, available at 
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/ 
mmwrhtml/mm5926a1.htm. 
14. Taioli, E., and Wynder, E.L., ‘‘Effect of 
the Age at Which Smoking Begins on 
Frequency of Smoking in Adulthood,’’ The 
New England Journal of Medicine, 325(13); 
968–969, 1991. 
15. Chen, J. and Millar, W, ‘‘Age of smoking 
initiation: implications for quitting,’’ Health 
Reports (Statistics Canada, Catalogue 82– 
003–XPB), 9(4); 39–46, 1998. 
16. Breslau, N., and Peterson, E., ‘‘Smoking 
Cessation in Young Adults: Age at Initiation 
of Cigarette Smoking and Other Suspected 
Influences,’’ American Journal of Public 
Health, 86(2); 214–20, 1996. 
17. Benowitz, N., ‘‘Nicotine Addiction,’’ 
The New England Journal of Medicine, 
362(24); 2295–303, 2010. 
18. Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, ‘‘Cigarette Smoking-Attributable 
Morbidity—United States, 2000,’’ Morbidity 
and Mortality Weekly Report, 52(35); 842– 
844, Sept. 5, 2003, available at http:// 
www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/ 
mm5235a4.htm. 
19. Fiore M.C., Jaen C.R., Baker T.B., et al., 
‘‘Treating tobacco use and dependence: 2008 
update,’’ Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services, Public Health 
Service, 2008, available at http:// 
www.surgeongeneral.gov/tobacco/ 
treating_tobacco_use08.pdf . 
20. U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services, ‘‘Reducing the Health Consequences 
of Smoking—25 Years of Progress,’’ A Report 
of the Surgeon General; 1989, available at 
http://www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/ 
reports/. 
21. U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services, ‘‘The Health Consequences of 
Smoking: Nicotine Addiction,’’ A Report of 
the Surgeon General; 1988, available at 
http://www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/ 
reports/. 
22. Berg, C., et al., ‘‘Failure to report 
attempts to quit smoking,’’ Addictive 
Behaviors, 35; 900–904, 2010. 
23. Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, ‘‘Cigarette Smoking Among 
Adults and Trends in Smoking Cessation— 
United States, 2008,’’ Morbidity and Mortality 
Weekly Report, 58(44); 1227–1232, Nov. 13, 
2009, available at http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/ 
preview/mmwrhtml/mm5844a2.htm. 
24. DiFranza, J., et al., ‘‘Initial symptoms of 
nicotine dependence in adolescents,’’ 
Tobacco Control, 9; 313–319, 2000. 
25. Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, ‘‘High School Students Who 
Tried to Quit Smoking Cigarettes—United 
States, 2007.’’ Morbidity and Mortality 
Weekly Report, 58(16); 428–431, May 1, 2009, 
available at http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/ 
preview/mmwrhtml/mm5816a4.htm. 
26. U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services, ‘‘The Health Benefits of Smoking 
Cessation,’’ A Report of the Surgeon General; 
1990, available at http:// 
www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/reports/. 
27. Hammond, D., ‘‘Tobacco Labelling & 
Packaging Toolkit: A guide to FCTC Article 
11,’’ Feb. 2009, available at http:// 
www.tobaccolabels.ca/download/tobaccolab/ 
iuatldtook?attachment=1. 
28. Hammond, D., Fong, G.T., and 
McDonald, P.W., et al., ‘‘Impact of the 
graphic Canadian warning labels on adult 
smoking behaviour,’’ Tobacco Control, 12; 
391–5, 2003. 
29. Hammond, D., McDonald, P.W., and 
Fong, G.T., et al. ‘‘The Impact of Cigarette 
Warning Labels and Smoke-free Bylaws on 
Smoking Cessation—Evidence from Former 
Smokers,’’ Canadian Journal of Public 
Health/Revue Canadienne de Sante Publique, 
95(3); 201–204, May–June 2004. 
30. Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, ‘‘Health Warnings on Tobacco 
Products—Worldwide, 2007,’’ Morbidity and 
Mortality Weekly Report, 58(19); 528–9, May 
22, 2009, available at http://www.cdc.gov/ 
mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5819a3.htm. 
31. Lorillard et al., 80 F.T.C. 455, 460–65 
(1972) (consent orders). 
32. Federal Trade Commission, ‘‘Staff 
Report on the Cigarette Advertising 
Investigation,’’ ch. 4, May 1981, available at 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:19 Nov 10, 2010 Jkt 223001 PO 00000 Frm 00038 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\12NOP2.SGM 12NOP2em
cd
on
al
d 
on
 D
SK
2B
SO
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
69561 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 218 / Friday, November 12, 2010 / Proposed Rules 
http://tobaccodocuments.org/lor/03607752- 
7763.html. 
33. Fischer, P.M., Richards, J.W., and 
Berman, E.F., et al., ‘‘Recall and Eye Tracking 
Study of Adolescents Viewing Tobacco 
Advertisements,’’ Journal of the American 
Medical Association, 261; 84–89, 1989. 
34. Robinson, T.N. Killen, J.D., ‘‘Do 
Cigarette Warning Labels Reduce Smoking?: 
Paradoxical Effects Among Adolescents,’’ 
Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent 
Medicine, 151(3); 267–72, 1997. 
35. Davis, R.M. and Kendrick, J.S., ‘‘The 
Surgeon General’s Warnings in Outdoor 
Cigarette Advertising,’’ Journal of the 
American Medical Association, 261(1); 90– 
94, 1989. 
36. Hammond, D., Fong, G.T., and Borland, 
R., et al., ‘‘Text and Graphic Warnings on 
Cigarette Packages: Findings from the 
International Tobacco Control Four Country 
Study,’’ American Journal of Preventive 
Medicine, 32(3); 202–209, 2007. 
37. Hammond, D., Fong, G.T. and McNeill, 
A., et al., ‘‘Effectiveness of cigarette warning 
labels in informing smokers about the risks 
of smoking: findings from the International 
Tobacco Control (ITC) Four Country Survey,’’ 
Tobacco Control, 15(III); iii19–iii25, 2006, 
available at http://tc.bmjjournals.com/cgi/ 
content/full/15/suppl_3/iii19. 
38. Peters, E., Romer, D. and Slovic, P., et 
al., ‘‘The impact and acceptability of 
Canadian-style cigarette warning labels 
among U.S. smokers and nonsmokers,’’ 
Nicotine & Tobacco Research, 9(4); 473–481, 
April 2007. 
39. Federal Trade Commission, ‘‘Cigarette 
Report for 2006,’’ 2009, available at http://
www.ftc.gov/os/2009/-8/090812
cigarettereport.pdf. 
40. National Cancer Institute, ‘‘The Role of 
the Media in Promoting and Reducing 
Tobacco Use,’’ NCI Tobacco Control 
Monograph Series, Monograph 19, NIH 
Publication No. 07–6242, 2008, available at 
cancercontrol.cancer.gov/TCRB/ 
monographs/19/index.html. 
41. Millar, W.J., ‘‘Reaching Smokers with 
Lower Educational Attainment,’’ Health 
Reports (Statistics Canada), 8(2); 11–19, 1996. 
42. Fong, G.T., Hammond, D., and 
Hitchman, S.C., ‘‘The impact of pictures on 
the effectiveness of tobacco warnings,’’ 
Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 
87; 640–43, 2009, available at http://
www.who.int/bulletin/volumes/87/8/09- 
069575.pdf. 
43. Canadian Cancer Society, Evaluation of 
New Warnings on Cigarette Packages. 
Prepared by Environics, Focus Canada 2001– 
3, 2001, available at http://www.cancer.ca/
Canada-wide/How%20you%20can%20help/
Take%20action/
Advocacy%20what%20were%20doing/
Tobacco%20control%20advocacy/
Progress%20in%20tobacco%20control/
Evaluation%20of%20new%20warnings%
20on%20cigarette%20packages.aspx?
sc_lang=en. 
44. Morrison, W., Doucet, C., and Diener, 
A., ‘‘Knowledge of Health Risks,’’ Health 
Canada, 2002 Youth Smoking Survey- 
Technical Report; 197–228, 2004, available at 
http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/hc-ps/pubs/tobac- 
tabac/yss-etj-2002/index-eng.php. 
45. Koval, J.J., Aubut, J.A., et al., ‘‘The 
Potential Effectiveness of Warning Labels on 
Cigarette Packages: The Perceptions of Young 
Adult Canadians,’’ Canadian Journal of 
Public Health/Revue Canadienne de Sante 
Publique, 96(5); 353–6, 2005. 
46. Borland, R., Wilson, N., et al., ‘‘Impact 
of graphic and text warnings on cigarette 
packs: findings from four countries over five 
years,’’ Tobacco Control, 18(5); 358–364, 
2009. 
47. White, V., Webster, B., and Wakefield, 
M., ‘‘Do graphic health warning labels have 
an impact on adolescents’ smoking-related 
beliefs and behaviours?’’ Addiction, 103; 
1562–71, 2008. 
48. Elliott & Shanahan Research, 
‘‘Developmental Research for New Australian 
Health Warnings on Tobacco Products Stage 
2,’’ prepared for Population Health Division, 
Department of Health and Ageing, 
Commonwealth of Australia, August 2003, 
available at http://www.health.gov.au/
internet/main/publishing.nsf/Content/
4FA9E17EB0A1FB6ECA25776900054914/ 
$File/warnres2.pdf. 
49. Kempf, D.S. and Harmon, S.K., 
‘‘Examining the effectiveness of proposed 
cigarette package warning labels with graphic 
images among U.S. college students,’’ 
Academy of Marketing Studies Journal, 10(2); 
77–93, 2006. 
50. O’Hegarty, M., Pederson, L.L., et al., 
‘‘Young Adults’ Perceptions of Cigarette 
Warning Labels in the United States and 
Canada,’’ Preventing Chronic Disease, 4(2); 1– 
9, 2007. 
51. Hammond, D., Fong, G.T., et al., 
‘‘Graphic Canadian Cigarette Warning Labels 
and Adverse Outcomes: Evidence from 
Canadian Smokers,’’ American Journal of 
Public Health, 94(8); 1442–5, 2004. 
52. Shanahan, P. and Elliot, D., ‘‘Evaluation 
of the Effectiveness of the Graphic Health 
Warnings on Tobacco Product Packaging 
2008,’’ Canberra: Australian Government 
Department of Health and Ageing, 2009. 
53. Miller, C.L., Hill, D.J., Quester, P.G., et 
al., ‘‘Response of mass media, tobacco 
industry and smokers to the introduction of 
graphic cigarette pack warnings in Australia,’’ 
European Journal of Public Health, 19(6); 
644–49, 2009. 
54. Vardavas, C.I., Connolly, G., et al., 
‘‘Adolescents perceived effectiveness of the 
proposed European graphic tobacco warning 
labels,’’ European Journal of Public Health, 
19(2); 212–17, 2009. 
55. O’Hegarty, M., Pederson, L.L., et al., 
‘‘Reactions of Young Adult Smokers to 
Warning Labels on Cigarette Packs,’’ 
American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 
30(6); 467–73, 2006. 
56. Health Canada, ‘‘Canadian Tobacco Use 
Monitoring Survey (CTUMS),’’ available at 
http://hc-sc.gc.ca/hc-ps/tobac-tabac/
research-recherche/stat/_ctums-esutc_
prevalence/prevalence-eng.php. 
57. Elliott & Shanahan Research, 
‘‘Literature Review: Evaluation of the 
Effectiveness of the Graphic Health Warnings 
on Tobacco Product Packaging 2008,’’ 
prepared for Department of Health and 
Ageing, Commonwealth of Australia, 2009. 
58. Danaei, G., Ding, E.L., and Mozaffarian, 
E., et al., ‘‘The Preventable Causes of Death 
in the United States: Comparative Risk 
Assessment of Dietary, Lifestyle and 
Metabolic Risk Factors,’’ PLoS Medicine 6(4), 
April 28, 2009. 
59. Tobacco Labelling Resource Centre, 
‘‘Country Information: Canada,’’ available at 
http://www.tobaccolabels.ca/currentl/canada 
(accessed August 3, 2010). 
60. Eastern Research Group, Inc., ‘‘Baseline 
of State and International Tobacco Laws,’’ 
June 25, 2010. 
61. Health Canada, ‘‘Overview of Historical 
Data, Wave 1, 1999–2009,’’ available at 
http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/hc-ps/tobac-tabac/
research-recherche/stat/_ctums-esutc_2009/
w-p-1_histo-eng.php (accessed August 3, 
2010). 
62. National Center for Health Statistics 
(U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services), ‘‘National Health Interview Survey: 
Questionnaires, Datasets and Related 
Documentation, 1997 to the Present,’’ 
available at http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nhis/
quest_data_related_1997_forward.htm 
(accessed July 23, 2010). 
63. Health Canada, Tobacco Directorate, 
‘‘Long-Term Trends in the Prevalence of 
Current Smokers,’’ Mimeo, May 14, 2009. 
64. National Center for Biotechnology 
Information, ‘‘Health, United States, 2005: 
Table 63,’’ available at http://www.cdc.gov/
nchs/data/hus/hus05.pdf. 
65. U.S. Census Bureau, Population 
Division, Interim State Population 
Projections, 2005, available at http://
www.census.gov/population/www/
projections/projectionsagesex.html. 
66. Sloan, F.A., Ostermann, J., and 
Conover, C., et al., The Price of Smoking, 
Cambridge MA: MIT Press (2004). 
67. Taylor, Donald H., Jr., et al., ‘‘Benefits 
of Smoking Cessation for Longevity,’’ 
American Journal of Public Health, 92(6): 
990–996, 2002. 
68. OMB Circular A–4, 11–12. 
69. Cutler, D. 2008, ‘‘Are We Finally 
Winning the War on Cancer?’’ Journal of 
Economic Perspectives, 22:3–26. 
70. Murphy, K.M. and Topel, R.H., ‘‘The 
Value of Health and Longevity,’’ Journal of 
Political Economy, 114(5): 871–904, 2006. 
71. Sullivan, P.W. and Gushchyan, V., 
‘‘Preference-Based EQ–5D Index Scores for 
Chronic Conditions in the United States,’’ 
Medical Decision-Making, 26: 410–420, July– 
Aug. 2006. 
72. Hall, John R., Jr., ‘‘The Smoking- 
Material Fire Problem,’’ Quincy, MA: 
National Fire Protection Association, March 
2010. 
73. National Fire Protection Association, 
News Release, July 16, 2004. 
74. ABC News/Associated Press, Fire-Safe 
Cigarette Law Yields Results, February 13, 
2006. 
75. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 
National Center for Environmental 
Economics, ‘‘Frequently Asked Questions on 
Mortality Risk Valuation,’’ 2010, available at 
http://yosemite.epa.gov/ee/epa/eed.nsf/ 
pages/MortalityRiskValuation.html. 
76. U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau 
of Economic Analysis, 2010a, National 
Economic Accounts: Current-dollar and 
‘‘real’’ GDP, available at http://www.bea.gov/ 
national/index.htm. 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:19 Nov 10, 2010 Jkt 223001 PO 00000 Frm 00039 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\12NOP2.SGM 12NOP2em
cd
on
al
d 
on
 D
SK
2B
SO
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
69562 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 218 / Friday, November 12, 2010 / Proposed Rules 
77. U.S. Census Bureau, Statistics of U.S. 
Businesses (SUSB), Latest SUSB Annual 
Data, U.S., All Industries, 2007, available at 
http://www.census.gov/econ/susb/ (accessed 
July 2010). 
78. U.S. Census Bureau, 2005c, Product 
Lines: 2002, 2002 Economic Census, 
Accommodation and Food Services, Subject 
Series, available at http://www.census.gov/
prod/ec02/ec0272sllst.pdf. 
79. U.S. Census Bureau, 2005d, Product 
Lines: 2002, 2002 Economic Census, Retail 
Trade, Subject Series, available at http://
www.census.gov/prod/ec02/ec0244sllst.pdf. 
80. U.S. Census Bureau, Nonemployer 
Statistics, U.S., All Industries, 2008, Retail 
Trade, Accommodation and Food Services, 
available at http://censtats.census.gov/cgi- 
bin/nonemployer/nonsect.pl (accessed July 
2010). 
81. RTI: Muth, Mary K., Melanie J. Ball, 
Michaela C. Coglaiti, and Shawn A. Karns. 
‘‘Model to Estimate Costs of Using Labeling 
as a Risk-Reduction Strategy for Consumer 
Products Regulated by the Food and Drug 
Administration,’’ Methodology Report, RTI 
International, Research Triangle Park, NC: 
May 2010. 
82. RTI Spreadsheet: Preliminary Estimates 
from the Forthcoming FDA Labeling Cost 
Model, August 2010. 
83. RTI: Muth, Mary K., Erica C. Gledhill, 
and Shawn A. Karns, ‘‘FDA Labeling Cost 
Model.’’ RTI Health, Social, and Economics 
Research, Research Triangle Park, NC: 
January 2003. 
84. California Directory of Compliant 
Cigarettes and Roll-Your-Own Brand 
Families Listed by Manufacturer, available at 
http://ag.ca.gov/tobacco/pdf/
CompliantManufacturers.pdf (accessed July 
2, 2010). 
85. ‘‘District of Columbia Tobacco 
Directory,’’ Office of the Chief Financial 
Officer, available at http://cfo.dc.gov/cfo/ 
cwp/view,A,1324,Q,616374.asp (accessed 
Aug. 6, 2010). 
86. Hawaii, State of, Department of the 
Attorney General, Criminal Justice Division 
Tobacco Enforcement Unit ‘‘Directory: 
Cigarettes and Roll-Your-Own Tobacco,’’ 
available at http://hawaii.gov/ag/tobacco/
Directory%2010-28-10.pdf. 
87. Nebraska Department of Revenue, 
‘‘Nebraska Directory of Certified Tobacco 
Product Manufacturers and Brands,’’ August 
2010, available at http://
www.revenue.ne.gov/cig/manufacturer.html. 
88. ‘‘South Carolina Tobacco Directory,’’ 
Office of the Attorney General, November 1, 
2010, available at http://www.
scattorneygeneral.org/civil/pdf/sc_tobacco_
directory.pdf. 
89. ‘‘Utah Approved Tobacco 
Manufacturers and Cigarette/RYO Brands,’’ 
Utah State Tax Commission Publication 51, 
11/01/2010, available at http://tax.utah.gov/
forms/pubs/pub-51.pdf. 
90. Flynn, Jennifer D, ‘‘Characteristics of 
Home Fire Victims Fact Sheet,’’ NFPA Fire 
Analysis and Research, March 2010. 
91. Arias, E., ‘‘United States Life Tables, 
2006,’’ National Vital Statistics Reports 
58(21), June 28, 2010, available at http://
www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nvsr/nvsr58/nvsr58_
21.pdf. 
92. U.S. Census Bureau, American 
FactFinder, ‘‘2006 Annual Survey of 
Manufacturers,’’ available at http://factfinder.
census.gov/servlet/IBQTable?_bm=y&-ds_
name=AM0631GS101. 
93. Thrasher, James F. et al. ‘‘Estimating the 
Impact of Different Cigarette Package 
Warning Label Policies: The Auction 
Method,’’ Addictive Behaviors, 32: 2916– 
2925, 2007. 
94. U.S. Department of Agriculture, ‘‘2007 
Census of Agriculture: United States 
Summary and State Data: Volume 1, 
Geographic Area Series, Part 51,’’ December 
2009, available at http://www.agcensus.usda.
gov/Publications/2007/Full_Report/usv1.pdf. 
95. Chaloupka, F., and Warner, K, ‘‘The 
Economics of Smoking,’’ Handbook of Health 
Economics, ed., Holland: 
Newhouse.Amsterdam, 2000. 
96. Warner, K.E., et al., ‘‘Employment 
Implications of Declining Tobacco Product 
Sales for the Regional Economies of the 
United States,’’ Journal of the American 
Medical Association, 1996. 
97. U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, 
National Economic Accounts. ‘‘Table 3.5. 
Taxes on Production and Imports,’’ available 
at http://www.bea.gov/national/nipaweb/
SelectTable.asp (accessed October 13, 2010). 
98. U.S. Department of the Treasury, 
Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau, 
‘‘Federal Excise Tax Increase and Related 
Provisions,’’ available at http://www.ttb.gov/
main_pages/schip-summary.shtml (accessed 
August 18, 2010). 
99. Tax Foundation, ‘‘State Sales, Gasoline, 
Cigarette and Alcohol Tax Rates by State, 
2000–2010,’’ available at http://www.tax
foundation.org/publications/show/245.html. 
100. U.S. Department of Commerce, Census 
Bureau 2008, National Cancer Institute and 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
co-sponsored Tobacco Use Supplement to the 
Current Population Survey 2006–2007, 
available at http://www.nber.org/data/
current-population-survey-data.html. 
101. U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau 
of Economic Analysis, 2010b, National 
Income and Product Accounts Table 2.5.5, 
available at http://www.bea.gov/national/
nipaweb/TableView.asp?SelectedTable=74&
Freq=Year&FirstYear=2008&LastYear=2009 
(accessed August 26, 2010). 
102. U.S. Census Bureau, 2010, 
International Trade Statistics. 
103. U.S Department of Agriculture, 
Foreign Agricultural Service, Global 
Agricultural Trade System Online, available 
at http://www.fas.usda.gov/ustrade/
usthome.asp (accessed August 9, 2010). 
104. AC Nielsen, 2010. 
105. Maxwell, J.C., The Maxwell Report: 
Year-End and Fourth Quarter 2008 Sales 
Estimates for the Cigarette Industry, 
Richmond, VA: John C. Maxwell, Jr., 
February 2009. 
106. U.S. Small Business Administration, 
2008, Table of Size Standards, available at 
http://www.sba.gov/contract
ingopportunities/officials/size/table/
index.html (accessed August 2010). 
107. U.S. Census Bureau, 2005a, 
Establishment and Firm Size: 2002, 2002 
Economic Census, Accommodation and Food 
Services, Subject Series, available at http://
www.census.gov/prod/ec02/ec0272ssszt.pdf. 
108. U.S. Census Bureau, 2005b, 
Establishment and Firm Size: 2002, 2002 
Economic Census, Retail Trade, Subject 
Series, available at http://www.census.gov/
prod/ec02/ec0244ssszt.pdf. 
List of Subjects in 21 CFR Part 1141 
Advertising, Incorporation by 
reference, Labeling, Packaging and 
containers, Tobacco, and Smoking. 
Therefore, under the Federal Cigarette 
Labeling and Advertising Act, the 
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, 
and under authority delegated to the 
Commissioner of Food and Drugs, it is 
proposed that chapter I of title 21 of the 
Code of Federal Regulations be 
amended by adding part 1141 to 
subchapter K to read as follows: 
PART 1141—CIGARETTE PACKAGE 
AND ADVERTISING WARNINGS 
Subpart A—General Provisions 
Sec. 
1141.1 Scope. 
1141.3 Definitions. 
Subpart B—Cigarette Package and 
Advertising Warnings 
1141.10 Required warnings. 
1141.12 Incorporation by reference of 
required warnings. 
1141.14 Misbranding of cigarettes. 
Subpart C—Additional Disclosure 
Requirements for Cigarette Packages and 
Advertising 
1141.16 Disclosures regarding cessation. 
Authority: Secs. 201 and 202, Pub. L. 111– 
31, 123 Stat. 1776; 15 U.S.C. 1333; 21 U.S.C. 
371, 387c, 387f. 
Subpart A—General Provisions 
§ 1141.1 Scope. 
(a) This part sets forth the 
requirements for the display of health 
warnings on cigarette packages and in 
advertisements for cigarettes. FDA may 
require additional statements to be 
displayed on packages and in 
advertisements under the Federal Food, 
Drug, and Cosmetic Act or other 
authorities. 
(b) The requirements of this part do 
not apply to manufacturers or 
distributors of cigarettes that do not 
manufacture, package, or import 
cigarettes for sale or distribution within 
the United States. 
(c) A cigarette retailer shall not be 
considered in violation of this part as it 
applies to the display of health 
warnings on a cigarette package if the 
package: 
(1) Contains a health warning; 
(2) Is supplied to the retailer by a 
license- or permit-holding tobacco 
product manufacturer, importer, or 
distributor; and 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:19 Nov 10, 2010 Jkt 223001 PO 00000 Frm 00040 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\12NOP2.SGM 12NOP2em
cd
on
al
d 
on
 D
SK
2B
SO
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
69563 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 218 / Friday, November 12, 2010 / Proposed Rules 
(3) Is not altered by the retailer in a 
way that is material to the requirements 
of section 4(a) of the Federal Cigarette 
Labeling and Advertising Act (15 U.S.C. 
1333(a)) or this part, including by 
obscuring the warning, by reducing its 
size, by severing it in whole or in part, 
or by otherwise changing it in a material 
way. 
(d) A cigarette retailer shall not be 
considered in violation of this part, as 
it applies to the display of health 
warnings in an advertisement for 
cigarettes if the advertisement is not 
created by or on behalf of the retailer 
and the retailer is not otherwise 
responsible for the inclusion of the 
required warnings. This paragraph shall 
not relieve a retailer of liability if the 
retailer displays, in a location open to 
the public, an advertisement that does 
not contain a health warning or that 
contains a warning that has been altered 
by the retailer in a way that is material 
to the requirements of section 4(b) of the 
Federal Cigarette Labeling and 
Advertising Act (15 U.S.C. 1333(b)), this 
part, or section 4(c) of the Federal 
Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act 
(15 U.S.C. 1333(c)), including by 
obscuring the warning, by reducing its 
size, by severing it in whole or in part, 
or by otherwise changing it in a material 
way. 
§ 1141.3 Definitions. 
For the purposes of this part, 
Cigarette means: 
(1) Any roll of tobacco wrapped in 
paper or in any substance not 
containing tobacco; and 
(2) Any roll of tobacco wrapped in 
any substance containing tobacco 
which, because of its appearance, the 
type of tobacco used in the filler, or its 
packaging and labeling, is likely to be 
offered to, or purchased by, consumers 
as a cigarette described in paragraph (1) 
of this definition. 
Commerce means: 
(1) Commerce between any State, the 
District of Columbia, the 
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Guam, 
the Virgin Islands, American Samoa, 
Wake Island, Midway Islands, Kingman 
Reef, or Johnston Island and any place 
outside thereof; 
(2) Commerce between points in any 
State, the District of Columbia, the 
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Guam, 
the Virgin Islands, American Samoa, 
Wake Island, Midway Islands, Kingman 
Reef, or Johnston Island, but through 
any place outside thereof; or 
(3) Commerce wholly within the 
District of Columbia, Guam, the Virgin 
Islands, American Samoa, Wake Island, 
Midway Island, Kingman Reef, or 
Johnston Island. 
Distributor means any person who 
furthers the distribution of cigarettes at 
any point from the original place of 
manufacture to the person who sells or 
distributes the product to individuals 
for personal consumption. Common 
carriers are not considered distributors 
for the purposes of this part. 
Front panel and rear panel mean the 
two largest sides or surfaces of the 
package. 
Importer means any person who 
introduces into commerce any cigarette 
that: 
(1) Was not manufactured inside the 
United States; and 
(2) Is intended for sale or distribution 
to consumers in the United States. 
Manufacturer means any person, 
including any repacker or relabeler, who 
manufactures, fabricates, assembles, 
processes, or labels a finished cigarette 
product. 
Package means a pack, box, carton, or 
container of any kind in which 
cigarettes are offered for sale, sold, or 
otherwise distributed to consumers. 
Person means an individual, 
partnership, corporation, or any other 
business or legal entity. 
Required warning means the 
combination of one of the textual 
warning statements and its 
accompanying color graphic, which are 
set forth in ‘‘Cigarette Required 
Warnings—English and Spanish’’ and 
‘‘Cigarette Required Warnings—Other 
Foreign Languages,’’ which are 
incorporated by reference at § 1141.12. 
Retailer means any person who sells 
cigarettes to individuals for personal 
consumption, or who operates a facility 
where vending machines or self-service 
displays of cigarettes are permitted. 
United States, when used in a 
geographical sense, includes the several 
States, the District of Columbia, the 
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Guam, 
the Virgin Islands, American Samoa, 
Wake Island, Midway Islands, Kingman 
Reef, and Johnston Island. The term 
‘‘State’’ includes any political division of 
any State. 
Subpart B—Cigarette Package and 
Advertising Warnings 
§ 1141.10 Required warnings. 
(a) Packages—(1) It shall be unlawful 
for any person to manufacture, package, 
sell, offer to sell, distribute, or import 
for sale or distribution within the 
United States any cigarettes the package 
of which fails to bear, in accordance 
with section 4 of the Federal Cigarette 
Labeling and Advertising Act (15 U.S.C. 
1333) and this part, one of the required 
warnings on both the front and the rear 
panel. 
(2) The required warning shall be 
obtained and accurately reproduced 
from the electronic images contained in 
‘‘Cigarette Required Warnings—English 
and Spanish,’’ which is incorporated by 
reference at § 1141.12, except that it 
must be adapted as necessary to meet 
the requirements of section 4 of the 
Federal Cigarette Labeling and 
Advertising Act (15 U.S.C. 1333) and 
this part. 
(3) The required warning shall appear 
directly on the package and shall be 
clearly visible underneath the 
cellophane or other clear wrapping. 
(4) The required warning shall be 
located in the upper portion of the front 
and rear panels of the package and shall 
comprise at least the top 50 percent of 
these panels; Provided, however, that on 
cigarette cartons, the required warning 
shall be located on the left side of the 
front and rear panels of the carton and 
shall comprise at least the left 50 
percent of these panels. 
(5) The required warning shall be 
positioned such that the text of the 
required warning and the other 
information on that panel of the package 
have the same orientation. 
(b) Advertisements—(1) It shall be 
unlawful for any manufacturer, 
importer, distributor, or retailer of 
cigarettes to advertise or cause to be 
advertised within the United States any 
cigarette unless its advertising bears, in 
accordance with section 4 of the Federal 
Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act 
(15 U.S.C. 1333) and this part, one of the 
required warnings. 
(2) The text in each required warning 
shall be in the English language, except 
that: 
(i) In the case of an advertisement that 
appears in a non-English publication, 
the text in the required warning shall 
appear in the predominant language of 
the publication whether or not the 
advertisement is in English; and 
(ii) In the case of an advertisement 
that appears in an English language 
publication but that is not in English, 
the text in the required warning shall 
appear in the same language as that 
principally used in the advertisement. 
(3) For English-language and Spanish- 
language warnings, each required 
warning shall be obtained and 
accurately reproduced from the 
electronic images contained in 
‘‘Cigarette Required Warnings—English 
and Spanish,’’ which is incorporated by 
reference at § 1141.12, except that it 
must be adapted as necessary to meet 
the requirements of section 4 of the 
Federal Cigarette Labeling and 
Advertising Act (15 U.S.C. 1333), 
including area and other formatting 
requirements, and this part. 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:19 Nov 10, 2010 Jkt 223001 PO 00000 Frm 00041 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\12NOP2.SGM 12NOP2em
cd
on
al
d 
on
 D
SK
2B
SO
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
69564 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 218 / Friday, November 12, 2010 / Proposed Rules 
(4) For foreign-language warnings, 
except for Spanish-language warnings, 
each required warning shall be the color 
graphic obtained and accurately 
reproduced from the electronic images 
contained in ‘‘Cigarette Required 
Warnings—Other Foreign Language 
Advertisements,’’ which is incorporated 
by reference at § 1141.12, and into 
which a true and accurate translation of 
the textual warning is inserted in 
accordance with ‘‘Cigarette Required 
Warnings—Other Foreign Language 
Advertisements,’’ except that the 
required warning must be adapted as 
necessary to meet the requirements of 
section 4 of the Federal Cigarette 
Labeling and Advertising Act (15 U.S.C. 
1333), including area and other 
formatting requirements, and this part. 
(5) The required warning shall occupy 
at least 20 percent of the area of each 
advertisement, and shall be placed in 
accordance with the requirements in the 
Federal Cigarette Labeling and 
Advertising Act. 
(c) Irremovable or permanent 
warnings. The required warnings shall 
be indelibly printed on or permanently 
affixed to the package or advertisement. 
Such warnings, for example, must not 
be printed or placed on a label affixed 
to a clear outer wrapper that is likely to 
be removed to access the product within 
the package. 
§ 1141.12 Incorporation by reference of 
required warnings. 
Certain material entitled: ‘‘Cigarette 
Required Warnings—English and 
Spanish,’’ (edition 1.0, June 2011, Food 
and Drug Administration), appearing in 
§§ 1141.10(a)(2), (b)(3), and 1141.16(a); 
and ‘‘Cigarette Required Warnings— 
Other Foreign Language 
Advertisements,’’ (edition 1.0, June 
2011, Food and Drug Administration), 
appearing in §§ 1141.10(b)(4) and 
1141.16(a) are incorporated by reference 
into this part with the approval of the 
Director of the Federal Register in 
accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a) and 1 
CFR part 51. You may obtain a copy 
from the Food and Drug Administration, 
Center for Tobacco Products, Office of 
Compliance, 9200 Corporate Blvd., 
Rockville, MD 20850, 1–877–CTP–1373, 
and from the Web sites listed in 
paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section. 
Also, this material is available for 
inspection at the National Archives and 
Records Administration (NARA). For 
more information on the availability of 
the following material, call NARA at 
202–741–6030 or go to http://www.
archives.gov/Federal_register/codeof_
Federal_regulations/ibr_locations.html: 
(a) ‘‘Cigarette Required Warnings— 
English and Spanish,’’ available from 
FDA at http://www.fda.gov/Tobacco, 
referred to at §§ 1141.10(a)(2) and (b)(3) 
and § 1141.16. 
(b) ‘‘Cigarette Required Warnings— 
Other Foreign Language 
Advertisements,’’ available from FDA at 
http://www.fda.gov/Tobacco, referred to 
at §§ 1141.10(b)(4) and § 1141.16. 
§ 1141.14 Misbranding of cigarettes. 
(a) A cigarette shall be deemed to be 
misbranded under section 903(a)(1) of 
the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic 
Act unless its labeling bears one of the 
required warnings in accordance with 
section 4 of the Federal Cigarette 
Labeling and Advertising Act (15 U.S.C. 
1333) and this part. A cigarette shall be 
deemed to be misbranded under section 
903(a)(7)(A) of the Federal Food, Drug, 
and Cosmetic Act unless its advertising 
bears one of the required warnings in 
accordance with section 4 of the Federal 
Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act 
(15 U.S.C. 1333) and this part. 
(b) A cigarette advertisement or 
package will be deemed to include a 
brief statement of relevant warnings for 
the purposes of section 903(a)(8) of the 
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act if 
it bears one of the required warnings in 
accordance with section 4 of the Federal 
Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act 
(15 U.S.C. 1333) and this part. A 
cigarette distributed or offered for sale 
in any State shall be deemed to be 
misbranded under section 903(a)(8) of 
the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic 
Act unless the manufacturer, packer, or 
distributor includes in all 
advertisements and packages issued or 
caused to be issued by the 
manufacturer, packer, or distributor 
with respect to the cigarette one of the 
required warnings in accordance with 
section 4 of the Federal Cigarette 
Labeling and Advertising Act (15 U.S.C. 
1333) and this part. 
Subpart C—Additional Disclosure 
Requirements for Cigarette Packages 
and Advertising 
§ 1141.16 Disclosures regarding 
cessation. 
(a) The required warning shall 
include a reference to a smoking 
cessation assistance resource in 
accordance with, and as specified in, 
‘‘Cigarette Required Warnings—English 
and Spanish’’ (incorporated by reference 
at § 1141.12) or ‘‘Cigarette Required 
Warnings—Other Foreign Language 
Advertisements’’ (incorporated by 
reference at § 1141.12), whichever is 
applicable. 
(b) The smoking cessation assistance 
resource required to be referenced by 
paragraph (a) of this section must: 
(1) Provide factual information about 
the harms to health associated with 
cigarette smoking and the health 
benefits of quitting smoking; 
(2) Provide factual information about 
what smokers can expect when trying to 
quit; 
(3) Provide practical advice (problem 
solving/skills training) about how to 
deal with common issues faced by users 
trying to quit; 
(4) Provide evidence-based advice 
about how to formulate a plan to quit 
smoking; 
(5) Provide evidence-based 
information about effective relapse 
prevention strategies; 
(6) Provide factual information on 
smoking cessation treatments, including 
FDA-approved cessation medications; 
(7) Provide information, advice, and 
support that is evidence-based, 
unbiased (including with respect to 
products, services, persons, and other 
entities), and relevant to tobacco 
cessation; 
(8) Other than as described in this 
section, not advertise or promote any 
particular product or service; 
(9) Not selectively present 
information about a subset of FDA- 
approved cessation products or product 
categories while failing to mention other 
FDA-approved cessation products or 
product categories or reference any drug 
or other medical product that FDA has 
not approved for tobacco cessation; and 
(10) Not encourage the use of any 
non-evidence-based smoking cessation 
practices. 
(c) If the smoking cessation assistance 
resource required to be referenced by 
paragraph (a) of this section is a Web 
site, it: 
(1) Must not contain a link to any Web 
site unless it meets all of the criteria 
described in paragraph (b) of this 
section; and 
(2) May include references to one or 
more toll-free telephone numbers only if 
they meet the criteria described in 
paragraphs (b) and (d) of this section. 
(d) If the smoking cessation assistance 
resource required to be referenced by 
paragraph (a) of this section is a toll-free 
telephone number, it must: 
(1) Ensure that staff providing 
smoking cessation information, advice, 
and support are trained specifically to 
help smokers quit by delivering 
unbiased and evidence-based 
information, advice, and support; and 
(2) Maintain appropriate controls to 
ensure the criteria described in 
paragraph (b) of this section are met. 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 18:15 Nov 10, 2010 Jkt 223001 PO 00000 Frm 00042 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\12NOP2.SGM 12NOP2em
cd
on
al
d 
on
 D
SK
2B
SO
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
69565 Federal Register / Vol. 75, No. 218 / Friday, November 12, 2010 / Proposed Rules 
Dated: November 8, 2010. 
Margaret A. Hamburg, 
Commissioner of Food and Drugs. 
Dated: November 8, 2010. 
Kathleen Sebelius, 
Secretary of Health and Human Services. 
[FR Doc. 2010–28538 Filed 11–10–10; 8:45 am] 
BILLING CODE 4160–01–P 
VerDate Mar<15>2010 17:19 Nov 10, 2010 Jkt 223001 PO 00000 Frm 00043 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 9990 E:\FR\FM\12NOP2.SGM 12NOP2em
cd
on
al
d 
on
 D
SK
2B
SO
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
2
