37837 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
1 The Department is awarding Stabilization 
program funds in two phases. In the first phase, the 
Department is awarding 67 percent of a State’s 
Education Stabilization Fund allocation, unless the 
State can demonstrate that additional funds are 
required to restore fiscal year 2009 State support for 
education, in which case the Department will 
award the State up to 90 percent of that allocation. 
In addition, the Department will award 100 percent 
of each State’s Government Services Fund 
allocation in Phase I. The Department will award 
the remainder of a State’s Education Stabilization 
Fund allocation in the second phase. A table listing 
the allocations to States under the Stabilization 
program is available at: http://www.ed.gov/ 
programs/ 
statestabilization/funding.html. 
[FR Doc. E9–17909 Filed 7–24–09; 11:15 am] 
BILLING CODE 4000–01–C 
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
[Docket ID ED–2009–OESE–0007] 
RIN 1810–AB04 
State Fiscal Stabilization Fund 
Program 
Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance 
(CFDA) Numbers: 84.394 (Education 
Stabilization Fund) and 84.397 
(Government Services Fund). 
AGENCY: Department of Education. 
ACTION: Notice of proposed 
requirements, definitions, and approval 
criteria. 
SUMMARY: The Secretary of Education 
(Secretary) proposes requirements, 
definitions, and approval criteria for the 
State Fiscal Stabilization Fund 
(Stabilization) program. The Secretary 
may use one or more of these 
requirements, definitions, and approval 
criteria in awarding funds under this 
program in fiscal year (FY) 2010. The 
requirements, definitions, and approval 
criteria proposed in this notice are 
based on the assurances regarding 
education reform that grantees are 
required to provide in exchange for 
receiving funds under the Stabilization 
program. We take this action to specify 
the data and information that grantees 
must collect and report with respect to 
those assurances and to help ensure 
grantees’ ability to collect and report the 
required data and information. 
DATES: We must receive your comments 
on or before August 28, 2009. 
ADDRESSES: Submit your comments 
through the Federal eRulemaking Portal 
or via postal mail, commercial delivery, 
or hand delivery. We will not accept 
comments by fax or by e-mail. Please 
submit your comments only one time in 
order to ensure that we do not receive 
duplicate copies. In addition, please 
include the Docket ID and the term 
‘‘State Fiscal Stabilization Fund’’ at the 
top of your comments. 
• Federal eRulemaking Portal: Go to 
http://www.regulations.gov to submit 
your comments electronically. 
Information on using Regulations.gov, 
including instructions for accessing 
agency documents, submitting 
comments, and viewing the docket, is 
available on the site under ‘‘How To Use 
This Site.’’ 
• Postal Mail, Commercial Delivery, 
or Hand Delivery. If you mail or deliver 
your comments about these proposed 
requirements, definitions, and approval 
criteria, address them to Office of 
Elementary and Secondary Education 
(Attention: State Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund Comments), U.S. Department of 
Education, 400 Maryland Avenue, SW., 
Room 3E108, Washington, DC 20202– 
6200. 
• Privacy Note: The Department’s 
policy for comments received from 
members of the public (including those 
comments submitted by mail, 
commercial delivery, or hand delivery) 
is to make these submissions available 
for public viewing in their entirety on 
the Federal eRulemaking Portal at http: 
//www.regulations.gov. Therefore, 
commenters should be careful to 
include in their comments only 
information that they wish to make 
publicly available on the Internet. 
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: 
James Butler. Telephone: (202) 260– 
2274 or by e-mail: 
phase2comments@ed.gov. 
If you use a telecommunications 
device for the deaf (TDD), call the 
Federal Relay Service (FRS), toll free, at 
1–800–877–8339. 
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 
Invitation to Comment: We invite you 
to submit comments regarding this 
notice. To ensure that your comments 
have maximum effect in developing the 
notice of final requirements, definitions, 
and approval criteria, we urge you to 
identify clearly the specific proposed 
requirements, definitions, and approval 
criteria that each comment addresses. 
We invite you also to assist us in 
complying with the specific 
requirements of Executive Order 12866 
and its overall requirement of reducing 
regulatory burden that might result from 
these proposed requirements, 
definitions, and approval criteria. Please 
let us know of any further ways we 
could reduce potential costs or increase 
potential benefits while preserving the 
effective and efficient administration of 
this program. 
During and after the comment period, 
you may inspect all public comments 
about this notice by accessing 
Regulations.gov. You may also inspect 
the public comments in person in Room 
3E108, 400 Maryland Avenue, SW., 
Washington, DC, between the hours of 
8:30 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Washington, 
DC, time, Monday through Friday of 
each week except Federal holidays. 
Assistance to Individuals with 
Disabilities in Reviewing the 
Rulemaking Record: On request we will 
provide an appropriate accommodation 
or auxiliary aid to an individual with a 
disability who needs assistance to 
review the comments or other 
documents in the public rulemaking 
record for this notice. If you want to 
schedule an appointment for this type of 
accommodation or auxiliary aid, please 
contact the person listed under FOR 
FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT. 
Purpose of Program: The State Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund program provides 
approximately $48.6 billion in formula 
grants to States to help stabilize State 
and local budgets in order to minimize 
and avoid reductions in education and 
other essential services, in exchange for 
a State’s commitment to advance 
essential education reform in key areas. 
Program Authority: American 
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009, 
Division A, Title XIV—State Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund, Public Law 111–5. 
Proposed Requirements 
Note: The proposed requirements are listed 
following the background for this section. 
Background: Section 14005(d) of 
Division A of the American Recovery 
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (ARRA) 
requires a State receiving funds under 
the Stabilization program to provide 
assurances in four key areas of 
education reform: (a) Achieving equity 
in teacher distribution, (b) improving 
collection and use of data, (c) standards 
and assessments, and (d) supporting 
struggling schools. For each area of 
reform, the ARRA prescribes specific 
action(s) that the State must assure that 
it will implement. In addition, section 
14005(a) of the ARRA requires a State 
that receives funds under the 
Stabilization program to submit an 
application to the Department 
containing such information as the 
Secretary may reasonably require. In 
this notice, we propose specific data 
and information requirements (the 
assurance indicators and descriptors) 
that a State receiving funds under the 
Stabilization program must meet with 
respect to the statutory assurances. We 
also propose specific requirements for a 
plan that a State must submit (the State 
plan), as part of its application for the 
second phase 1 of funding under the 
Stabilization program, describing its 
ability to collect and report the required 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 20:41 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00035 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4703 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37838 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
2 We note that descriptions of the teacher 
performance evaluation systems used in LEAs also 
provide necessary context for data on teacher 
performance ratings or levels. When viewed in 
isolation, data on teacher performance ratings or 
levels are open to interpretation and may ultimately 
not be meaningful. 
3 See Leithwood, K., Louis, K. S., Anderson, S., 
and Walhstrom, K., (2004). How leadership 
influences student learning. Minneapolis, MN: 
University of Minnesota. 
4 If, however, the State requires the use of specific 
teacher and principal evaluation systems by its 
LEAs, it could directly provide descriptions of 
those systems in lieu of individual system 
descriptions by its LEAs. 
data and other information. Together, 
these two sets of proposed requirements 
aim to provide transparency on the 
extent to which a State is implementing 
the actions for which it has provided 
assurance. Increased access to and focus 
on this information will better enable 
States and other stakeholders to identify 
strengths and weaknesses in education 
systems and determine where 
concentrated reform effort is warranted. 
We also intend to use the data and 
information that States collect and 
report in assessing whether a State is 
qualified to participate in and receive 
funds under other reform-oriented 
programs administered by the 
Department. 
As discussed elsewhere in this notice, 
a proposed assurance indicator or 
descriptor may relate to data or other 
information that States currently collect 
and report to the Department, or to data 
or other information for which the 
Department is itself the source. In those 
cases, we do not propose any new data 
or information collection requirements 
for a State; rather, the Department will 
provide the State with the relevant data 
or other information that the State 
would be required to confirm and make 
publicly available. (In confirming the 
data or information, the State would not 
be required to perform any additional 
analysis or verification.) In the other 
cases, the proposed requirement would 
constitute new data or information 
collection and reporting responsibilities 
for the State, to the extent the State does 
not currently collect and report such 
data or information for other purposes. 
Following is a description of the 
proposed indicators and descriptors in 
each education reform area and the 
proposed State plan requirements. The 
Department recognizes that requests for 
data and information should reflect an 
integrated and coordinated approach 
among the various programs supported 
with ARRA funds, particularly the 
Stabilization, Race to the Top, School 
Improvement Grants, and Statewide 
Longitudinal Data Systems programs. 
Accordingly, the Department will 
continue to evaluate the proposed 
requirements for this program in context 
with those other programs. 
Achieving Equity in Teacher 
Distribution 
Regarding education reform area (a) 
(achieving equity in teacher 
distribution), section 14005(d)(2) of the 
ARRA requires a State receiving funds 
under the Stabilization program to 
assure that it will take actions to 
improve teacher effectiveness and 
comply with section 1111(b)(8)(C) of the 
Elementary and Secondary Education 
Act of 1965, as amended (ESEA) (20 
U.S.C. 6311), in order to address 
inequities in the distribution of highly 
qualified teachers between high- and 
low-poverty schools and to ensure that 
low-income and minority children are 
not taught at higher rates than other 
children by inexperienced, unqualified, 
or out-of-field teachers. In order to 
provide indicators of the extent to 
which a State is taking such actions, we 
propose to require that the State provide 
data and other information on student 
access to highly qualified teachers in 
high- and low-poverty schools, on how 
teacher and principal performance is 
evaluated, and on the distribution of 
performance evaluation ratings or levels 
among teachers and principals. 
With respect to student access to 
highly qualified teachers in high- and 
low-poverty schools, States are 
currently required to collect and report 
data to the Department, through the 
EDFacts system, on the extent to which 
core academic courses in such schools 
are taught by highly qualified teachers. 
Because such data are currently 
available, we do not propose to require 
any new data or information collection 
by a State in this area; rather, the 
Department would provide the State 
with the data it most recently submitted, 
which the State would be required to 
confirm and make publicly available. 
With respect to evaluation of teacher 
performance, we propose to require that 
a State provide descriptive information 
on the teacher performance evaluation 
systems used in local educational 
agencies (LEAs) in the State, including 
an indication of whether any official 
systems used to evaluate teacher 
performance include student 
achievement outcomes as an evaluation 
criterion. With respect to teacher 
performance ratings or levels, we 
propose to require that a State provide 
data on the distribution of performance 
ratings or levels in its LEAs as well as 
an indication of whether such ratings or 
levels are available to the public by 
school for each LEA. When properly 
developed and implemented, local 
evaluation systems perform a principal 
role in measuring teacher effectiveness. 
We also believe that student 
achievement outcomes are a central 
factor in evaluation systems that yield 
fair and reliable assessments of teacher 
performance. The data and information 
on teacher performance ratings or levels, 
together with the descriptive 
information on teacher performance 
evaluation systems, will provide greater 
transparency on the design and usage of 
teacher evaluation systems and will 
serve as an important indicator of the 
extent to which effective teachers are 
equitably distributed within LEAs and 
States.2 Moreover, this information will 
help States and other stakeholders 
correct inequities in the distribution of 
effective teachers as well as 
shortcomings in the design and usage of 
teacher performance evaluation systems. 
Regarding evaluation of principal 
performance, we propose requirements 
similar to those proposed for evaluation 
of teacher performance, except that we 
do not propose to require a State to 
indicate whether principal performance 
ratings or levels are available to the 
public by school in each LEA, as such 
information may be personally 
identifiable. Although the ARRA does 
not explicitly mention principals with 
respect to the assurance in this reform 
area, we believe that effective school 
administration is a key factor in 
effective teaching and learning. Studies 
show that school leadership is a major 
contributing factor to what students 
learn at school. Studies also show that 
strong teachers are more likely to teach 
in schools with strong principals.3 
Information on principal performance 
will provide another useful snapshot of 
the steps being taken to ensure that 
effective school personnel are 
distributed equitably within LEAs and 
States. 
In order to meet the proposed 
requirements to describe the teacher and 
principal performance evaluation 
systems used in LEAs in the State, a 
State would not be required itself to 
develop such descriptions; it would be 
sufficient for the State to maintain a 
Web site that contains electronic links 
to descriptions developed by its LEAs.4 
On such a Web site, the State could also 
include, by LEA, the data and 
information the State collects in order to 
meet the other proposed requirements 
that relate to evaluation of teacher and 
principal performance (i.e., the 
requirements to indicate whether 
official teacher and principal 
evaluations systems include student 
achievement outcomes as an evaluation 
criterion, to provide the number and 
percentage of teachers and principals 
rated at each performance rating or level 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00036 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4703 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37839 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
5 The Department is developing guidance to assist 
States in developing and implementing statewide 
longitudinal data systems that are consistent with 
the provisions of the America COMPETES Act and 
that comply with applicable student privacy 
requirements, including applicable requirements of 
the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act. We 
expect to issue preliminary guidance in this area in 
the near future. During the time this guidance is 
being developed, we expect that States will 
continue to work toward fully developing and 
implementing statewide longitudinal data systems. 
in official evaluation systems, and to 
indicate whether the number and 
percentage of teachers rated at each 
performance rating or level in official 
evaluations systems are publicly 
available for each school). In such a 
case, however, the State would be 
responsible for ensuring, through 
appropriate guidance or technical 
assistance, that the descriptions of 
teacher and principal performance 
evaluation systems maintained by LEAs 
contain the required information and 
are provided in an easily 
understandable format. 
To view a summary of the proposed 
requirements in this education reform 
area, please visit: http://www.ed.gov/ 
programs/statestabilization/ 
applicant.html. 
Improving Collection and Use of Data 
Regarding education reform area (b) 
(improving collection and use of data), 
section 14005(d)(3) of the ARRA 
requires a State receiving funds under 
the Stabilization program to provide an 
assurance that it will establish a 
statewide longitudinal data system that 
includes the elements described in 
section 6401(e)(2)(D) of the America 
COMPETES Act (20 U.S.C. 9871). To 
provide indicators of the extent to 
which a State is meeting that 
requirement, we propose that the State 
provide information on the elements of 
its statewide longitudinal data system 
and on whether the State provides 
teachers with data on student 
performance that include estimates of 
individual teacher impact on student 
achievement in a manner that is timely 
and informs instruction. 
With respect to the elements of 
statewide longitudinal data systems, we 
propose to require, consistent with the 
ARRA, that a State indicate whether its 
data system contains each of the 12 
elements described in section 
6401(e)(2)(D) of the America 
COMPETES Act 5. For pre-school 
through postsecondary education, these 
elements include: (1) A unique 
statewide student identifier that does 
not permit a student to be individually 
identified by users of the system; (2) 
student-level enrollment, demographic, 
and program participation information; 
(3) student-level information about the 
points at which students exit, transfer 
in, transfer out, drop out, or complete 
P–16 education programs; (4) the 
capacity to communicate with higher 
education data systems; and (5) an audit 
system assessing data quality, validity, 
and reliability. For preschool through 
grade 12 education, these elements 
include: (6) yearly State assessment 
records of individual students; (7) 
information on students not tested, by 
grade and subject; (8) a teacher 
identifier system with the ability to 
match teachers to students; (9) student- 
level transcript information, including 
on courses completed and grades 
earned; and (10) student-level college 
readiness test scores. Finally, for 
postsecondary education, the elements 
include: (11) information regarding the 
extent to which students transition 
successfully from secondary school to 
postsecondary education, including 
whether students enroll in remedial 
coursework; and (12) other information 
determined necessary to address 
alignment and adequate preparation for 
success in postsecondary education. 
These elements constitute the minimum 
requirements of a modern statewide 
longitudinal data system. To measure 
the progress of students and schools 
effectively and efficiently, it is 
imperative that the State’s data system 
contains these elements. 
With respect to teachers’ receipt of 
data on student performance that 
include estimates of individual teacher 
impact on student achievement, we 
propose to require a State to indicate 
whether it provides such data to 
teachers in grades in which the State 
administers reading/language arts and 
mathematics assessments. We believe 
that teachers’ receipt of these data 
should be a natural product of a 
statewide longitudinal data system that 
includes elements (1), (6), and (8) 
referenced in the preceding paragraph. 
Moreover, we believe that this is a key 
example of how reliable, high-quality 
data from the State’s system can drive 
education reform in general and 
improvements in the classroom in 
particular. 
To view a summary of the proposed 
requirements in this education reform 
area, please visit: http://www.ed.gov/ 
programs/statestabilization/ 
applicant.html. 
Standards and Assessments 
Regarding education reform area (c) 
(standards and assessments), section 
14005(d)(4) of the ARRA requires a State 
receiving funds under the Stabilization 
program to assure that it will: (A) 
Enhance the quality of the academic 
assessments it administers pursuant to 
section 1111(b)(3) of the ESEA (20 
U.S.C. 6311) through activities such as 
those described in section 6112(a) of the 
ESEA (20 U.S.C. 7301a); (B) comply 
with the requirements of paragraphs 
(3)(C)(ix) and (6) of section 1111(b) of 
the ESEA (20 U.S.C. 6311) and section 
612(a)(16) of the Individuals with 
Disabilities Education Act (20 U.S.C. 
1412) related to the inclusion of 
children with disabilities and limited 
English proficient students in State 
assessments, the development of valid 
and reliable assessments for those 
students, and the provision of 
accommodations that enable their 
participation in State assessments; and 
(C) take steps to improve State academic 
content standards and student academic 
achievement standards for secondary 
schools consistent with section 
6401(e)(1)(A)(ii) of the America 
COMPETES Act (20 U.S.C. 9871). To 
provide indicators of the extent to 
which a State is taking these actions, we 
propose that the State provide data and 
other information in the following areas: 
• Whether students are provided 
high-quality State assessments. 
• Whether the State is engaged in 
activities to enhance its assessments 
(with respect to paragraph (A) of the 
statutory assurance). 
• Whether students with disabilities 
and limited English proficient students 
are included in State assessment 
systems (with respect to paragraph (B) 
of the statutory assurance). 
• Whether the State makes available 
information regarding student academic 
performance compared to student 
academic performance in other States. 
• The extent to which students 
graduate from high school in four years 
with a regular high school diploma and 
continue on to pursue a college 
education or technical training (with 
respect to paragraph (C) of the statutory 
assurance). 
As States prepare to significantly 
improve the rigor and effectiveness of 
their standards and assessment systems, 
we believe this information will, in 
general, provide stakeholders with vital 
transparency on the current status of 
those systems and on the efforts to 
improve them that are currently 
underway. 
For two of the areas described above, 
namely, whether students are provided 
high-quality State assessments and 
whether students with disabilities and 
limited English proficient students are 
included in State assessment systems, 
States are currently required to collect 
and report data or other information to 
the Department. For instance, regarding 
whether students with disabilities and 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00037 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4703 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37840 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
6 See below for the proposed requirements in 
these areas regarding standards and assessments 
that use other data and information currently 
available to the Department; these include 
Indicators (c)(3), (c)(4), and (c)(8). 
7 These activities are supported by the Grants for 
Enhanced Assessment Instruments program. See 
http://www.ed.gov/programs/eag/index.html for 
more information on this program. 
8 States must disaggregate these data by student 
subgroup consistent with the requirements of 
section 1111(b)(2)(C)(v)(II) of the ESEA. The student 
subgroups discussed in that section include: 
economically disadvantaged students, students 
from major racial and ethnic groups, students with 
disabilities, and students with limited English 
proficiency. 
9 Although the statutory assurance concerns only 
Title I schools in corrective action and 
restructuring, we propose to require that States 
include Title I schools in improvement as well 
when providing data on the extent to which 
dramatic reforms to improve student academic 
achievement are being implemented. Making this 
addition would be consistent with the school 
reform strategies that States are implementing using 
funds available under section 1003(g) of the ESEA 
(School Improvement Grants), which are intended 
to be applied to schools in improvement as well as 
to schools in corrective action or restructuring. 
limited English proficient students are 
included in State assessment systems, 
States are currently required to report, 
through the EDFacts system (for the 
annual ESEA Consolidated State 
Performance Report), the number and 
percentage of such students who are 
included in State reading/language arts 
and mathematics assessments. 
Similarly, regarding whether students 
are provided high-quality State 
assessments, a State must currently 
submit information to the Department 
on its assessment system, which the 
Department reviews for compliance 
with the requirements of the ESEA and 
on the basis of which the Department 
issues an approval status. We propose to 
use these and other data and 
information currently available to the 
Department 6 as indicators of a State’s 
progress in these two areas; in these 
cases, the Department would provide 
the State with the data it most recently 
submitted, or the most recent 
determinations of the Department, 
which the State would be required to 
confirm and publicly report. 
Regarding the extent to which the 
State is engaged in activities to enhance 
its assessments, we propose to require, 
consistent with the statutory assurance, 
that a State indicate whether it is 
pursuing any of the activities described 
in section 6112(a) of the ESEA.7 These 
activities include: (1) Working in 
collaboration or consortia with other 
States or organizations to improve the 
quality, validity, and reliability of State 
academic assessments; (2) measuring 
student academic achievement using 
multiple measures of academic 
achievement from multiple sources; (3) 
charting student progress over time; and 
(4) evaluating student academic 
achievement using comprehensive 
instruments, such as performance and 
technology-based assessments. If a State 
indicates that it is engaged in any such 
activities, it would be required to briefly 
describe the nature of that activity. 
As a supplement to the data and 
information currently available to the 
Department regarding whether students 
with disabilities and limited English 
proficient students are included in State 
assessment systems (as discussed 
above), we propose to require a State to 
indicate whether it has completed, 
within the last two years, an analysis of 
the appropriateness and effectiveness of 
the accommodations it provides 
students with disabilities and limited 
English proficient students to ensure 
their meaningful participation in State 
assessments. This additional 
information will help provide a 
comprehensive picture of the effort a 
State is making to include these 
students in a valid and reliable 
assessment system consistent with the 
statutory assurance. Moreover, we note 
that States conducting such analyses 
can use results from those analyses to 
target resources and identify areas 
where improvements in the services 
provided to these students are needed. 
Regarding whether the State makes 
available information on student 
performance compared to performance 
of students in other States, Federal 
regulations require States to include in 
the annual State report cards required 
under section 1111(h)(1)(A) of the ESEA 
(20 U.S.C. 6311), beginning with report 
cards issued for the 2009–2010 school 
year, the most recent available student 
achievement results for the State from 
the National Assessment of Educational 
Progress (NAEP) administered by the 
Department (34 CFR 200.11(c)). Because 
of this regulatory requirement, we do 
not propose to require any new data 
collection by a State in this area; rather, 
in this case, the State would be required 
to confirm that its annual State report 
card contains this information. We 
believe that, when compared with 
student achievement results from State 
assessments (which a State is required 
by statute also to include in its annual 
State report card), student achievement 
results from NAEP provide a 
perspective on the extent to which a 
State has developed and is 
implementing high-quality academic 
content and student achievement 
standards. 
Regarding the extent to which 
students graduate from high school and 
continue on to pursue a college 
education or technical training, we 
propose to require that a State provide 
data on the following topics: The 
number and percentage of students, by 
subgroup, who graduate from high 
school using a four-year adjusted cohort 
graduation rate as required by 34 CFR 
200.19(b)(1)(i); the number of high 
school graduates (by subgroup) 8 who 
subsequently enroll in institutions of 
higher education (IHEs) as defined in 
section 101(a) of the Higher Education 
Act of 1965, as amended (HEA); and, of 
the high school graduates who enroll in 
public IHEs, the number (by subgroup) 
who complete at least one year’s worth 
of college credit applicable to a degree. 
These data will act as key indicators of 
the extent to which a State has 
developed and is implementing 
secondary school academic content and 
achievement standards that contribute 
effectively to student preparation for 
college without the need for 
remediation. 
To view a summary of the proposed 
requirements in this education reform 
area, please visit: http://www.ed.gov/ 
programs/statestabilization/ 
applicant.html. 
Supporting Struggling Schools 
Regarding education reform area (d) 
(supporting struggling schools), section 
14005(d)(5) of the ARRA requires a State 
receiving funds under the Stabilization 
program to provide an assurance that it 
will ensure compliance with the 
requirements of section 1116(b)(7)(C)(iv) 
and section 1116(b)(8)(B) of the ESEA 
(20 U.S.C. 6316) with respect to Title I 
schools identified for corrective action 
and restructuring. In order to provide 
indicators of the extent to which a State 
is implementing the statutory assurance, 
we propose that the State provide data 
on the extent to which dramatic reforms 
to improve student academic 
achievement are implemented in Title I 
schools in improvement under section 
1116(b)(1)(A) of the ESEA,9 in corrective 
action, or in restructuring, and on the 
extent to which charter schools are 
operating in the State. 
With respect to reforms implemented 
in Title I schools in improvement, 
corrective action, or restructuring, we 
propose to require that a State provide 
data on the academic progress of such 
schools as well as on certain kinds of 
reform actions taken regarding those 
schools. We believe that these data, a 
supplement to existing data and 
information on Title I schools in 
improvement, corrective action, or 
restructuring, will serve as useful 
indicators of the extent to which 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 20:41 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00038 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4703 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37841 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
effective reforms are being implemented 
in these schools consistent with the 
intent of the ESEA and ARRA. 
Regarding the operation of charter 
schools in the State, we propose to 
require that a State provide data and 
other information on the number of 
charter schools that are permitted to 
operate in the State, the number that are 
currently operating, the number and 
identity of charter schools that have 
closed within the last five years, and the 
reason(s) (including financial, 
enrollment, academic, or other reasons) 
for the closure of any such school. 
Under section 1116(b)(8)(B) of the 
ESEA, LEAs must select and implement 
an alternative governance arrangement 
for a school in restructuring, and one 
allowable alternative is reopening the 
school as a charter school. Possessing 
greater autonomy in exchange for 
greater accountability, charter schools 
can become engines of innovation and 
serve as models for school reform. We 
believe these data will be useful in 
determining the extent to which 
opening charter schools is a viable 
reform option for LEAs with schools in 
restructuring and other struggling 
schools, and the extent to which charter 
schools are held accountable for their 
performance so that only high- 
performing options remain available. 
With respect to the number of charter 
schools that are currently operating, 
States are currently required to collect 
and report data on this topic to the 
Department through the EDFacts 
system. Because these data are currently 
available, we do not propose to require 
a new data collection by a State; rather, 
in this case, the Department would 
provide the State with the data it most 
recently submitted, which the State 
would be required to confirm and make 
publicly available. 
To view a summary of the proposed 
requirements in this education reform 
area, please visit: http://www.ed.gov/ 
programs/statestabilization/ 
applicant.html. 
State Plans 
In addition to the specific data and 
information requirements relating to the 
four ARRA education reform assurances 
discussed above, we also propose 
requirements for a plan that a State must 
submit to the Department. In general, 
the State plan must describe the State’s 
current ability to collect the data or 
other information needed for the 
proposed assurance indicators and 
descriptors as well as the State’s current 
ability to make the data or information 
easily available to the public. If the State 
is currently able to fully collect and 
report the required data or other 
information, the State must provide the 
most recent data or information with its 
plan. If a State is not currently able to 
collect or report the data or other 
information, the plan must describe the 
State’s process and timeline for 
developing and implementing the 
means to do so as soon as possible but 
no later than September 30, 2011, the 
date by which funds received under the 
Stabilization program must be obligated. 
The State plan must describe the State’s 
collection and reporting abilities with 
respect to each individual indicator or 
descriptor. 
As discussed above, the data or 
information needed for an assurance 
indicator or descriptor is in some cases 
already reported to the Department by 
the State, or is provided by the 
Department. In those cases, it is 
understood that the State is currently 
able to collect the data or information; 
the State’s plan need only address the 
State’s ability to publicly report the data 
or information, and the State need not 
include the data or information with its 
plan. 
The proposed State plan requirements 
apply generally across the education 
reform areas discussed above with the 
exception of education reform area (b) 
(improving collection and use of data), 
for which we propose to apply slightly 
different plan requirements. 
Specifically, we propose to require that 
the State describe in the State plan 
whether the State’s data system includes 
the required elements of a statewide 
longitudinal data system and, if the data 
system does not, the State’s process and 
timeline for developing and 
implementing a system that meets all 
requirements as soon as possible but no 
later than September 30, 2011. As this 
indicator relates to a State’s ability to 
collect and report data, however, these 
requirements do not in effect differ 
substantially from the generally 
applicable State plan requirements (i.e., 
the requirements that the State describe 
its abilities to collect and report data or 
other information for a given indicator 
or descriptor). Moreover, the 
development and implementation of 
such a statewide longitudinal data 
system is intrinsic to a State’s ability to 
collect and report the data required by 
certain other indicators (e.g., the 
indicators on student enrollment and 
credit completion in institutions of 
higher education after graduation from 
high school). Such a statewide 
longitudinal data system can also 
produce and manage other data that 
States may use in developing and 
improving programs; targeting services; 
developing better linkages between 
preschool, elementary and secondary, 
and postsecondary systems, agencies, 
and institutions; and holding schools, 
LEAs, and institutions accountable for 
their performance. Most importantly, we 
believe these State plan requirements 
are supported by the statutory assurance 
for this education reform area which, as 
stated above, requires the State to assure 
that it will develop such a system. 
Similarly, regarding teachers’ receipt 
of data on student performance that 
includes estimates of individual teacher 
impact on student achievement, we 
propose to require that the State 
describe in the State plan whether the 
State provides teachers with such data 
and, if the State does not, the State’s 
process and timeline for developing and 
implementing the means to do so as 
soon as possible but no later than 
September 30, 2011. We believe this 
requirement is likewise supported by 
the statutory assurance insofar as it 
provides an illustration of the ways in 
which data from the State’s statewide 
longitudinal data system can be used to 
drive education reform. School and LEA 
leaders can use these data, in particular, 
in developing and providing 
professional development opportunities, 
assigning teachers, and implementing 
compensation and other human capital 
policies. 
In addition to requirements relating to 
a State’s ability to collect and report 
data or other information for the 
respective assurance indicators and 
descriptors, we propose other general 
requirements for the State plan relating 
to the State’s institutional infrastructure 
and capacity, the nature of any technical 
assistance or other support provided, 
the plan budget, and the processes the 
State employs for data and information 
quality assurance purposes. 
Our experience with data collections 
has shown that the development of a 
plan by the agency responsible for a 
collection is highly beneficial to all 
parties. For the Department and the 
public, a plan provides transparency on 
the agency’s abilities to collect and 
report the data and other information, as 
well as a framework for holding the 
agency accountable for meeting the 
respective collection and reporting 
requirements. For the agency (in this 
case, the State), the plan presents an 
opportunity to assess its capacity and 
resources with respect to the 
requirements and to develop and 
implement any processes needed in 
order to comply with those 
requirements. 
In developing a plan as proposed in 
this notice, the State is encouraged to 
consult with key stakeholders such as 
superintendents, educators, and parents 
as well as teacher union, business, 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00039 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4703 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37842 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
community, and civil rights leaders. 
Such consultation would ensure that 
these stakeholders are aware of the 
State’s current ability to meet the 
proposed requirements, can provide 
input on the means the State will 
develop to comply with the 
requirements, and can prepare to assist 
the State in implementing those means. 
Proposed Requirements 
The Secretary proposes the following 
requirements for the Stabilization 
program. We may apply these 
requirements in any year in which this 
program is in effect. 
I. Assurance Indicators and 
Descriptors: A State must collect and 
report data and other information for the 
following indicators and descriptors 
regarding the assurances that the State 
has provided in order to receive funds 
under the Stabilization program. 
(a) Achieving equity in teacher 
distribution. A State must collect and 
report data and other information on the 
extent to which students in high- and 
low-poverty schools in the State have 
access to highly qualified teachers, on 
how teacher and principal performance 
is evaluated, and on the distribution of 
performance evaluation ratings or levels 
among teachers and principals. 
Specifically, a State must— 
Indicator (a)(1). Confirm, for the State 
and for each LEA in the State, the 
number and percentage (including 
numerator and denominator) of core 
academic courses taught, in the highest- 
poverty and lowest-poverty schools, by 
teachers who are highly qualified 
consistent with section 9101(23) of the 
ESEA; 
Descriptor (a)(1). Describe, for each 
LEA in the State, the systems used to 
evaluate the performance of teachers; 
Indicator (a)(2). Indicate, for each 
LEA in the State, whether the systems 
used to evaluate the performance of 
teachers include student achievement 
outcomes as an evaluation criterion; 
Indicator (a)(3). Provide, for each LEA 
in the State whose teachers receive 
performance ratings or levels through an 
evaluation system, the number and 
percentage (including numerator and 
denominator) of teachers rated at each 
performance rating or level; 
Indicator (a)(4). Indicate, for each 
LEA in the State whose teachers receive 
performance ratings or levels through an 
evaluation system, whether the number 
and percentage (including numerator 
and denominator) of teachers rated at 
each performance rating or level are 
available for each school in the LEA in 
a manner easily accessible and a format 
easily understandable by the public; 
Descriptor (a)(2). Describe, for each 
LEA in the State, the systems used to 
evaluate the performance of principals; 
Indicator (a)(5). Indicate, for each 
LEA in the State, whether the systems 
used to evaluate the performance of 
principals include student achievement 
outcomes as an evaluation criterion; and 
Indicator (a)(6). Provide, for each LEA 
in the State whose principals receive 
performance ratings or levels through an 
evaluation system, the number and 
percentage (including numerator and 
denominator) of principals rated at each 
performance rating or level. 
(b) Improving collection and use of 
data. A State must collect and report 
information on the elements of its 
statewide longitudinal data system and 
on whether teachers receive data on 
student performance in a manner that is 
timely and informs instruction. 
Specifically, a State must— 
Indicator (b)(1). Indicate which of the 
12 elements described in section 
6401(e)(2)(D) of the America 
COMPETES Act are included in the 
State’s statewide longitudinal data 
system; and 
Indicator (b)(2). Indicate whether the 
State provides teachers of reading/ 
language arts and mathematics in grades 
in which the State administers 
assessments in those subjects with data 
on the performance of their students on 
those assessments that include estimates 
of individual teacher impact on student 
achievement, in a manner that is timely 
and informs instruction. 
(c) Standards and assessments. A 
State must collect and report data and 
other information on whether students 
are provided high-quality State 
assessments, on whether the State is 
engaged in activities to enhance its 
assessments, on whether students with 
disabilities and limited English 
proficient students are included in State 
assessment systems, on whether the 
State makes information available 
regarding student academic 
performance in the State compared to 
the academic performance of students in 
other States, and on the extent to which 
students graduate from high school in 
four years with a regular high school 
diploma and continue on to pursue a 
college education or technical training. 
Specifically, a State must— 
Indicator (c)(1). Confirm the approval 
status, as determined by the 
Department, of the State’s assessment 
system under section 1111(b)(3) of the 
ESEA with respect to reading/language 
arts, mathematics, and science 
assessments; 
Indicator (c)(2). Indicate whether the 
State is engaged in activities consistent 
with section 6112(a) of the ESEA to 
enhance the quality of its academic 
assessments; 
Descriptor (c)(1). Briefly describe the 
nature of any activities indicated in 
Indicator (c)(2); 
Indicator (c)(3). Confirm whether the 
State has developed and implemented 
valid and reliable alternate assessments 
for students with disabilities that are 
approved by the Department; 
Indicator (c)(4). Confirm whether the 
State’s alternate assessments for 
students with disabilities, if approved 
by the Department, are based on grade- 
level, modified, or alternate academic 
achievement standards; 
Indicator (c)(5). Indicate whether the 
State has completed, within the last two 
years, an analysis of the appropriateness 
and effectiveness of the 
accommodations it provides students 
with disabilities to ensure their 
meaningful participation in State 
assessments; 
Indicator (c)(6). Confirm the number 
and percentage (including numerator 
and denominator) of students with 
disabilities who are included in State 
reading/language arts and mathematics 
assessments; 
Indicator (c)(7). Indicate whether the 
State has completed, within the last two 
years, an analysis of the appropriateness 
and effectiveness of the 
accommodations it provides limited 
English proficient students to ensure 
their meaningful participation in State 
assessments; 
Indicator (c)(8). Confirm whether the 
State provides native language versions 
of State assessments for limited English 
proficient students that are approved by 
the Department; 
Indicator (c)(9). Confirm the number 
and percentage (including numerator 
and denominator) of limited English 
proficient students who are included in 
State reading/language arts and 
mathematics assessments; 
Indicator (c)(10). Confirm that the 
State’s annual State Report Card (under 
ESEA section 1111(h)(1)) contains the 
most recent available State reading and 
mathematics NAEP results as required 
by 34 CFR 200.11(c); 
Indicator (c)(11). Provide, for the 
State, for each LEA in the State, for each 
high school in the State and, at each of 
these levels, by student subgroup 
(consistent with section 
1111(b)(2)(C)(v)(II) of the ESEA), the 
number and percentage (including 
numerator and denominator) of students 
who graduate from high school using a 
four-year adjusted cohort graduation 
rate as required by 34 CFR 
200.19(b)(1)(i); 
Indicator (c)(12). Provide, for the 
State, for each LEA in the State, for each 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00040 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4703 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37843 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
high school in the State and, at each of 
these levels, by student subgroup 
(consistent with section 
1111(b)(2)(C)(v)(II) of the ESEA), of the 
students who graduate from high school 
consistent with 34 CFR 200.19(b)(1)(i), 
the number who enroll in an IHE as 
defined in section 101(a) of the HEA; 
and 
Indicator (c)(13). Provide, for the 
State, for each LEA in the State, for each 
high school in the State and, at each of 
these levels, by student subgroup 
(consistent with section 
1111(b)(2)(C)(v)(II) of the ESEA), of the 
students who graduate from high school 
consistent with 34 CFR 200.19(b)(1)(i) 
who enroll in a public IHE, the number 
who complete at least one year’s worth 
of college credit (applicable to a degree) 
within two years. 
(d) Supporting struggling schools. A 
State must collect and report data and 
other information on the extent to 
which reforms to improve student 
academic achievement are implemented 
in the State’s Title I schools in 
improvement, corrective action, or 
restructuring under section 1116(b) of 
the ESEA, and on the extent to which 
charter schools are operating in the 
State. Specifically, a State must— 
Indicator (d)(1). Provide, for the State 
and for each LEA in the State, the 
number and percentage (including 
numerator and denominator) of schools 
in improvement, corrective action, or 
restructuring that have made progress 
on State assessments in reading/ 
language arts in the last year; 
Indicator (d)(2). Provide, for the State 
and for each LEA in the State, the 
number and percentage (including 
numerator and denominator) of schools 
in improvement, corrective action, or 
restructuring that have made progress 
on State assessments in mathematics in 
the last year; 
Indicator (d)(3). Provide, for the State 
and for each LEA in the State, the 
number and percentage (including 
numerator and denominator) of schools 
in improvement, corrective action, or 
restructuring that have been turned 
around, consolidated, or closed in the 
last year; 
Indicator (d)(4). Provide, for the State, 
of the schools in improvement, 
corrective action, or restructuring, the 
number and identity of schools in the 
lowest-achieving five percent that have 
been turned around, consolidated, or 
closed in the last year; 
Indicator (d)(5). Provide, for the State, 
of the schools in the lowest-achieving 
five percent of schools in improvement, 
corrective action, or restructuring that 
have been turned around, consolidated, 
or closed in the last year, the number 
that are secondary schools; 
Indicator (d)(6). Provide, for the State 
and, if applicable, for each LEA in the 
State, the number of charter schools that 
are currently permitted to operate; 
Indicator (d)(7). Confirm, for the State 
and for each LEA in the State that 
operates charter schools, the number of 
charter schools currently operating; 
Indicator (d)(8). Provide, for the State 
and for each LEA in the State that 
operates charter schools, the number 
and identity of charter schools that have 
closed (including schools that were not 
reauthorized to operate) within the last 
five years; and 
Indicator (d)(9). Indicate, for each 
charter school that has closed within the 
last five years, whether the closure of 
the school was for financial, enrollment, 
academic, or other reasons. 
II. State Plans: A State receiving funds 
under the Stabilization program must 
develop and submit to the Department 
a comprehensive plan that includes the 
following information. 
(a) Indicator and descriptor 
requirements. Except as discussed in 
paragraph (c) of this section, the State 
must be able to collect and report the 
data or other information required by an 
assurance indicator or descriptor. To 
this end, the State must describe, for 
each assurance indicator or descriptor— 
(1) The State’s current ability to fully 
collect the required data or other 
information at least annually; 
(2) The State’s ability to fully report 
the required data or other information, 
at least annually through September 30, 
2011, in a manner easily accessible and 
a format easily understandable by the 
public; 
(3) If the State is not currently able to 
fully collect, at least annually, the data 
or other information required by the 
indicator or descriptor— 
(A) The State’s process and timeline 
for developing and implementing, as 
soon as possible but no later than 
September 30, 2011, the means to fully 
collect the data or information, 
including— 
(i) The milestones that the State 
establishes toward developing and 
implementing those means; 
(ii) The date by which the State 
expects to reach each milestone; and 
(iii) Any obstacles that may prevent 
the State from developing and 
implementing those means by 
September 30, 2011, including but not 
limited to requirements and 
prohibitions of State law and policy; 
(B) The nature and frequency of 
reports that the State will provide to the 
public regarding its progress in 
developing and implementing those 
means; and 
(C) The amount of funds the State is 
using or will use to develop and 
implement those means, and whether 
the funds are or will be Federal, State, 
or local funds; 
(4) If the State is not able to fully 
report, at least annually through 
September 30, 2011, in a manner easily 
accessible and a format easily 
understandable by the public, the data 
or other information required by the 
indicator or descriptor— 
(A) The State’s process and timeline 
for developing and implementing, as 
soon as possible but no later than 
September 30, 2011, the means to fully 
report the data or information, 
including— 
(i) The milestones that the State 
establishes toward developing and 
implementing those means; 
(ii) The date by which the State 
expects to reach each milestone; and 
(iii) Any obstacles that may prevent 
the State from developing and 
implementing those means by 
September 30, 2011, including but not 
limited to requirements and 
prohibitions of State law and policy; 
(B) The nature and frequency of 
reports that the State will provide to the 
public regarding its progress in 
developing and implementing those 
means; and 
(C) The amount of funds the State is 
using or will use to develop and 
implement those means, and whether 
the funds are or will be Federal, State, 
or local funds. 
(b) Data or other information. If the 
State is currently able to fully collect 
and report the data or other information 
required by the indicator or descriptor, 
the State must provide the most recent 
data or information with its plan. 
(c) Requirements for indicators in 
reform area (b) (improving collection 
and use of data). 
(1) With respect to Indicator (b)(1), the 
State must develop and implement a 
statewide longitudinal data system that 
includes each of the 12 elements 
described in section 6401(e)(2)(D) of the 
America COMPETES Act. To this end, 
the State must, in its plan— 
(A) Indicate which of the 12 elements 
are currently included in the State’s 
statewide longitudinal data system; 
(B) If the State’s statewide 
longitudinal data system does not 
currently include all 12 elements, 
describe— 
(i) The State’s process and timeline 
for developing and implementing, as 
soon as possible but no later than 
September 30, 2011, a statewide 
longitudinal data system that fully 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00041 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4703 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37844 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
includes all 12 elements, including the 
milestones that the State establishes 
toward developing and implementing 
such a system, the date by which the 
State expects to reach each milestone, 
and any obstacles that may prevent the 
State from developing and 
implementing such a system by 
September 30, 2011 (including but not 
limited to requirements and 
prohibitions of State law and policy); 
(ii) The nature and frequency of 
reports that the State will provide to the 
public regarding its progress in 
developing and implementing such a 
system; and 
(iii) The amount of funds the State is 
using or will use to develop and 
implement such a system, and whether 
the funds are or will be Federal, State, 
or local funds. 
(2) With respect to Indicator (b)(2), the 
State must provide teachers with data 
on the performance of their students 
that include estimates of individual 
teacher impact on student achievement 
consistent with the indicator. To this 
end, the State must— 
(A) Indicate whether the State 
provides teachers with such data; 
(B) If the State does not provide 
teachers with such data, describe— 
(i) The State’s process and timeline 
for developing and implementing, as 
soon as possible but no later than 
September 30, 2011, the means to 
provide teachers with such data, 
including the milestones that the State 
establishes toward developing and 
implementing those means, the date by 
which the State expects to reach each 
milestone, and any obstacles that may 
prevent the State from developing and 
implementing those means by 
September 30, 2011 (including but not 
limited to requirements and 
prohibitions of State law and policy); 
(ii) The nature and frequency of 
reports that the State will provide to the 
public regarding its progress in 
developing and implementing those 
means; and 
(iii) The amount of funds the State is 
using or will use to develop and 
implement those means, and whether 
the funds are or will be Federal, State, 
or local funds. 
(d) General requirements. The State 
must describe— 
(1) The agency or agencies in the State 
responsible for the development, 
execution, and oversight of the plan, 
including the institutional infrastructure 
and capacity of the agency or agencies 
as they relate to each of those tasks; 
(2) The agency or agencies, 
institutions, or organizations, if any, 
providing technical assistance or other 
support in the development, execution, 
and oversight of the plan, and the nature 
of such technical assistance or other 
support; 
(3) The overall budget for the 
development, execution, and oversight 
of the plan; 
(4) The processes the State employs to 
review and verify the required data and 
other information; and 
(5) The processes the State employs to 
ensure that, consistent with 34 CFR 
99.31(b), the required data and other 
information are not made publicly 
available in a manner that personally 
identifies students, where applicable. 
Proposed Definitions 
Background 
The ARRA contains definitions for 
several key terms applicable to the 
Stabilization program. The ARRA does 
not, however, define all terms relevant 
to the assurances that States must 
provide in order to receive funds under 
the program. In this notice, we propose 
definitions of key terms not defined in 
the ARRA (or, by reference, in the ESEA 
or the HEA) to prevent confusion 
regarding the assurance indicators and 
descriptors and to ensure that grantees 
develop plans that are consistent with 
the purposes of the ARRA and the 
Department’s requirements and 
intentions for the program. 
Proposed Definitions 
The Secretary proposes the following 
definitions for Stabilization program 
terms not defined in the ARRA (or, by 
reference, in the ESEA or the HEA). We 
may apply these definitions in any year 
in which this program is in effect. 
With respect to the requirement that 
a State collect and report on the extent 
to which students in high- and low- 
poverty schools in the State have access 
to highly qualified teachers, highest- 
poverty school means, consistent with 
section 1111(h)(1)(C)(viii) of the ESEA, 
a school in the highest quartile of 
schools (at the State and LEA levels, 
respectively) using a measure of poverty 
determined by the State. Similarly, 
lowest-poverty school means, consistent 
with section 1111(h)(1)(C)(viii) of the 
ESEA, a school in the lowest quartile of 
schools (at the State and LEA levels, 
respectively) using a measure of poverty 
determined by the State. 
With respect to the requirements that 
a State indicate whether the official 
systems used to evaluate the 
performance of teachers and principals 
include student achievement outcomes 
as an evaluation criterion, student 
achievement outcomes means outcomes 
including, at a minimum, one of the 
following: student performance on 
summative assessments, or on 
assessments predictive of student 
performance on summative assessments, 
in terms of absolute performance, gains, 
or growth; student grades; and rates at 
which students are on track to graduate 
from high school. 
With respect to the requirement that 
a State collect and report the number of 
high school graduates who enrolled in 
a public IHE who complete at least one 
year’s worth of college credit (applicable 
to a degree) within two years, college 
credit (applicable to a degree) is used as 
that term is defined by the IHE granting 
such credit. 
With respect to the requirements that 
a State collect and report the numbers 
of Title I schools in improvement, 
corrective action, or restructuring that 
have made progress on State 
assessments in reading/language arts 
and in mathematics in the last year, 
school that has made progress means a 
school whose gains on the assessment, 
in the ‘‘all students’’ category (as under 
section 1111(b)(2)(C)(v)(I) of the ESEA), 
are equal to or greater than the average 
gains of schools in the State on that 
assessment. 
With respect to the requirements that 
a State collect and report the number of 
Title I schools in improvement, 
corrective action, or restructuring that 
have been turned around, consolidated, 
or closed in the last year, school that 
has been turned around means a school 
that has had a governance change 
(which must include a change in the 
school’s principal and other school 
leadership changes), implemented a 
new instructional focus, and replaced at 
least 50 percent of its staff as part of a 
planned intervention; school that has 
been consolidated means a school that 
has merged with another school so that 
students from both schools are educated 
together; and school that has been 
closed includes but is not limited to a 
school that has been closed and 
reopened under the management of a 
charter management organization or an 
educational management organization. 
With respect to the requirement that 
a State collect and report, of the Title I 
schools in improvement, corrective 
action, or restructuring, the number and 
identity of schools in the lowest- 
achieving five percent that have been 
turned around, consolidated, or closed 
in the last year, lowest-achieving five 
percent is used as that term is defined 
by the State, except that in defining the 
term the State must consider both the 
absolute performance of schools on 
State assessments in reading/language 
arts and mathematics and whether 
schools have made progress on those 
assessments (see definition of school 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00042 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4703 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37845 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
that has made progress above), and 
except that, if a State has fewer than 100 
schools in improvement, corrective 
action, or restructuring, the State must 
include at least five such schools. 
Proposed Approval Criteria 
Background 
Our experience with administering 
grant competitions and with reviewing 
proposals from States regarding their 
compliance with certain requirements of 
the ESEA (particularly the requirements 
in Title I of the ESEA relating to 
standards, assessments, and 
accountability) recommends the use of 
explicit criteria for approving the plans 
we propose to require of States receiving 
funds under this program. In addition to 
specifying the areas of focus in the 
review of these plans, such criteria also 
usefully indicate to States the qualities 
in a plan that make it approvable. 
In this notice we propose approval 
criteria relating to the quality and 
adequacy of the State plans. We intend 
to make determinations regarding the 
approval of a State’s plan based on the 
recommendations of a peer review using 
these criteria. We will issue guidance to 
peer reviewers providing more specific 
information on the final criteria as they 
relate to the respective final 
requirements. 
As noted above, a State must submit 
its plan as part of its application for the 
second phase of funding under the 
Stabilization program, through which 
the Department will award the 
remaining portion of a State’s total 
Stabilization allocation. A State that 
submits a plan that is determined to be 
sufficiently responsive to each 
requirement will immediately receive 
75 percent of the remainder of its total 
allocation of funds under the program. 
A State will receive the remaining 25 
percent of its remainder of funds only 
after its plan is approved in its entirety. 
Proposed Approval Criteria 
The Secretary proposes the following 
criteria for approving the plan of a State 
receiving funds under the Stabilization 
program. We may apply one or more of 
these criteria in any year in which this 
program is in effect. 
(a) Quality of the State plan. Except 
as described in paragraph (b), in 
determining the quality of the plan 
submitted by a State, we consider the 
following: 
(1) Whether the plan clearly and 
accurately describes the State’s abilities 
to collect and to report the data or other 
information required by an assurance 
indicator and descriptor; and 
(2) If the State is not currently able to 
fully collect and report the data or 
information required by an indicator or 
descriptor— 
(i) Whether the timeline and process 
for developing and implementing the 
means to fully collect and report the 
data or information are reasonable and 
sufficient to comply with the 
requirement; 
(ii) Whether any obstacles identified 
by the State as preventing it from 
developing and implementing the 
means to fully collect and report the 
data or information by September 30, 
2011 are sufficient to justify a delay in 
complying with the requirement; and 
(iii) Whether the reports that the State 
will provide to the public will be 
appropriately accessible and will 
sufficiently indicate the State’s progress 
in developing and implementing the 
means to comply with the requirement. 
(b) Quality of the State plan with 
respect to indicators in reform area (b) 
(improving collection and use of data). 
In determining the quality of the plan 
submitted by a State as it relates to the 
indicators in reform area (b), we 
consider the following: 
(1) Whether the plan clearly and 
accurately describes the State’s ability to 
meet the plan requirement for the 
indicator (i.e., in the case of Indicator 
(b)(1), the requirement to develop and 
implement a statewide longitudinal data 
system that includes each of the 12 
elements described in section 
6401(e)(2)(D) of the America 
COMPETES Act; and in the case of 
Indicator (b)(2), the requirement to 
provide teachers with data on the 
performance of their students that 
include estimates of individual teacher 
impact on student achievement); and 
(2) If the State does not currently meet 
the plan requirement for the indicator— 
(i) Whether the timeline and process 
for developing and implementing the 
means to meet the requirement are 
reasonable and sufficient to comply 
with the requirement; 
(ii) Whether any obstacles identified 
by the State as preventing it from 
developing and implementing the 
means to meet the requirement by 
September 30, 2011 are sufficient to 
justify a delay in complying with the 
requirement; and 
(iii) Whether the reports that the State 
will provide to the public will be 
appropriately accessible and will 
sufficiently indicate the State’s progress 
in developing and implementing the 
means to comply with the requirement. 
(c) Adequacy of the State plan. In 
determining the adequacy of the plan 
submitted by a State, we consider the 
following: 
(1) Whether the institutional 
infrastructure and capacity of the 
agency or agencies responsible for the 
development, implementation, and 
oversight of the plan, together with any 
technical assistance or other support 
provided by other agencies, institutions, 
or organizations, are adequate to comply 
with the indicator and descriptor 
requirements individually and as a 
whole; 
(2) Whether the funds the State is 
using or will use are adequate to comply 
with the indicator and descriptor 
requirements both individually and as a 
whole; 
(3) Whether the processes the State 
employs to review and verify the 
required data and information are 
adequate to ensure that the data and 
information are accurate and of high 
quality; and 
(4) Whether the processes the State 
employs are adequate to ensure that, 
where applicable, the required data and 
other information are not made publicly 
available in a manner that personally 
identifies students. 
Final Requirements, Definitions, and 
Approval Criteria 
We will announce the final 
requirements, definitions, and approval 
criteria for the Stabilization program in 
a notice in the Federal Register. We will 
determine the final requirements, 
definitions, and approval criteria after 
considering any comments submitted in 
response to this notice and other 
information available to the Department. 
This notice does not preclude us from 
proposing additional requirements, 
definitions, and approval criteria, 
subject to meeting applicable 
rulemaking requirements. 
Note: This notice does not solicit 
applications. In any year in which we choose 
to use one or more of these requirements, 
definitions, and approval criteria, we invite 
applications through a notice in the Federal 
Register. 
Executive Order 12866 
The proposed costs have been 
reviewed in accordance with Executive 
Order 12866. Under the terms of the 
order, the Department has assessed the 
costs and benefits of this regulatory 
action. 
In assessing the potential costs and 
benefits—both quantitative and 
qualitative—of these proposed 
requirements, the Department has 
determined that the benefits of the 
proposed requirements exceed the costs. 
The Department also has determined 
that this regulatory action does not 
unduly interfere with State, local, and 
tribal governments in the exercise of 
their governmental functions. 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00043 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4703 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37846 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
To assist the Department in 
complying with the requirements of 
Executive Order 12866, the Secretary 
invites comments on whether there may 
be further opportunities to reduce any 
potential costs or increase potential 
benefits resulting from these proposed 
requirements without impeding the 
effective and efficient administration of 
the Stabilization program. 
Need for Federal Regulatory Action 
These proposed requirements, 
definitions, and approval criteria are 
needed to implement the State Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund program in a manner 
that the Secretary believes will best 
enable the program to achieve its 
objectives of supporting meaningful 
education reforms in the States while 
helping to stabilize State and local 
budgets and minimize reductions in 
education and other essential services. 
In particular, the proposals included in 
this notice are necessary to advance the 
four key educational reforms listed in 
the ARRA, particularly by ensuring 
better reporting and more public 
availability of information on the 
progress of implementation in each of 
the four reform areas. The proposed 
requirement for each State to establish 
a longitudinal data system that includes 
the elements specified in the America 
COMPETES Act will have an especially 
significant impact on the availability of 
data that can be used in developing and 
improving programs; targeting services; 
developing better linkages between 
preschool, elementary and secondary 
schools, and postsecondary systems, 
agencies, and institutions; and holding 
schools, LEAs, and institutions 
accountable for their performance. 
Establishment of such a system by each 
participating State is also required 
under the ARRA. 
Further, the proposed requirement for 
each State to commit to developing 
procedures for providing teachers of 
reading/language arts and mathematics 
with data on the performance of their 
students that includes estimates of 
individual teacher impact reflects a 
need to ensure that teachers have better 
data on how well they are educating 
their students and that school and LEA 
leaders have valuable information that 
they can use in developing and 
providing professional development 
opportunities, assigning teachers, and 
implementing compensation and other 
human capital policies. 
The proposed definitions included in 
this notice are necessary to give clearer 
meaning to some of the terms used in 
the descriptions of the requirements and 
approval criteria. The proposed 
approval criteria themselves are needed 
in order to provide for a clear and 
objective set of standards that the 
Secretary would use in ensuring that 
each State, before receiving the 
remainder of its Stabilization program 
allocation, has in place a plan for 
collecting and reporting the required 
data and meeting the other requirements 
proposed in this notice. 
Regulatory Alternatives Considered 
A likely alternative to promulgation of 
the types of requirements, definitions, 
and approval criteria proposed in this 
notice would be for the Secretary to 
release the remaining Stabilization 
program funds without establishing 
specific reporting or other requirements. 
Under such a scenario, participating 
States would still be required to meet 
the statutory requirements (that is, to 
take actions to improve teacher 
effectiveness and the equitable 
distribution of highly qualified teachers, 
to establish longitudinal data systems 
that include the elements specified in 
the America COMPETES Act, to 
enhance the quality of their standards 
and assessments, to ensure the inclusion 
of students with disabilities and limited 
English proficient students in their 
assessments, and to take steps to 
improve consistently low-performing 
schools), but there would be no 
assurance of consistent and complete 
reporting of States’ progress and no 
uniform mechanism for measuring and 
comparing States’ performance. 
Additionally, the need for teachers to 
obtain better information on their 
students’ educational progress would 
likely be unfulfilled. While the 
Department is interested in public 
comment on the feasibility and 
advisability of the various requirements 
proposed herein, the Secretary regards 
disbursement of the remaining 
Stabilization program funds without 
implementation of the reporting and 
other proposed requirements as a 
missed opportunity for bringing about 
needed educational reforms at a critical 
time. 
Summary of Costs and Benefits 
The Department has analyzed the 
costs of complying with the proposed 
requirements. Some of the costs will be 
very minimal and others more 
significant. As an example of a 
requirement that will result in minimal 
burden and cost, States are currently 
required to report annually, through 
EDFacts (the Department’s centralized 
data collection and warehousing 
system), for the State as a whole and for 
each LEA, the number and percentage of 
core academic courses taught, in the 
highest-poverty and lowest-poverty 
schools, by teachers who are highly 
qualified. Proposed indicator (a)(1) 
would require that they confirm the data 
they have reported, which should not be 
a time-consuming responsibility. As a 
second example, the proposed 
requirement to confirm the approval 
status of the State’s assessment system 
under section 1111(b)(3) of the ESEA, as 
determined by the Department, should 
also require minimal effort. 
Other proposed requirements will 
impose significant new costs, but the 
Department believes that the benefits 
resulting from the requirements will 
exceed those costs. The major benefit of 
these requirements, taken in their 
totality, is better and more publicly 
available information on the status of 
activities related to the reform areas 
identified in the authorizing statute for 
the Stabilization program. As described 
in detail below, research indicates or 
suggests that progress on each of the 
reforms will contribute to improved 
student outcomes. The provision of 
better information (on teacher 
qualifications, teacher and principal 
evaluation systems, State student 
longitudinal data systems, State 
standards and assessment systems, 
student success in high school and 
postsecondary education, efforts to turn 
around low-performing schools, and 
charter school reforms) to policymakers, 
educators, parents, and other 
stakeholders will assist in their efforts to 
further the reforms. In addition, State 
reporting of these data will help the 
Department determine the impact of the 
unprecedented level of funding made 
available by the ARRA. Further, the data 
and plans that States submit will inform 
Federal education policy, including the 
upcoming reauthorization of the ESEA. 
States will be able to draw on Federal 
resources in meeting some of the 
requirements. The proposed 
requirements that would result in the 
most significant costs are related to the 
implementation of a State data system 
that can track individual student 
transitions from high school to college. 
To support these efforts, States may 
receive Federal funds from the 
Statewide Longitudinal Data Systems 
program, through which the Department 
has made over $187 million available 
since fiscal year 2005. The ARRA 
provided an additional $250 million for 
that program, and the Administration’s 
budget request for fiscal year 2010 
includes an additional $65 million. In 
addition, it is important to note that 
States may use funds available through 
the Stabilization program’s Government 
Services Fund (over $8.8 billion) to 
develop and implement the systems 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00044 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4703 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37847 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
10 State Teacher Policy Yearbook: 2008, page 68. 
http://www.nctq.org/stpy08/reports/ 
stpy_national.pdf. 
necessary to report on these 
performance indicators. 
The following is a detailed analysis of 
the estimated costs of implementing the 
specific proposed requirements, 
followed by a discussion of the 
anticipated benefits. The costs of 
implementing specific paperwork- 
related requirements are also shown in 
the tables in the Paperwork Reduction 
Act of 1995 section of this notice. 
Distribution of Highly Qualified 
Teachers 
Section 14005(d)(2) of the ARRA 
requires a State receiving funds under 
the Stabilization program to assure, in 
the Stabilization program application, 
that it will address inequities in the 
distribution of highly qualified teachers. 
In response to this requirement, the 
Department is proposing to require 
States to confirm, for the State and for 
each LEA in the State, the number and 
percentage of core academic courses 
taught, in the highest-poverty and 
lowest-poverty schools, by teachers who 
are highly qualified. Because States will 
have previously submitted this 
information to the Department through 
the EDFacts system, we anticipate that 
the costs of complying with this 
requirement would be minimal. A State 
likely would need only to ensure that it 
had correctly aggregated and reported 
data received from its LEAs. The 
Department expects that each State 
would require one hour of staff time to 
complete this effort, at a cost of $30 per 
hour. For the 50 States, the District of 
Columbia, and Puerto Rico, the total 
estimated level of effort would be 52 
hours at a cost of $1,560. 
Teacher and Principal Evaluation 
Systems 
Section 14005(d)(2) also requires 
States to take actions to improve teacher 
effectiveness. To accomplish that goal, 
States must first have a means of 
assessing teacher success. A limited 
number of States have implemented 
statewide teacher and principal 
evaluation systems, while in the other 
States the responsibility for evaluating 
teachers and principals rests with the 
LEAs or schools. Little is known about 
the design of these systems across the 
Nation, but the collection and reporting 
of additional information would create 
a resource that additional States and 
LEAs can draw on in building their own 
systems. The Department, therefore, 
proposes to require States to collect and 
publicly report information about these 
evaluation systems. 
Specifically, the Department is 
proposing to require that States 
describe, for each LEA in the State, the 
systems used to evaluate the 
performance of teachers and principals. 
Further, the Department proposes to 
require States to indicate, for each LEA 
in the State, whether the systems used 
to evaluate the performance of teachers 
and principals include student 
achievement outcomes as an evaluation 
criterion. 
The level of effort required to respond 
to these proposed requirements would 
likely vary depending on the types of 
teacher and principal evaluation 
systems in place in a given State or LEA. 
The Department believes that, if a 
system is in place at the State level, the 
response burden would be low, because 
the State will have the required 
information readily available. According 
to the National Council on Teacher 
Quality, 12 States require LEAs to use 
a State-developed instrument to 
evaluate teachers or to develop an 
equivalent instrument that must be 
approved by the State.10 For these 12 
States, the Department estimates that a 
total of 72 hours (6 hours per State) 
would be required to respond to these 
proposed requirements, for a total cost, 
at $30 per hour, of $2,160. The 2,632 
LEAs located in these States would not 
be involved in the response to these 
proposed requirements. 
In the 40 States that do not have 
statewide teacher and principal 
evaluation systems in place, the level of 
effort required would likely be 
significantly higher. For each of these 
States, the Department estimates that 
360 hours would be required at the State 
level to develop and administer a survey 
of LEAs (including designing the survey 
instrument, disseminating it, providing 
training or other technical assistance to 
LEAs on completing the survey, 
collecting the data and other 
information, checking accuracy, and 
public reporting), which would amount 
to a total of 14,400 hours and a total 
estimated State cost of $432,000 
(assuming, again, a cost per hour of 
$30). The 12,368 LEAs located in these 
States would bear the cost of collecting 
and reporting the data to their States. 
For the purpose of the burden estimates 
in this section, the Department 
estimates that 75 percent of these LEAs 
(9,276) have official teacher and 
principal evaluation systems in place. 
For those LEAs, we estimate that 3 
hours would be required to respond to 
these proposed requirements. For the 
estimated 3,092 LEAs that do not have 
an official evaluation system in place, 
we estimate that 2 hours would be 
required. The Department, thus, 
estimates that LEAs would need to 
spend a total of 34,012 hours to respond 
to these proposed requirements at a total 
cost of $850,300. This estimate is 
speculative because the Department was 
unable to find information about the 
prevalence of teacher and principal 
evaluation systems in LEAs. We invite 
comments that provide information on 
the prevalence of these systems in LEAs 
(so that we may further refine our 
estimates) and on the potential costs of 
meeting the requirements for LEAs that 
have or do not have such a system. 
The Department is also proposing to 
require States to provide, for each LEA 
in the State whose teachers and 
principals receive performance ratings 
or levels through an evaluation system, 
the number and percentage of teachers 
and principals rated at each 
performance rating or level. Finally, the 
Department proposes to require States to 
indicate, for each LEA in the State 
whose teachers receive performance 
ratings or levels through an official 
evaluation system, whether the number 
and percentage of teachers rated at each 
performance rating or level is publicly 
available for each school in the LEA in 
a manner that is easily accessible and in 
a format easily understandable by the 
public. We were unable to find 
information on whether LEAs will have 
this information readily available in a 
centralized data system and, therefore, 
invite comment on this issue. For the 
purpose of this estimate, we assume that 
60 percent of LEAs will have the 
necessary information in their central 
office or will be so small that collecting 
this information will be a simple 
process. Applying this percentage to the 
estimated 11,908 LEAs that have in 
place an official system to evaluate 
teacher and principal performance 
(which includes the 2,632 LEAs in 
States with statewide systems, as well as 
the estimated 9,276 LEAs in other States 
that have their own local systems), the 
Department estimates that the total 
burden of responding to these proposed 
requirements would be 59,540 hours (5 
hours per affected LEA) and $1,488,500. 
We estimate that each of the other 4,763 
LEAs will need to spend 40 hours to 
respond. The Department, therefore, 
estimates the total LEA burden for these 
requirements to be 260,264 hours across 
the Nation at an estimated total cost of 
$6,506,600 (assuming a cost per hour of 
$25). 
States would then need to collect 
these data, most likely by including 
these items in the survey instrument 
that they will develop to respond to the 
other proposed requirements in this 
section, and will then need to aggregate 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00045 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4703 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37848 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
11 As noted earlier in this notice, the student 
subgroups include: economically disadvantaged 
students, students from major racial and ethnic 
groups, students with limited English proficiency, 
and students with disabilities. 
and publicly report the data. We 
estimate that this will require 8 hours of 
effort per State, for a total burden of 416 
hours at a cost of $12,480. For more 
detailed estimates of costs for these 
proposed requirements, please see the 
tables in the Paperwork Reduction Act 
of 1995 section of this notice. 
State Data Systems 
Section 14005(d)(3) requires States to 
assure that they will establish a 
longitudinal data system that includes 
the elements described in section 
6401(e)(2)(D) of the America 
COMPETES Act. To track State progress 
in this reform area, the Department 
proposes to require each State to 
indicate which of the 12 elements are 
included in the State’s statewide 
longitudinal data system. The costs of 
reporting this information should be 
minimal. Moreover, most States are 
already reporting information on ten of 
the 12 elements to the Data Quality 
Campaign, a national effort to encourage 
State policymakers to use high-quality 
education data to improve student 
achievement. The Department expects 
that States will be able to readily 
provide information on whether the two 
remaining elements are included in 
their data systems and that it should 
take little time for the States that have 
not been reporting to the Data Quality 
Campaign to provide information on 
their data systems. We, therefore, 
estimate that States would need only 2 
hours to respond to this requirement, for 
a total level of effort of 104 hours at an 
estimated cost of $3,120. 
The Department also proposes to 
require that States report, for each LEA 
in the State, whether the State provides 
teachers of reading/language arts and 
mathematics in the grades in which the 
State administers assessments in those 
subjects with data on the performance of 
their students on those assessments that 
include estimates of individual teacher 
impact on student achievement, in a 
manner that is timely and informs 
instruction. The Department believes 
that making such information available 
would help improve the quality of 
instruction and the quality of teacher 
evaluation and compensation systems. 
Under the State Plan section, we discuss 
the costs of developing systems for the 
provision of such information in all 
States. The costs of merely reporting on 
whether a State currently provides this 
information to teachers should be 
minimal. We estimate that each State 
would spend one hour to report this 
information, for a total level of effort of 
52 hours at a cost of $1,560. 
State Assessments 
In response to the section 
14005(d)(4)(A) requirement that States 
enhance the quality of their student 
assessments, the Department proposes 
to require that the States confirm certain 
existing data and other information and 
submit some new information about 
their assessment systems. Specifically, 
the Department proposes to require each 
State to confirm the approval status, as 
determined by the Department, of the 
State’s assessment system (with respect 
to reading/language arts, mathematics, 
and science assessments) and indicate 
whether and how the State is engaged 
in activities authorized under the Grants 
for Enhanced Assessment Instruments 
program that would enhance the quality 
of the State’s academic assessments. In 
addition, States would be required to 
confirm that their annual State Report 
Card (issued pursuant to the 
requirements of ESEA section 1111(h)) 
contains the most recent available State 
reading and mathematics NAEP results. 
The Department estimates that each 
State would require six hours to 
respond to these proposed 
requirements, for a total cost of $9,360. 
Section 14005(d)(4)(B) requires States 
to assure that they will administer valid 
and reliable assessments for children 
with disabilities and limited English 
proficient students. To measure State 
progress on this assurance, the 
Department proposes to require States 
to: Confirm whether the State has 
developed and implemented valid and 
reliable alternate assessments for 
students with disabilities that have been 
approved by the Department; confirm 
whether the State’s alternative 
assessments for students with 
disabilities, if approved by the 
Department, are based on grade-level, 
modified, or alternate academic 
achievement standards; indicate 
whether the State has completed, within 
the last two years, an analysis of the 
appropriateness and effectiveness of the 
accommodations it provides students 
with disabilities to ensure their 
meaningful participation in State 
assessments; indicate whether the State 
has completed, within the last two 
years, an analysis of the appropriateness 
and effectiveness of the 
accommodations it provides limited 
English proficient students to ensure 
their meaningful participation in State 
assessments; and confirm whether the 
State provides native language versions 
of State assessments for limited English 
proficient students. To respond to these 
five proposed indicators, the 
Department estimates that the 50 States, 
the District of Columbia, and Puerto 
Rico would each require five hours, for 
a total cost of $7,800. 
In addition, the Department proposes 
to require that States confirm the 
number and percentage of students with 
disabilities and limited English 
proficient students who are included in 
State reading/language arts and 
mathematics assessments. The 
Department expects that each State 
would, on average, require one hour of 
staff time to complete this effort, at a 
cost of $30 per hour. The burden 
estimated for this requirement is 
minimal because the States will have 
already submitted this information to 
the Department through the EDFacts 
system. For the 50 States, the District of 
Columbia, and Puerto Rico, the total 
estimated level of effort would be 52 
hours at cost of $1,560. 
High School and Postsecondary Success 
Section 14005 (d)(4)(C) requires States 
to assure, in their Stabilization Fund 
applications, that they take steps to 
improve their State academic content 
standards and student academic 
achievement standards consistent with 
section 6401(e)(1)(A)(ii) of the American 
COMPETES Act, which calls for States 
to identify and make any necessary 
changes to their secondary school 
graduation requirements, academic 
content standards, academic 
achievement standards, and the 
assessments students take preceding 
graduation from secondary school in 
order to align those requirements, 
standards, and assessments with the 
knowledge and skills necessary for 
success in academic credit-bearing 
coursework in postsecondary education, 
in the 21st century workforce, and in 
the Armed Forces without the need for 
remediation. Several of the indicators 
and descriptors proposed in this notice 
are aligned with this provision of the 
America COMPETES Act. 
First, the Department proposes to 
require each State to report, for the State 
and each LEA and high school in the 
State and, at each of these levels, by 
student subgroup,11 the number and 
percentage of students who graduate 
from high school as determined using 
the four-year adjusted cohort graduation 
rate. The Department believes that State 
efforts to comply with the Department’s 
October 29, 2008 regulation requiring 
the use of a four-year adjusted cohort 
graduation rate in the determination of 
adequate yearly progress under Title I of 
the ESEA are now underway (see 34 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00046 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4703 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37849 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
12 http://www.dataqualitycampaign.org/survey. 
13 According to data States submitted to the 
Department through the Consolidated State 
Performance Report 2007–08, there are a total of 
15,016 LEAs across the Nation, 14,040 of which 
receive Title I, Part A funds. 
14 We do acknowledge, however, that although 
the statute does not set a deadline for State 
establishment of the required data systems, item 
(c)(ii)(A) under State Plans in this notice would 
require States to have in place State longitudinal 
data systems that fully include all 12 elements 
described in the America COMPETES Act by 
September 30, 2011. Putting a full system in place 
by that date might increase costs to States or, 
alternatively, might reduce costs (if the more rapid 
establishment of a system results in efficiencies). 
The Department invites comments on the cost 
implications of the proposed deadline. 
15 According to the Digest of Education Statistics, 
2008, almost 2.8 million first-time freshmen 
enrolled in IHEs in fall 2007. See http:// 
nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d08/tables/ 
dt08_198.asp. Also according to the Digest, in fall 
2005, 6,073,240 students were enrolled in private 
elementary and secondary schools. At that time, 
enrollment in public elementary and secondary 
schools was 49,113,298. Extrapolating from those 
data, the Department estimates that 11 percent of 
all first-time postsecondary students graduated from 
private schools. See http://nces.ed.gov/programs/ 
digest/d08/tables/dt08_058.asp. 
16 http://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d08/tables/ 
dt08_223.asp. 
17 Note that a table in the Paperwork Reduction 
Act of 1995 section of this notice provides the 
burden estimates by IHE, but that this narrative 
provides national estimates using the total number 
of students included in the data requirement. 
CFR 200.19(b)(1)(i)). Some additional 
effort would be required to collect and 
report these data for all schools as the 
current regulations apply only to Title I 
schools. 
Based on the Data Quality Campaign’s 
2008 survey of the 50 States and the 
District of Columbia, which found that 
42 States have the capacity to calculate 
the National Governors Association 
longitudinal graduation rate,12 the 
Department believes that most States are 
well-situated to collect and report these 
data, or have the processes underway to 
make such reporting possible by 
September 30, 2011. In fulfillment of the 
proposed requirement, the Department 
estimates that States would need to 
distribute to non-Title I LEAs the survey 
instrument they are using to collect this 
information from Title I LEAs and to 
input the data from these surveys, 
which would require an estimated 8 
hours per State. The new LEA burden to 
respond to this indicator would be 
limited to the approximately 976 LEAs 
that do not receive Title I funds.13 The 
Department estimates that these LEAs 
would spend an average of 40 hours to 
respond to this indicator for a total LEA 
effort of 39,040 hours. The total 
estimated cost is, therefore, $976,000. 
In addition, the Department is 
proposing that States report, for the 
State, for each LEA in the State, for each 
high school in the State and, at each of 
these levels, by student subgroup, the 
number of students who graduate from 
high school consistent with 34 CFR 
200.19(b)(1)(i) who enroll in an IHE and, 
of those students who enroll in a public 
IHE, the number who complete at least 
one year’s worth of college credit 
(applicable to a degree) within two 
years. The proposed requirements 
would entail considerable coordination 
among high schools, LEAs, SEAs, and 
IHEs. The Department expects that SEAs 
would have to develop a system to make 
this data collection and sharing 
possible, which they could at least 
partially achieve by establishing a 
longitudinal data system that includes 
the elements described in section 
6401(e)(2)(D) of the America 
COMPETES Act. As discussed above, 
section 14005(d)(3) of the ARRA 
requires States to assure, in their 
Stabilization Fund application, that they 
will establish such a data system. 
Because the requirement to establish 
such a system flows from the statute, 
not from these proposed requirements, 
the Department does not include the 
costs of establishing such a system in 
the costs of these proposed 
requirements.14 In addition, States will 
be able to use Government Services 
funds that they receive as part of their 
Stabilization allocation to support these 
efforts, and may compete for funds from 
the Statewide Longitudinal Data 
Systems program. Further, the efforts of 
the National Student Clearinghouse, a 
non-profit organization that provides 
student enrollment and degree 
verification services, demonstrate that 
there is significant interest in 
information sharing between IHEs and 
LEAs; more than 3,300 colleges that 
enroll over 92 percent of US college 
students and hundreds of LEAs 
participate in the Clearinghouse’s 
efforts. The Department expects that 
LEAs and IHEs that currently provide 
data to this system may require less 
effort to respond to this proposed 
requirement. 
With respect to the proposed 
requirement on reporting postsecondary 
enrollments, the Department expects 
that LEAs would need to enter, into 
their State’s statewide longitudinal data 
system, data on each high school 
graduate’s plans after high school, 
including the IHE where the student 
intends to enroll, if applicable. 
According to the Digest of Education 
Statistics, approximately 2,492,000 
students who graduated from public 
high schools enrolled in IHEs as first- 
time freshmen in fall 2007.15 Holding 
that number constant, the Department 
estimates that LEAs would be able to 
enter data for these students at a pace 
of 20 students per hour, which would 
result in a total level of LEA effort of 
124,600 hours at a cost of $3,115,000. 
The State would then likely need to 
request that each IHE in the State 
confirm a student’s enrollment, using 
the statewide longitudinal data system 
to obtain data on students who intended 
to enroll within the State. Based on data 
from the 2006 Integrated Postsecondary 
Education Data System (IPEDS), Spring 
2007,16 the Department estimates that 
2,043,440 first-time freshmen (82 
percent of all first-time freshmen who 
graduated from public high schools) 
enroll in IHEs in their home State. The 
Department estimates that IHEs will be 
able to confirm enrollment for 20 
students per hour, for a total of 102,172 
hours of IHE effort at a total cost of 
$2,554,300 (assuming a cost of $25 per 
hour).17 
States would also likely need to 
request that IHEs outside the State 
confirm the enrollment of students who 
indicated that they would enroll in 
those institutions. Again, based on data 
from the 2006 IPEDS, Spring 2007, the 
Department estimates that 448,560 
students who graduate from public high 
schools each year enroll in IHEs in 
States outside their home State. The 
Department estimates that it will take 
States 30 minutes per student to 
complete this process, including 
contacting out-of-State IHEs, obtaining 
the necessary information from them, 
and including data on those students in 
their public reports. This element of the 
proposed requirement, therefore, would 
result in a national total of 224,280 
hours of State effort at a total cost of 
$6,726,840. As with students who enroll 
in IHEs in their home State, the 
Department estimates that IHEs will be 
able to confirm enrollment for 20 
students per hour, for a total of 22,428 
hours of IHE effort at a total cost of 
$560,700. 
Finally, to meet the proposed 
requirement that they publicly report 
the number of students who enroll in 
IHEs, States would need to aggregate the 
data received from all IHEs and would 
then need to run analyses and publicly 
post the data for the State, for each LEA, 
for each high school and, at each of 
these levels, by student subgroup. The 
Department estimates that each State 
would need 40 hours to conduct these 
analyses and post these data, for a total 
State burden of 2,080 hours at a cost of 
$62,400. 
The proposed requirement that States 
report the number of students enrolling 
in a public IHE who complete at least 
one year’s worth of college credit 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 20:41 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00047 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4703 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37850 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
applicable toward a degree within two 
years would also entail a collaborative 
process between SEAs and IHEs. Again, 
based on data from the Digest of 
Education Statistics, the Department 
estimates that 2,492,000 first-time 
freshmen enroll in public IHEs. Further, 
the Department estimates that, once a 
State has established a system for the 
collection and reporting of these data, 
IHEs will be able to enter data for 20 
students an hour; thus, the total 
estimated level of effort to respond to 
this proposed requirement would be 
approximately 124,600 hours of IHE 
effort at an estimated cost of $3,115,000, 
assuming a cost of $25 per hour. 
As with the previous indicator, States 
would likely need to request that IHEs 
outside the State report whether the 
students enrolled in those institutions 
have completed at least one year’s worth 
of college credit. Again, the Department 
estimates that 448,560 students who 
graduate from public high schools each 
year enroll in IHEs in States outside 
their home State. The Department 
estimates that it will take States 30 
minutes per student to complete this 
process, including contacting out-of- 
State IHEs, obtaining the necessary 
information from them, and including 
data on those students in their public 
reports. This element of the proposed 
requirement, therefore, would result in 
a national total of 224,280 hours of State 
effort at a total cost of $6,726,840. As 
with students who enroll in IHEs in 
their home State, the Department 
estimates that IHEs will be able to report 
whether students obtained a year or 
more of college credit for 20 students 
per hour, for a total of 22,428 hours of 
IHE effort at a total cost of $560,700. 
Finally, as with the previous 
indicator, States would need to 
aggregate the data received from all IHEs 
and would then need to run analyses 
and publicly post the data for at the 
State, LEA, and school levels and at 
each of these levels, by student 
subgroup. The Department estimates 
that each State would need 40 hours to 
conduct these analyses and post these 
data, for a total State burden of 2,080 
hours at a cost of $62,400. 
Supporting Struggling Schools 
A key goal of the ARRA is to ensure 
that States and LEAs provide targeted, 
intensive support and effective 
interventions to turn around schools 
identified for corrective action and 
restructuring under Title I of the ESEA. 
Section 14005(d)(5) requires States to 
ensure compliance with the Title I 
requirements in this area. To track State 
progress, the Department proposes to 
require States to provide, for each LEA 
in the State and aggregated at the State 
level, the number and percentage of 
schools in improvement, corrective 
action, or restructuring that have made 
progress on State assessments in 
reading/language arts and mathematics 
in the last year, and the number and 
percentage of schools in improvement, 
corrective action, or restructuring that 
have been turned around, consolidated, 
or closed in the last year. States would 
also be required to report the number 
and identity of schools in the lowest- 
achieving five percent of the schools in 
improvement, corrective action, or 
restructuring that have been turned 
around, consolidated, or closed in the 
last year, as well as the number of those 
schools (i.e., the schools in the lowest- 
achieving five percent of the schools in 
improvement, corrective action, or 
restructuring that have been turned 
around, consolidated, or closed in the 
last year) that are secondary schools. 
The Department believes that States 
will already have available the data 
needed to report on the indicators 
related to the total number and 
percentage of schools in improvement, 
corrective action, or restructuring that 
have made progress on State 
assessments, although they might need 
to run new analyses of the data. 
However, the Department expects that 
States would have to collect new data 
on the schools in improvement, 
corrective action, or restructuring (in 
general and in the lowest-achieving five 
percent) that have been turned around, 
consolidated, or closed. In addition, the 
State will need to define the schools in 
the lowest-achieving five percent. We 
estimate that this data collection will 
entail two hours of effort in each of the 
1,173 LEAs (the number of LEAs that, 
according to data reported to EDFacts, 
had at least one school in improvement, 
corrective action, or restructuring in the 
2007–08 school year). As a result, the 
Department estimates that the total LEA 
burden for this proposed requirement 
would be 2,346 hours at a cost of 
$58,650. States would then need to 
aggregate these data, in addition to the 
effort they will spend responding to the 
other indicators that relate to struggling 
schools. The Department estimates that 
each State would require 16 hours of 
effort to respond, for a total cost of 
$83,610. 
Charter Schools 
The Department believes that the 
creation and maintenance of high- 
quality charter schools is a key strategy 
for promoting successful models of 
school reform. To determine the level of 
State effort in this area, the Department 
proposes to require States to provide, at 
the State level and, if applicable, for 
each LEA in the State, the number of 
charter schools that are currently 
permitted to operate and the number 
that are currently operating. We expect 
that this information will be readily 
available, and that States will need only 
one hour to respond to this proposed 
requirement. 
In addition, the Department proposes 
to require States to report, at the State 
and, if applicable, LEA levels, the 
number and identity of charter schools 
that have closed within the last five 
years and to indicate, for each such 
school, whether the closure was for 
financial, enrollment, academic, or 
other reasons. The Department estimates 
that SEAs would likely also have this 
information readily available (although 
some may need to obtain additional 
information from their LEAs) and would 
need five hours to report it. The 
Department assumes that the effort to 
respond to these proposed requirements 
would be limited to the 42 States 
(including the District of Columbia and 
Puerto Rico) that allow charter schools. 
The Department thus estimates that the 
State effort required to respond to these 
indicators would total 210 hours at a 
cost of $6,300. 
State Plans 
This notice proposes to require States, 
as a condition of receiving their 
remaining funding for the Stabilization 
program, to submit a plan to the 
Department that describes the State’s 
current ability to fully collect and report 
data for the proposed indicators and 
descriptors at least annually and in a 
manner easily accessible and a format 
easily understandable by the public. If 
the State is currently able to fully collect 
and report the data or other information 
required by the indicator or descriptor, 
the State must provide the most recent 
data or information with its plan. If a 
State is not currently able to fully 
collect and report the required data or 
other information, the plan must 
describe the process that the State will 
undertake in order to have the means to 
fully collect and report such data or 
information as soon as possible but no 
later than September 30, 2011. 
As a part of this plan, the State would 
be required to establish milestones and 
a date by which the State expects to 
reach each milestone, describe the 
nature and frequency of publicly 
available reports that the State will 
publish on its progress, and identify the 
amount and source (i.e., whether 
Federal, State or local) of funds that will 
support the efforts necessary to collect 
and report the data or information. The 
level of effort involved in preparing 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00048 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4703 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37851 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
18 According to the Digest of Education Statistics, 
49,298,945 students were enrolled in public 
elementary and secondary schools in fall 2006. See 
http://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d08/tables/ 
dt08_033.asp. 
19 For example, see http:// 
dataqualitycampaign.org/files/publications- 
dqc_academic_growth-100908.pdf and http:// 
www.dataqualitycampaign.org/files/Meetings- 
DQC_Quarterly_Issue_Brief_092506.pdf. 
these elements of the plan will vary 
from State to State based on individual 
State progress in each reform area. For 
example, according to the Data Quality 
Campaign’s 2008 survey of the 50 States 
and the District of Columbia, 48 States 
have ‘‘a unique statewide student 
identifier that connects student data 
across key databases across years,’’ 28 
States have the ‘‘[a]bility to match 
student-level p-12 and higher education 
data,’’ and 21 States have a ‘‘statewide 
teacher identifier with a teacher-student 
match.’’ States that have taken these 
steps have built a foundation for the 
efforts that would be necessary to meet 
some of the proposed requirements, and 
will likely need to spend less time 
completing these elements of their 
plans. The Department estimates that, in 
total, each State will need an average of 
396 hours to prepare these sections of 
the plan; thus, the total hours that 
would be necessary to meet this 
proposed requirement for the 50 States, 
the District of Columbia, and Puerto 
Rico would be 20,592 hours, for a total 
cost of $617,760. For more detailed 
estimates of costs for each specific 
proposed requirement, please see the 
tables in the Paperwork Reduction Act 
of 1995 section of this notice. 
As part of the planning requirements, 
the Department proposes to require each 
State to indicate whether it provides 
teachers of reading/language arts and 
mathematics with data on the 
performance of their students that 
includes estimates of individual teacher 
impact on student achievement and, if 
the State does not do so, to describe a 
process and timeline for doing so by 
September 30, 2011. The Department 
understands that only a small number of 
States (approximately three) currently 
provide this type of information to their 
teachers. However, most other States 
that are developing State longitudinal 
data systems have included teacher 
identifiers in those systems and, thus, 
have part of the infrastructure to 
produce and report these data. The 
Department also understands that there 
are currently only a limited number of 
providers with which States can 
contract for the development of ‘‘value- 
added’’ or other mechanisms for using 
information from the State data systems 
to produce estimates of individual 
teacher impact. This limited capacity 
may make the costs of acquiring this 
assistance higher than they would be 
otherwise. However, the Department 
assumes that as the market grows, more 
providers will enter the field and costs 
will come down. 
The Department further estimates that 
30 percent of all K–12 public school 
teachers are teaching reading/language 
arts or mathematics in the grades in 
which the State administers 
assessments. Based on this assumption, 
the Department estimates that the State 
assessment results for approximately 
14,790,000 students (30 percent of all 
students enrolled in public elementary 
and secondary schools) would be 
included in the calculations necessary 
for States to meet this proposed 
requirement.18 The Department 
estimates that the State cost of analyzing 
the data, verifying with teachers that the 
correct teacher-subject-student 
connection is made in the system, and 
publishing the information online in a 
user-friendly format would be 2 dollars 
per student, for a total State cost of 
$29,940,000. 
The Department also understands that 
an important element of State efforts to 
inform teachers of the estimated impact 
of their teaching on student 
achievement is providing professional 
development for principals and teachers 
on the interpretation and use of those 
data in raising student achievement. 
However, since the proposed planning 
requirements would not require States 
to provide this professional 
development, we have not included its 
cost in the estimated costs of these 
proposed requirements. 
In addition, the Department proposes 
to require States to describe in their 
plans the following: the entities 
responsible for the development, 
execution, and oversight of the plan; the 
agencies or organizations that will 
provide any technical assistance or 
other support that is necessary; the 
overall budget for the development, 
execution, and oversight of the plan; the 
processes that the State employs to 
review and verify the required data and 
other information; and the processes the 
State employs to ensure that, consistent 
with 34 CFR 99.31(b), the required data 
and other information are not made 
publicly available in a manner that 
personally identifies students, where 
applicable. The Department estimates 
that this management and oversight 
section of the plan will require 80 hours 
per State, for a total national estimate of 
4,160 hours at a cost of $124,800. The 
total estimated cost to States of 
preparing the plans is, thus, $742,560. 
Total Estimated Costs 
The Department estimates that the 
total burden of responding to these 
proposed requirements would be 
494,650 hours and $44,779,500 for 
SEAs, 426,250 hours and $10,656,250 
for LEAs, and 249,200 hours and 
$6,230,000 for IHEs, for a total burden 
of 1,170,100 hours at a cost of 
$61,665,750. 
Benefits 
The principal benefits of the proposed 
requirements are those resulting from 
the reporting and public availability of 
information on each State’s progress in 
the four reform areas described in the 
ARRA. The Department believes that the 
information gathered and reported as a 
result of these requirements will 
improve public accountability for 
performance, help States, LEAs, and 
schools learn from one another and 
make improvements in what they are 
doing, and inform the ESEA 
reauthorization process. 
A second major benefit is that better 
public information on State and local 
progress in the four reform areas will 
likely spur more rapid progress on those 
reforms, because States and LEAs that 
appear to be lagging in one or more 
areas may see a need to redouble their 
efforts. The Department believes that 
more rapid progress on the essential 
educational reforms will have major 
benefits nationally, and that these 
reforms have the potential to drive 
dramatic improvements in student 
outcomes. 
For example, statewide longitudinal 
data systems are essential tools in 
advancing education reform. With these 
systems in place, States can assess the 
effectiveness of specific interventions, 
schools, principals, and teachers by 
tracking individual student 
achievement, high school graduation, 
and postsecondary enrollment and 
credit. They can, for example, track the 
academic achievement of individual 
students over time, even if those 
students change schools during the 
course of their education. By analyzing 
this information, decision-makers can 
determine if a student’s ‘‘achievement 
trajectory’’ will result in his or her being 
college- or career-ready, and can better 
target services based on the student’s 
academic needs.19 
The Department also believes that 
States’ implementation of these 
requirements will lead to more 
widespread development and 
implementation of better teacher and 
principal evaluation systems. In 
particular, the availability of accurate, 
complete, and valid achievement data is 
essential to implementing better systems 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00049 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4703 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37852 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
20 See: Braun, Henry I. Using Student Progress To 
Evaluate Teachers: A Primer on Value-Added 
Models. Educational Testing Service, Policy 
Information Center, 2005; Marsh, Julie A.; Pane, 
John F.; Hamilton, Laura S. Making Sense of Data- 
Driven Decision Making in Education: Evidence 
from Recent RAND Research. Santa Monica, CA: 
RAND Corporation, 2006; and Sanders, William L. 
‘‘Value-Added Assessment from Student 
Achievement Data: Opportunities and Hurdles.’’ 
Journal of Personnel Evaluation in Education, Vol. 
14, No. 4, p. 329–339, 2000. 
21 Center for Educator Compensation Reform: 
http://cecr.ed.gov/. 
22 A table listing the allocations to States under 
the Stabilization program is available at: http:// 
www.ed.gov/programs/statestabilization/ 
funding.html. 
of teacher and principal evaluation. 
Value-added models, for example, can 
provide an objective estimate of the 
impact of teachers on student learning 
and achievement.20 Further, they can be 
used by schools, LEAs, or States to 
reward excellence in teaching or school 
leadership, as a component of 
performance-based compensation 
systems, or to identify schools in need 
of improvement or teachers who may 
require additional training or 
professional development.21 
The proposed requirements will have 
additional benefits to the extent that 
they provide States with incentives to 
address inequities in the distribution of 
effective teachers, improve the quality 
of State assessments, and undergo 
intensive efforts to improve struggling 
schools. Numerous studies document 
the substantial impact of improved 
teaching on educational outcomes and 
the need to take action to turn around 
the lowest-performing schools, 
including high schools (and their feeder 
middle schools) that enroll a 
disproportionate number of the students 
who fail to complete a high school 
education and receive a regular high 
school diploma. The Department 
believes that more widespread adoption 
of these reforms would have a 
significant, positive impact on student 
achievement. 
Although these benefits are not easily 
quantified, the Department believes they 
will exceed the projected costs. 
Accounting Statement: As required by 
OMB Circular A–4 (available at http:// 
www.Whitehouse.gov/omb/Circulars/ 
a004/a-4.pdf), in the following table, we 
have prepared an accounting statement 
showing the classification of the 
expenditures associated with the 
provisions of this proposed regulatory 
action. This table provides our best 
estimate of the Federal payments to be 
made to States under this program as a 
result of this proposed regulatory action. 
Expenditures are classified as transfers 
to States. 
TABLE—ACCOUNTING STATEMENT 
CLASSIFICATION OF ESTIMATED EX-
PENDITURES 
Category Transfers 
Annual monetized 
transfers.
$12,621,790,599. 
From Whom to Whom Federal Government 
to States. 
The Stabilization program provides 
approximately $48.6 billion in formula 
grants to States.22 As previously noted, 
the Department is awarding 
Stabilization program funds in two 
phases. In the first phase, the 
Department is awarding 67 percent of a 
State’s Education Stabilization Fund 
allocation, unless the State can 
demonstrate that additional funds are 
required to restore fiscal year 2009 State 
support for education, in which case the 
Department will award the State up to 
90 percent of that allocation. In 
addition, the Department will award 
100 percent of each State’s Government 
Services Fund allocation in Phase I. The 
Department will award the remainder of 
a State’s Education Stabilization Fund 
allocation in the second phase. Thus, 
depending on the total amount of funds 
States receive in the first phase, up to 
$12.6 billion may be available in the 
second phase. 
Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 
This notice contains information 
collection requirements that are subject 
to review by the Office of Management 
and Budget (OMB) under the Paperwork 
Reduction Act of 1995 (44 U.S.C. 3501– 
3520). It is our plan to offer a comment 
period for the information collection at 
the time of the final notice. At that time, 
the Department will submit the 
information collection to OMB for its 
review and provide the burden hours 
associated with each requirement for 
comment. However, because it is likely 
that the information collection will be 
reviewed under emergency OMB 
processing, the Department encourages 
the public to comment on the burden 
hours associated with each requirement 
in this notice. 
A description of the specific proposed 
information collection requirements is 
provided in the following tables along 
with preliminary estimates of the 
annual recordkeeping burden for these 
requirements. Included in a preliminary 
estimate is the time for collecting and 
tracking data, maintaining records, 
calculations, and reporting. The first 
table presents the estimated indicators 
burden for SEAs, the second table 
presents the estimated indicators 
burden for LEAs, the third table 
presents the estimated indicators 
burden for IHEs, and the fourth table 
presents the estimated State plan 
burden for SEAs. 
BILLING CODE 4000–01–P 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 20:41 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00050 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4703 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37853 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00051 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4725 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2 EN
29
JY
09
.0
37
</
G
PH
>
m
st
oc
ks
til
l o
n 
D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37854 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00052 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4725 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2 EN
29
JY
09
.0
38
</
G
PH
>
m
st
oc
ks
til
l o
n 
D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37855 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00053 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4725 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2 EN
29
JY
09
.0
39
</
G
PH
>
m
st
oc
ks
til
l o
n 
D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37856 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00054 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4725 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2 EN
29
JY
09
.0
40
</
G
PH
>
m
st
oc
ks
til
l o
n 
D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37857 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00055 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4725 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2 EN
29
JY
09
.0
41
</
G
PH
>
m
st
oc
ks
til
l o
n 
D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37858 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00056 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4725 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2 EN
29
JY
09
.0
42
</
G
PH
>
m
st
oc
ks
til
l o
n 
D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37859 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00057 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4725 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2 EN
29
JY
09
.0
43
</
G
PH
>
m
st
oc
ks
til
l o
n 
D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37860 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00058 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4725 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2 EN
29
JY
09
.0
44
</
G
PH
>
m
st
oc
ks
til
l o
n 
D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37861 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00059 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4725 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2 EN
29
JY
09
.0
45
</
G
PH
>
m
st
oc
ks
til
l o
n 
D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37862 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00060 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4725 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2 EN
29
JY
09
.0
46
</
G
PH
>
m
st
oc
ks
til
l o
n 
D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37863 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00061 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4725 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2 EN
29
JY
09
.0
47
</
G
PH
>
m
st
oc
ks
til
l o
n 
D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37864 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00062 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4725 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2 EN
29
JY
09
.0
48
</
G
PH
>
m
st
oc
ks
til
l o
n 
D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37865 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00063 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4725 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2 EN
29
JY
09
.0
49
</
G
PH
>
m
st
oc
ks
til
l o
n 
D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37866 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00064 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4725 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2 EN
29
JY
09
.0
50
</
G
PH
>
m
st
oc
ks
til
l o
n 
D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37867 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00065 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4725 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2 EN
29
JY
09
.0
51
</
G
PH
>
m
st
oc
ks
til
l o
n 
D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37868 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00066 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4725 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2 EN
29
JY
09
.0
52
</
G
PH
>
m
st
oc
ks
til
l o
n 
D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37869 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00067 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4725 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2 EN
29
JY
09
.0
53
</
G
PH
>
m
st
oc
ks
til
l o
n 
D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37870 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00068 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4725 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2 EN
29
JY
09
.0
54
</
G
PH
>
m
st
oc
ks
til
l o
n 
D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37871 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 20:46 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00069 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4725 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2 EN
29
JY
09
.0
55
</
G
PH
>
m
st
oc
ks
til
l o
n 
D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37872 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
Regulatory Flexibility Act 
Certification: 
The Secretary certifies that this 
proposed regulatory action will not have 
a significant economic impact on a 
substantial number of small entities. 
The small entities that this proposed 
regulatory action will affect are small 
LEAs receiving funds under this 
program and small IHEs. 
This proposed regulatory action will 
not have a significant economic impact 
on small LEAs because they will be able 
to meet the costs of compliance with 
this regulatory action using the funds 
provided under this program. 
With respect to small IHEs, the U.S. 
Small Business Administration Size 
Standards define these institutions as 
‘‘small entities’’ if they are for-profit or 
nonprofit institutions with total annual 
revenue below $5,000,000 or if they are 
institutions controlled by small 
governmental jurisdictions, which are 
comprised of cities, counties, towns, 
townships, villages, school districts, or 
special districts, with a population of 
less than 50,000. Based on data from the 
Department’s Integrated Postsecondary 
Education Data System (IPEDS), up to 
532 small IHEs with revenues of less 
than $5 million may be affected by this 
proposed requirement. These small IHEs 
represent only 15 percent of degree- 
granting IHEs. In addition, only 161,155 
students (0.7 percent) enrolled in 
degree-granting IHEs in fall 2007 
attended these small institutions. As the 
burden for indicators (c)(12) and (c)(13) 
is driven by the number of students for 
whom IHEs would be required to submit 
data, small IHEs will require 
significantly less effort to adhere to 
these proposed regulations than would 
be the case for larger IHEs. Based on 
IPEDS data, the Department estimates 
that 18,050 of these students are first- 
time freshmen. As stated earlier in the 
Summary of Costs and Benefits section 
of this notice, the Department estimates 
that, as required by proposed indicator 
(c)(12), IHEs will be able confirm the 
enrollment of 20 first-time freshmen per 
hour. Applying this estimate to the 
estimated number of first-time freshmen 
at small IHEs, the Department estimates 
that these IHEs would need to spend 
8,058 hours to respond to this proposed 
requirement at a total cost of $201,450 
(assuming a cost of $25 per hour). 
The effort involved in reporting the 
number of students enrolling in a public 
IHE who complete at least one year’s 
worth of college credit applicable 
toward a degree within two years as 
required by indicator (c)(13) would also 
apply to small IHEs. For this proposed 
requirement, the Department also 
estimates that IHEs will be able to report 
the credit completion status of 20 first- 
time freshmen per hour. Again applying 
this data entry rate to the estimated 
number of first-time freshmen at small 
IHEs, the Department estimates that 
these IHEs would need to spend 8,058 
hours to respond to this proposed 
requirement at a total cost of $201,450. 
The total cost of these proposed 
requirements for small IHEs is, 
therefore, $402,900, and the estimated 
cost per small IHE is $757. The 
Department has, therefore, determined 
that the regulations would not represent 
a significant burden on small 
not-for-profit IHEs. 
It is also important to note that States 
may use their Government Services 
Fund allocations to help small IHEs 
meet the costs of complying with the 
requirements that affect them, and 
public IHEs may use Education 
Stabilization Fund dollars they receive 
for that purpose. 
In addition, the Department believes 
the benefits provided under this 
proposed regulatory action will 
outweigh the burdens on these 
institutions of complying with the 
proposed requirements. One of these 
benefits will be the provision of better 
information on student success in 
postsecondary education to 
policymakers, educators, parents, and 
other stakeholders. The Department 
believes that the information gathered 
and reported as a result of these 
requirements will improve public 
accountability for performance; help 
States, LEAs, and schools learn from 
one another and improve their decision- 
making; and inform Federal 
policymaking. 
A second major benefit is that better 
public information on State and local 
progress in the four reform areas will 
likely spur more rapid progress on those 
reforms, because States and LEAs that 
appear to be lagging in one area or 
another may see a need to redouble their 
efforts. The Department believes that 
more rapid progress on the essential 
educational reforms will have major 
benefits nationally, and that these 
reforms have the potential to drive 
dramatic improvements in student 
outcomes. The proposed requirements 
that apply to IHEs should, in particular, 
spur more rapid implementation of P– 
16 State longitudinal data systems. 
The Secretary invites comments from 
small IHEs and small LEAs as to 
whether they believe this proposed 
regulatory action would have a 
significant economic impact on them 
and, if so, requests evidence to support 
that belief. 
Assessment of Educational Impact: 
In accordance with section 411 of the 
General Education Provisions Act, 20 
U.S.C. 1221e–4, the Department invites 
comment on whether these 
requirements do not require 
transmission of information that any 
other agency or authority of the United 
States gathers or makes available. 
Intergovernmental Review: This 
program is subject to Executive Order 
12372 and the regulations in 34 CFR 
part 79. One of the objectives of the 
Executive Order is to foster an 
intergovernmental partnership and a 
strengthened federalism. The Executive 
Order relies on processes developed by 
State and local governments for 
coordination and review of proposed 
Federal financial assistance. 
This document provides early 
notification of our specific plans and 
actions for this program. 
Accessible Format: Individuals with 
disabilities can obtain this document in 
an accessible format (e.g., braille, large 
print, audiotape, or computer diskette) 
on request to the program contact 
person listed under FOR FURTHER 
INFORMATION CONTACT. 
Electronic Access to This Document: 
You can view this document, as well as 
all other documents of this Department 
published in the Federal Register, in 
text or Adobe Portable Document 
Format (PDF) on the Internet at the 
following site: http://www.ed.gov/news/ 
fedregister. 
To use PDF you must have Adobe 
Acrobat Reader, which is available free 
at this site. If you have questions about 
using PDF, call the U.S. Government 
Printing Office (GPO), toll free, at 1– 
888–293–6498; or in the Washington, 
DC, area at (202) 512–1530. 
Note: The official version of this document 
is the document published in the Federal 
Register. Free Internet access to the official 
edition of the Federal Register and the Code 
of Federal Regulations is available on GPO 
Access at: http://www.gpoaccess.gov/nara/ 
index.html. 
Dated: July 22, 2009. 
Arne Duncan, 
Secretary of Education. 
[FR Doc. E9–17906 Filed 7–24–09; 11:15 am] 
BILLING CODE 4000–01–C 
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Institute of Education Sciences; 
Overview Information; Grant Program 
for Statewide Longitudinal Data 
Systems; Notice Inviting Applications 
for New Awards Under the American 
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 
2009. 
Catalog of Federal Domestic 
Assistance (CFDA) Number: 84.384A. 
Dates: 
Applications Available: July 24, 2009 
(Request for Applications [RFA]); 
August 10, 2009 (Application Package). 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 20:46 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00070 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4703 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
