1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Draft Regulatory Impact Analysis: 
Changes to Renewable Fuel Standard Program 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Assessment and Standards Division 
Office of Transportation and Air Quality 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
 
 
 
 
 
October 21, 2008 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NOTICE 
This technical report does not necessarily represent final EPA decisions or positions. 
It is intended to present technical analyses of issues using data that are currently available. 
The purpose in the release of such a report is to facilitate an exchange of technical information 
and to inform the public of technical developments.
2 
Table of Contents 
 
 
Statement of Need.......................................................................................................iii 
 
Overview.....................................................................................................................iv 
 
List of Acronyms and Abbreviations.........................  ...............................................vi 
 
Chapter 1:  Renewable Fuel Production and Consumption..........................................1 
 
Chapter 2:  Lifecycle GHG Analysis........................................................................249 
 
Chapter 3:  Impacts of the Program on Non-GHG Pollutants...................................388 
 
Chapter 4:  Impacts on Cost of Renewable Fuels, Gasoline, and Diesel ..................469 
 
Chapter 5:  Economic Impacts and Benefits..............................................................595 
 
Chapter 6:  Impacts on Water....................................................................................650 
 
Chapter 7:  Initial Regulatory Flexibility Analysis...................................................678 
 
Appendix A:  Biodiesel Effects on Heavy-Duty Highway Engines and Vehicles....688 
 
Endnotes....................................................................................................................716
i 
Statement of Need 
 
 
The current Renewable Fuel Standard (RFS) program was originally adopted by EPA to 
implement the provisions of the Energy Policy Act of 2005 (EPAct), which added section 211(o) 
to the Clean Air Act (CAA).  With the passage of the Energy Independence and Security Act of 
2007 (EISA), Congress recently made several important revisions to these renewable fuel 
requirements.  This proposal would revise the RFS program regulations to implement these EISA 
provisions.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
iii 
2 
 
 
iii 
Overview 
 
 
Chapter 1:  Renewable Fuel Production and Consumption 
This chapter describes the various feedstocks and renewable fuel types that could potentially be 
used to meet the EISA biofuel standards.  The availability and challenges of harvesting, storing, 
and transporting these feedstocks are discussed, as well as the different biofuel production 
technologies, industry plans, and potential growth projections for future facilities.  A discussion 
of biofuel distribution and consumption is included. 
 
Chapter 2:  Impacts of the Program on Greenhouse Gas Emissions 
This chapter describes the methodology used to determine the lifecycle greenhouse gas (GHG) 
emissions of the renewable fuels required by EISA, and to determine which qualify for the four 
GHG reduction thresholds established in EISA.  Future inclusion of  other feedstocks and fuel is 
discussed, as well as the overall GHG benefits of the RFS program. 
 
Chapter 3:  Impacts of the Program on Non-GHG Pollutants 
This chapter discusses the expected impacts of this proposed program on emissions of 
hydrocarbons (HC), oxides of nitrogen (NOx), carbon monoxide (CO), particulate matter (PM10 
and PM2.5), sulfur oxides (SOx), ammonia (NH3), ethanol, and air toxic emissions of benzene, 
1,3-butadiene, acetaldehyde, formaldehyde, acrolein, and naphthalene.  Emissions from vehicles 
and off-road equipment, as well as emissions from the entire fuel production and distribution 
chain are considered.  
 
Chapter 4:  Impacts on Cost of Renewable Fuels, Gasoline, and Diesel 
The impact of the proposed program on the production and distribution costs of ethanol, 
biodiesel, gasoline and diesel are discussed.  Per-gallon and nationwide costs are presented with 
and without ethanol subsidies.  
 
Chapter 5:  Economic Impacts and Benefits of the Program 
This chapter summarizes the impacts of the RFS2 proposal on the U.S. and international 
agricultural sector, U.S. petroleum imports, and the consequences of reduced oil imports on U.S. 
energy security.  Also, it examines the greenhouse gas benefits and the co-pollutant health and 
environmental impacts from the wider use of biofuels in the U.S. from this proposal. 
 
Chapter 6:  Impacts on Water 
The impacts of this proposed program on different bodies of water are discussed.  Aspects 
include feedstock production, ecological impacts, climate change, ethanol production, biodiesel 
production, and drinking water and public health issues. 
 
Chapter 7:  Initial Regulatory Flexibility Analysis 
The Initial Regulatory Flexibility Analysis (IRFA) evaluates the potential impacts of the 
proposed standards on small entities.  In developing the IRFA, we conducted outreach and held 
meetings with representatives from the various small entities that could be affected by the 
rulemaking.  Small business recommendations are discussed.  
iv 
iv 
Appendix A 
EPA conducted a comprehensive analysis of the emission impacts of biodiesel using heavy-duty, 
in-use diesel chassis and engine exhaust emissions data.  The emission impacts on NOx, PM, 
HC, and CO of 20 volume percent biodiesel fuels produced from various animal- and plant-
based feedstock materials tested under several cycles in this analysis.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
v 
12/18/2008    10:46:14 AM  
v 
List of Acronyms and Abbreviations 
 
ACE American Coalition for Ethanol 
ACS American Cancer Society 
ADM Archer Daniels Midland 
AEO Annual Energy Outlook (an EIA publication) 
AHC Aromatic hydrocarbons 
ARMS Agricultural Resource Management Survey 
ASTM American Society of Testing and Materials 
B0, B5, B20, etc Percent of biodiesel, e.g., B5= 5% biodiesel, 95% diesel 
bbl Barrel 
BEA Bureau of Economic Analysis 
Bgal, bgal, bilgal, bg Billions of gallons 
BGY Billions of gallons per year 
BPCD Barrels Per calendar day 
BPSD Barrels per stream day 
bpd, bbls/day Barrels Per Day 
Brix A measurement of the sugar content of a solution at a given temperature 
BTL Biomass-to-liquid 
BTU British Thermal Unit 
BU Bushel 
Bu/acre Bushels per acre 
BZ Benzene 
C Carbon 
C&D Construction and Demolition 
CA California 
CAA Clean Air Act 
CAIR Clean Air Interstate Rule 
CARB California Air Resources Board 
CaRFG3 California Phase 3 RFG 
CBG Cleaner Burning Gasoline 
CBI Caribbean Basin Initiative 
CB05 Carbon Bond 05 
CD Census Division 
CFEIS EPA’s Certification and Fuel Economy Information System 
CFR Code of Federal Regulations 
c/gal Cents per gallon 
CG Conventional Gasoline 
CH3CHO Acetaldehyde 
CH3C(O)OO· Acetyl peroxy radical 
CH3C(O)OONO2 Peroxyacetyl nitrate 
CHF Congestive heart failure 
CHP Combined Heat and Power Technology 
CIMT Carotid intima-media thickness 
CMAQ Community Multi-scale Air Quality model 
CO  Carbon Monoxide 
CO2  Carbon Dioxide 
COHb Carboxyhemoglobin 
Co-op Cooperative 
CRC Coordinating Research Council 
CRGNSA Columbia River Gorge National Scenic Area 
CRP Conservation Reserve Program 
 vi 
CTL Coal-to-liquid 
DDGS Distillers’ Dried Grains with Solubles 
DGS Distillers’ Grains with Solubles 
DHHS Department of Health and Human Services 
DOE Department of Energy 
DRIA Draft Regulatory Impact Analysis 
dt Dry ton 
E&C Engineering and Construction 
E0 Gasoline Blend which Does Not Contain Ethanol 
E10 Gasoline Blend containing a nominal 10 percent ethanol by volume 
E85 Gasoline Blend containing 85 percent ethanol by volume 
E200 Percent of Fuel Evaporated at 200 Degrees F (ASTM D 86) 
E300 Percent of Fuel Evaporated at 300 Degrees F (ASTM D 86) 
EIA Energy Information Administration (part of the U.S. Department of Energy) 
EISA Energy Independence and Security Act 
Energy Act Energy Policy Act of 2005 (also the Act) 
EPA Environmental Protection Agency 
EPAct Energy Policy Act of 2005 (also ‘the Energy Act’ or ‘the Act’) 
ETBE Ethyl Tertiary Butyl Ether 
ETOH Ethanol 
EU European Union 
ex CA Excluding California 
F, °F Fahrenheit 
F-T Fischer-Tropsch 
FAME Fatty acid methyl ester 
FAPRI Farm and Agricultural Policy Research Institute 
FASOM Forestry and Agriculture Sector Optimization Model 
FBP Feed Boiling Point (also Final Boiling Point) 
FCC Fluidized Catalytic Cracker 
FCCU Fluidized Catalytic Cracking Unit 
FHWA Federal Highway Administration 
FOEB Fuel Oil Equivalent Barrel 
FR Federal Register 
FRM Final Rulemaking 
FRTP Fixed Reduction Trigger Point 
FFV Flexible Fuel Vehicle 
FTP Federal test procedure 
g/Btu Grams per Btu 
g/day Grams per day 
Gal, gal Gallon 
GDP Gross Domestic Product 
GEOS Goddard Earth Observing System 
GHG Greenhouse Gases 
GPA Geographic Phase-in Area 
GREET Greenhouse Gas, Regulated Emissions, and Energy Use in Transportation model 
GWP Global warming potentials 
ha Hectare 
H2O Water 
HC Hydrocarbon(s) 
HCO Heavy Cycle Oil (a refinery stream) 
HCHO Formaldehyde 
HDN Naphtha Hydrotreater (also Hydro-Denitrogenation Unit) 
HEI Health Effects Institute 
 vii 
HNO3 Nitric acid 
HSR Heavy Straight Run (a refinery stream) 
HVGO Heavy Vacuum Gas Oil (a refinery stream) 
IARC International Agency for Research on Carcinogens 
IBP Initial Boiling Point 
IRFA Initial Regulatory Flexibility Analysis 
k Thousand 
kbbl Thousand barrels 
kg kilogram 
kwh Kilowatt Hour 
L, l Liter 
Lb, lb Pound 
LCC Land Capability Classification 
LCO Light Cycle Oil (a refinery stream) 
LEV Low emission vehicle 
LLE Liquid-Liquid Extraction 
LNS Light Naphtha Splitter 
LP Linear Programming (a type of refinery model) 
LSR Light Straight Run (a refinery stream) 
m2 Square meter 
MCIP Meteorology-Chemistry Interface Processor 
mg/m3 Milligrams per cubic meter 
MGY, MMgy Million Gallons per Year 
mm Millimeter 
MM Million 
MMBTU Million British Thermal Units 
MMbbls/cd Millions of barrels per calendar day 
MMGal/yr Millions of gallons per year 
MOBILE (5, 6, 6.2) EPA’s Motor Vehicle Emission Inventory Model (versions) 
MON Motor Octane Number 
MOVES Motor Vehicle Emissions Simulator 
MOVES2006 EPA’s Next Generation Highway Vehicle Emission Model 
MSAT Mobile Source Air Toxics 
MSAT1 2001 Mobile Source Air Toxics Rule 
MSAT2 2006 Proposed Mobile Source Air Toxics Rule 
MSW Municipal Solid Waste 
Mt Metric ton 
MTBE  Methyl Tertiary-Butyl Ether 
N Nitrogen 
NAAQS National Ambient Air Quality Standards 
NAICS North American Industrial Classification System 
NASS National Agricultural Statistics Service 
NATA National Air Toxic Assessment 
NBB National Biodiesel Board 
NCGA National Corn Growers Association 
NCI National Cancer Institute 
NCLAN National Crop Loss Assessment Network 
NCSU North Carolina State University 
NGL Natural gas plant liquids 
NH3 Ammonia 
NIOSH National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health 
NMHC  Non-Methane Hydrocarbons 
NMIM National Mobile Inventory Model (EPA software tool) 
 viii 
NMOG Non-methane organic gases 
NONROAD EPA’s Non-road Engine Emission Model 
NONROAD2005 EPA’s Non-road Engine Emission Model Released in 2005 
NO Nitric oxide 
NO2 Nitrogen dioxide 
NOx  Oxides of nitrogen 
NPRM Notice of Proposed Rulemaking 
NRC National Research Council 
NRCS Natural Resource Conservation Service 
NREL National Renewable Energy Laboratory 
O3 Ozone 
OA Organic aerosol 
OC Organic carbon 
·OH Hydroxyl radical 
OM Organic mass 
OMB Office of Management and Budget 
OMHCE Organic Material Hydrocarbon Equivalent 
ORD Office of Research and Development 
ORNL Oak Ridge National Laboratory 
OTAQ Office of Transportation and Air Quality 
Oxy-fuel, oxyfuel Winter oxygenated fuel program 
PADD Petroleum Administration for Defense District 
PAHs Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons 
PAN Peroxyacetyl nitrate 
PM Particulate Matter 
PM10  Coarse Particle 
PM2.5  Fine Particle 
PM AQCD Particulate Matter Air Quality Criteria Document 
PMA Petroleum Marketing Annual (an EIA publication) 
POM  Polycyclic Organic Matter 
PONA Paraffin, Olefin, Naphthene, Aromatic 
ppb Parts per billion 
ppm Parts Per million 
PPN Peroxypropionyl nitrate 
PRTP Percentage Reduction Trigger Point 
PSI Pounds per Square Inch 
QBtu Quadrillion btu 
Quadrillion 1015 
(R+M)/2 Octane calculation (RON+MON)/2 
R&D Research and Development 
RBOB Reformulated Blendstock for Oxygenate Blending 
rd Renewable diesel 
RFA Regulatory Flexibility Act 
RFG  Reformulated Gasoline  
RFS Renewable Fuels Standard 
RFS1 Renewable Fuels Standard Program promulgated in 2007. 
RFS2 Renewable Fuels Standard Changes 
RIA Regulatory Impact Analysis 
RIMS Regional Input-Output Modeling System 
RIN Renewable Identification Number 
RON Research octane number 
RPMG Renewable Products Marketing Group 
RSM Response Surface Model 
 ix
RVP Reid Vapor Pressure 
S Sulfur 
SBA Small Business Administration 
SBAR Panel, or ‘the Panel’ Small Business Advocacy Review Panel 
SBREFA Small Business Regulatory Enforcement Fairness Act (of 1996) 
scf Standard cubic feet 
SER Small Entity Representative 
SI Spark Ignition 
SOA Secondary Organic Aerosol 
SOC Secondary organic carbon 
SOC  Soil organic carbon 
SOx Oxides of Sulfur 
SULEV Super ultra low emission vehicle 
SVOC Semi-volatile organic compound 
T50 Temperature at which 50% (by volume) of fuel evaporates (ASTM D 86) 
T90 Temperature at which 90% (by volume) of fuel evaporates (ASTM D 86) 
TAME Tertiary Amyl Methyl Ether 
Ton 2000 lbs 
Tonne Metric tonne (equivalent to 1.1 tons); also metric ton 
TRQ Tariff rate quotas 
ULEV Ultra low emission vehicle 
U.S.C. United States Code 
USDA U.S. Department of Agriculture 
VGO Vacuum Gas Oil (a refinery stream) 
VMT  Vehicle Miles Traveled 
VOC Volatile Organic Compound 
vol% Percent by volume, volume percent 
WDGS Wet Distillers Grain w/ Solubles 
wt% Percent by weight, weight percent 
yr, y Year 
 1 
Chapter 1:  Renewable Fuel Production and Consumption 
 
 
1.1 Biofuel Feedstock Availability  
 
 Currently, the main feedstocks used for renewable fuel production are corn for ethanol 
and soy for biodiesel.  As technologies improve, we expect more emphasis on using cellulosic 
feedstocks such as agricultural residues, forestry residues, etc.  However, limitations may occur 
due to concerns over sustainable removal rates for initial cellulosic feedstocks.  Thus, dedicated 
energy crops which are touted as requiring low fertilizer and energy inputs as well as having the 
ability of being grown on marginal lands may also enter the market.  The following sections 
discuss the current and potential availability of biofuel feedstocks and the potential challenges 
that must be overcome in order for enough feedstock to be collected to meet the EISA 
requirement of 36 billion gallons of renewable fuel by 2022.  
 
1.1.1 Starch/Sugar Feedstocks 
 
 The following sections describe starch and sugar feedstocks that can be used to produce 
ethanol.  Currently, the majority of ethanol is produced from corn/grain.  Recently, there have 
also been plans to convert sugarcane grown in the U.S. into ethanol.  We also describe 
feedstocks used in the production of ethanol outside the U.S. 
 
1.1.1.1 Corn/Grain Ethanol   
 
 Today’s ethanol is primarily corn-based ethanol, which accounts for the majority of the 
estimated 6.5 billion gallons of domestic fuel ethanol produced in 2007.  According to multiple 
sources, anywhere from 12-18 billion gallons of corn ethanol could be produced by the 2015-16 
timeframe, see Table 1.1-1.1  Studies indicate, however, that current sustainable production of 
corn for fuel in the U.S. may be no more than 15 billion gallons per year at most, and perhaps 
only 12-14 billion gallons.2,3 For this proposal, we modeled 15 billion gallons of corn ethanol as 
required to meet the EISA standards using the agricultural models FASOM and FAPRI in order 
to assess the impact on crop acreage, crop allocation to fuel vs. other uses, and costs.  See 
Chapter 5 of the DRIA for more details on the modeling.  In addition to acres harvested and crop 
allocation, factors such as crop yields and ethanol yield per bushel of feedstock impact the 
amount of biofuel that can be produced. 
   
 2 
Table 1.1-1.  Corn Ethanol Production Forecast Parameters and Corresponding Years 
Source  
(cited in text above) 
Fuel Volumes/Year 
(billion gallons) 
Acres Planted 
(millions) 
Yield 
(bu/acre) 
Corn Allocation 
to Ethanol 
Ethanol Conversion 
(gal/bu)b 
USDA Baseline  12/2016 90 170 31% 2.76 
USDA Study 15/2016 92 170 37% 2.8 
NCGA Analysisc 12.8-17.8/2016 76-78a 178-193 33-40% 2.9-3.0 
This Proposal 15/2022 92/87a 183 33% 2.85 
aAcres harvested 
bOur proposed scenarios assume all figures include denaturant, but most references do not specify; Differences also 
occur depending on whether dry or wet mills are assumed, wet mills have slightly lower yields 
 
cNational Corn Growers Association 
 
 Corn is mainly grown in 12 states within the United States: Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, 
Kansas, Kentucky, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska, Ohio, South Dakota, and 
Wisconsin.  See Table 1.1-2. 
 
Table 1.1-2. 
U.S. Corn Harvested in 2007 by State 
State 
Total Harvested 
(Acres) 
Total 72,222,500 
Illinois 13,050,000 
Indiana 6,351,700 
Iowa 13,850,000 
Kansas 3,700,000 
Kentucky 1,360,000 
Michigan 2,315,900 
Minnesota 7,784,500 
Missouri 3,239,200 
Nebraska 9,199,700 
Ohio 3,604,300 
South Dakota 4,488,400 
Wisconsin 3,278,800 
 
 Corn yield per acre has been increasing at an average rate of about 1.6 percent per year 
for the past three decades.4  See Figure 1.1-1.  In our economic modeling assessment (see 
Chapter 5 of this DRIA), we rely on an estimate of 183 bu/acre in 2022, which equates to about 
1.2 percent annual increase in corn yields from current figures, and is consistent with the United 
States Department of Agriculture (USDA) projections.5   
 
 3 
Figure 1.1-1.  U.S. Corn Yields (1978-2008) 
 
 Today, the majority of corn is used as animal feed (51 percent), with smaller portions 
going to ethanol (18 percent), exports (19 percent), human food, and seed.6  The FASOM 
projects that approximately 33 percent of corn would need to be allocated to the ethanol industry 
by 2022.  The amount of corn allocated to fuel vs. other uses has caused much controversy over 
the production and use of corn-based ethanol in the past few years.  There is concern that the use 
of corn for fuel could potentially divert corn needed to feed people.  On the other hand, it is 
entirely possible that other countries (e.g. Argentina or Brazil) could increase their production of 
corn to match the increase in demand for food and fuel, thus meeting both needs.  As many 
factors are in play, we can not be certain the actual outcome of the future.  We rely on our 
modeling results to help inform us of the potential impacts.   
 
 Over the last 15 years, ethanol industry optimization of cooking, mashing, and 
fermentation conditions has increased the amount of ethanol produced from a bushel of corn.  
According to USDA reports, by about 2010 we can expect all plants on-line to yield an average 
of 2.76 gallons per bushel.7,8  In addition, based on discussions with USDA, we believe it is 
reasonable to expect an increase in corn kernel starch content of 2-4 percent over the next 
decade.  Combining these figures, we project industry average denatured ethanol yields to reach 
2.85 gallons per bushel by 2022 for dry mills and 2.63 gallons per bushel for wet mills.  See 
section 1.4 of this DRIA for more information on corn ethanol biofuel production technologies, 
e.g. dry mill vs. wet mill. 
 
1.1.1.2 Sugar Ethanol  
 
Currently, there are no U.S. plants producing ethanol from sugar feedstocks.9  Brazil and 
several other countries are producing ethanol from sugarcane, sugar beets, and molasses, 
showing that it is economically feasible to convert these feedstocks into ethanol (see section 
1.1.1.3).  However, the economics of producing ethanol from sugar feedstocks in these countries 
 4 
is not directly comparable to the economics of producing ethanol from sugar feedstocks in the 
U.S.  A study from USDA entitled “The Economic Feasibility of Ethanol Production from Sugar 
in the United States” indicates that producing ethanol from molasses is economically feasible 
while producing ethanol from sugar beets and sugarcane is estimated to be profitable at current 
ethanol spot prices (in 2006) and at about breakeven over the next several months, excluding 
capital replacement costs, based on current futures prices for ethanol.10  Over the longer term, the 
profitability of producing ethanol from sugarcane and sugar beets depends on the prices of these 
two crops, the costs of conversion, and the price of gasoline.  
 
Recent news indicates that there are plans in the U.S. to produce ethanol from sugar 
feedstocks.  For instance, sugarcane has been grown in California’s Imperial Valley specifically 
for the purpose of making ethanol and using the cane’s biomass to generate electricity to power 
the ethanol distillery as well as export excess electricity to the electric grid.11  There are at least 
two projects being developed at this time that could result in several hundred million gallons of 
ethanol produced.  The sugarcane is being grown on marginal and existing cropland that is 
unsuitable for food crops and will replace forage crops like alfalfa, Bermuda grass, Klein grass, 
etc.  Harvesting is expected to be fully mechanized.  Thus, there is potential for these projects 
and perhaps others to help contribute to the EISA biofuels mandate.  
 
1.1.1.3 Imported Ethanol  
 
 In 2005, around 48% of world fuel ethanol production was produced from sugar crops, 
i.e. sugarcane and sugar beets, with the remainder mostly from grains.12 Sugar beets are mainly 
grown in France, Germany, and in the U.S., with the majority of the feedstock typically used to 
produce sugar for food and feed.  Compared to sugar beets, sugarcane is produced in much 
higher volume and has been able to support a growing sugar and ethanol market.  Due to a higher 
availability of sugarcane feedstock for ethanol production, we expect that imported ethanol to the 
U.S. will likely come from sugarcane.   
 
 World production of sugarcane is approximately 1.4 billion metric tons (MT) and is 
concentrated mainly in tropical regions, particularly in Latin America, Africa, and South and 
Southeast Asia.  Roughly 100 countries produce sugarcane today.13  Brazil is currently the 
world’s largest producer of sugarcane (420 million MT in 2005) and offers the greatest potential 
for growth, due primarily to the availability of suitable lands for expanding sugarcane 
cultivation.14  Industry estimates indicate Brazil will produce about 487 million MT during the 
2007/08 harvest season. 
  
 As far as land availability is concerned, Brazil has large potential for expanding 
sugarcane production.  Sugarcane area in Brazil is forecasted to grow by 50% by 2010, with 
construction and extension of mills especially in the Centre-South.  Currently expansions have 
mainly been into pastureland areas and not into native scrubland.  In Brazil, just 20% of the 
arable land is cultivated, totaling 156 million acres.  The following Table 1.1-3., describes the 
land available/used in 2007.  As there are 494 million acres of pastureland and a considerable 
area of unused arable land (190 million acres), it is believed that there could be a large expansion 
in sugarcane.15 
 
 5 
Table 1.1-3.  Brazil Land Areas in 2007.16 
Brazil (Total Area) 2100
Total Preserved Areas and Other Uses* 1260
Total Arable Area 840
Cultivated Land (All Crops) 156
Soybeans 51
Corn 35
Oranges 2
Sugar Cane 19
Sugar Area 11
Ethanol Area 8
Pastureland 494
Available land (ag, livestock) 190
Million Acres
 
*Areas include Amazon Rain Forest, protected areas, conservation  
and reforestation areas, cities and towns, roads, lakes, and rivers. 
 
 The statistics above, however, do not indicate whether the land available requires any 
additional usage of water or has the proper soil and climate conditions for sugar cane.  According 
to one study, there is at least 148 million acres of additional land available with proper soil and 
climate conditions for sugar cane without utilizing environmentally protected land (i.e. Amazon 
and native reserves) and without the use of irrigation.17  This translates to approximately 90 
billion gallons of ethanol potential (using a yield of approximately 600 gal/acre which is a 
conservative estimate based on existing technology).  Although it is not probable that all this 
land will be converted to sugar cane ethanol, the estimate puts into prospective the large potential 
for sugarcane ethanol to be produced in Brazil.   
 
 Another study commissioned by the Brazilian Government produced an analysis in which 
Brazil’s arable land was evaluated for its suitability for cane.  The benefit of this study is that it 
provides more detail on the land quality and yield assumptions used in its estimates than the 
study and statistics shown above.18  The study eliminated areas protected by environmental 
regulations and those with a slope greater than 12% (those not suitable for mechanized farming).  
The following Table 1.1-4 shows the available land calculated for sugarcane expansion at 
various crop yields with and without irrigation and the potential volumes that could be attained. 
As can be seen, there are potentially large areas of land available for sugarcane expansion in 
Brazil.   
 
 6 
Table 1.1-4.  Potential Volumes Utilizing Available Land for Sugarcane ExpansionA,18,19 
w/o irrigation w/ irrigation w/o irrigation w/ irrigation
High 659 20 94 13 62
Good 592 281 242 166 143
Average 524 369 414 193 217
Inadequate 0 224 143 0 0
Total 894 894 373 422
Potential
Ethanol Yield 
(gal/acre)
Potential Area 
(million acres)
Potential Ethanol Volume 
(billion gallons)
 
 
 The actual potential for ethanol from sugarcane will, however, be further limited by the 
amount of sugarcane diverted towards food and other uses.  Taking into account demands for 
food and feed, the Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) Biofuel Feedstock Assessment for 
Selected Countries report suggests that perhaps more than 20 billion gallons of gasoline 
equivalent fuel could be produced from available sugarcane supply by 2017.  Brazil is estimated 
to produce approximately 2/3 of the potential supply.  The majority of this supply would likely 
be consumed within the country, with the leftover potentially available for export to the U.S. and 
other countries.  Recent government and industry estimates indicate that approximately 3.8-4.2 
bgal of ethanol could be available for export from Brazil by 2022 (with close to 17 billion 
gallons being produced and 13 billion gallons consumed domestically).  See section 1.5.2.1.1 of 
this DRIA for further details on Brazilian ethanol production and consumption.  Thus, there 
appears to be a large enough potential for Brazil to increase production of sugarcane to meet its 
internal demands as well as export to the United States and other countries. 
 
 Countries other than Brazil lack the land resources, appropriate soils, and climate for 
large expansion of sugarcane production.20  India and China are the second and third largest 
producers, however, most of the cultivatable land area is already in use and government policies 
discourage reallocation of arable land for biofuel production.  Although Argentina and Columbia 
have significant underutilized lands available, these resources generally do not have suitable soil 
and climate characteristics for sugarcane production.  Due to these factors, Brazil is the most 
likely country able to produce substantial volumes of sugarcane for biofuel production in the 
future.   
 
1.1.2 Cellulosic Biofuel Feedstocks 
 
 Various cellulosic feedstocks can potentially be used to produce cellulosic biofuel.  These 
include agricultural residues, forest residues, urban waste, and dedicated energy crops.  We 
describe each type in the following sections.   
 
                                                 
A
 Adapted from CGEE, ABDI, Unicamp, and NIPE, Scaling Up the Ethanol Program in Brazil. Assumed a 
conversion factor of 20 gallons of ethanol per tonne of sugarcane feedstock to compute gal/acre. A “high” potential 
refers to ethanol yields that are higher than current industry averages, while “good” refers to good quality land and 
productivity that is about equal to the current average. Explanations for “Average” and “Inadequate” were not 
provided.  
 
 7 
1.1.2.1 Agricultural Residues 
 We estimated how much crop residue could potentially be produced, and of that, how 
much could be removed or harvested to determine the total amount that will be available to 
produce ethanol in 2022.  The amount of residue that can be harvested is limited by how much 
residue must be left on the field to maintain soil health and by the mechanical efficiency 
(inefficiency) of the harvesting operation.  We discuss harvesting limitations due to maintaining 
soil health below, while mechanical efficiencies, storage, and transport issues are discussed in 
section 1.3 of this DRIA.  Feedstock costs are discussed in Chapter 4 of the DRIA.   
 Corn (Zea mays L.) and wheat are receiving the most attention across the industry due to 
their concentrated production areas and because between them they generate about the majority 
of total residue that’s produced.  This also means they will more likely be able to support 
commercial scale production.  In aggregate, the other residues provide fairly significant 
quantities of material, but because they are spread out, e.g., less densely planted both in the field 
and in a county or state, they are viewed as less likely to support commercial operations.  Later, 
we discuss how these other lower-quantity residue crops may supplement the larger operations.   
 We analyzed various reports on the availability of agricultural residues.  These are 
summarized in Table 1.1-5.  The agricultural residue estimates in Table 1.1-5 are based on 
historical/recent data, and thus, could be considered conservative in comparison to the future 
(2022) which would typically have higher crops yields or increases in acres harvested.   
Table 1.1-5.  Estimated Agricultural Residue Feedstock Availability (per year)21,22,23,24,25 
Source Total Available Total Sustainably Removable Crops Analyzed
USDA > 500 million tons not specified
Eight leading U.S. crops, e.g. corn, wheat, 
soy, oats, barley, rice (did not specify other 
two)
NREL 495 million tons 173 million tons
Corn, wheat, soybeans, cotton, sorghum, 
barley, oats, rice, rye, canola, beans, peas, 
peanuts, potatoes, safflower, sunflower, 
sugarcane, and flaxseed
Gallagher not specified 156 million tons Corn, wheat, sorghum, barley, oats, rice
Walsh not specified
144 million tons at $40/dry ton, ~150 
million tons at >$40/dry ton for corn; 7 
million tons at $40/dry ton, ~10-11 million 
tons at >$40/dry ton for wheat Corn and wheat
Graham 216 million tons
65 million tons at 30% removal rate and 
current conditions; 112 million tons at 50% 
removal rate using no-till conditions Corn 
 
 Based on our FASOM modeling, corn stover was chosen as the most economical 
agricultural feedstock to be used to produce ethanol in order to meet the 16 Bgal EISA cellulosic 
biofuel requirement.  We estimate that by 2022 greater than 400 million tons of corn stover could 
be produced, with approximately 82 million tons of that needed to produce 7.8 billion gallons of 
 8 
cellulosic biofuel.B  See Table 1.1-6.  Smaller amounts will be required from sugarcane (bagasse) 
as well as sweet sorghum to produce another 1.3 billion gallons of cellulosic biofuel.C  Thus, the 
residue collected to meet EISA would be a small fraction of the total residue produced.  See 
section 1.5.3.4 for more details on the use of agricultural residues for our cellulosic plant siting 
analysis. 
                                                 
B
 Assuming conversion yield of 94 gal/dry ton 
C
 Bagasse is technically a by-product of the sugarcane process and not an agricultural residue, we include it here for 
simplification 
 9 
Table 1.1-6.  
FASOM Estimated Agricultural Residue Feedstock Availability in 2022 (million tons)D 
State/Region Total
Alabama 0.0 1.9 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.2 2.2
Arizona 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.4 0.7
Arkansas 0.0 2.7 0.0 6.3 1.5 2.8 13.3
California 0.4 1.6 0.1 1.9 0.1 3.1 7.3
Colorado 0.3 5.5 0.0 0.0 0.4 7.7 13.9
Connecticut 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Delaware 0.0 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.3
Florida 0.0 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.2
Georgia 0.0 5.7 0.1 0.0 0.1 0.3 6.2
Idaho 1.3 0.4 0.0 0.0 0.0 4.5 6.2
Illinois 0.0 70.6 0.0 0.0 0.4 4.1 75.1
Indiana 0.0 34.6 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.8 36.4
Iowa 0.0 79.2 0.4 0.0 0.2 0.1 79.9
Kansas 0.0 16.1 0.0 0.0 7.5 23.2 47.0
Kentucky 0.1 7.5 0.0 0.0 0.1 1.6 9.3
Louisiana 0.0 0.5 0.0 4.0 0.1 0.1 4.8
Maine 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.2
Maryland 0.1 2.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.6 2.8
Massachusetts 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Michigan 0.0 9.6 0.1 0.0 0.0 2.6 12.3
Minnesota 0.2 40.3 0.3 0.0 0.0 3.8 44.6
Mississippi 0.0 4.6 0.0 0.7 0.5 1.2 7.0
Missouri 0.0 12.9 0.1 0.4 3.0 2.4 18.8
Montana 1.1 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 6.5 7.8
Nebraska 0.0 59.6 0.1 0.0 1.2 6.7 67.5
Nevada 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1
NewHampshire 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
NewJersey 0.0 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.3
NewMexico 0.0 0.5 0.0 0.0 0.7 1.6 2.8
NewYork 0.0 2.1 0.3 0.0 0.0 0.5 3.0
NorthCarolina 0.1 4.6 0.1 0.0 0.1 1.5 6.4
NorthDakota 1.8 5.7 0.2 0.0 0.0 14.0 21.7
Ohio 0.0 18.2 0.2 0.0 0.0 4.0 22.4
Oklahoma 0.0 0.3 0.0 0.0 0.8 9.7 10.9
Oregon 0.2 0.2 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.6 1.1
Pennsylvania 0.1 3.2 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.7 4.2
RhodeIsland 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
SouthCarolina 0.0 1.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.0 2.2
SouthDakota 0.1 17.1 0.2 0.0 0.5 6.8 24.7
Tennessee 0.0 2.7 0.0 0.0 0.1 0.9 3.8
Texas 0.0 15.2 0.1 1.2 5.5 3.5 25.6
Utah 0.1 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.0 1.2
Vermont 0.0 0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.2
Virginia 0.1 1.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.7 1.9
Washington 1.1 0.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 6.9 8.8
WestVirginia 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.1
Wisconsin 0.0 14.2 0.2 0.0 0.0 1.2 15.7
Wyoming 0.2 0.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.4 0.9
Total 7.7 444.4 3.1 14.6 23.1 128.8 621.8
Rice Sorghum WheatBarley Corn Oats
 
 
                                                 
D
 Assumes straw to grain ratio for barley and wheat (1.5:1) and for corn, oats, rice, and sorghum (1:1); Also assumes 
0.024 ton/bu for barley and oats, 0.028 ton/bu for corn, 0.05 ton/cwt for rice and sorghum, and 0.03 on/bu for wheat. 
 10 
Soil Health 
 In terms of soil health, residues perform many positive functions for agricultural soils.  
Recent studies and reviews have attempted to address these issues.  Despite a few shortcomings, 
existing research can be used to some extent to guide practices or make estimates, especially for 
corn stover harvest in the Corn Belt, which has been studied more extensively than the other 
residues except, perhaps, wheat.   
 In a review by five USDA Agricultural Research Service (ARS) scientists, Wilhelm et al. 
acknowledged the complexity of interactions between soil type, climate, and management when 
considering crop residue effects on soil.  They recommended that removal rates be based on 
regional yield, climatic conditions and cultural practices, with no specific rates given.26  Using 
the Revised Universal Soil Loss Equation (RUSLE) technology and the Wind Erosion Equation 
(WEQ), Nelson predicted safe residue removal rates for minimizing soil loss in the Eastern and 
Midwestern U.S.  These predictions varied widely over time and location as a result of the 
complex interactions discussed by Wilhelm et al. 27,28  In another recent review, sponsored by the 
U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), Mann et al. concluded that before specific recommendations 
could be made, more information was needed on the long term effects of residue harvest, 
including: 1) water quality; 2) soil biota; 3) transformations of different forms of soil organic 
carbon (SOC); and 4) subsoil SOC dynamics.29  Current USDA Natural Resource Conservation 
Service (NRCS) practice standards for residue management shy away from specific residue 
quantities and point to the use of the RUSLE2 model for guidance (without specifics on how to 
do so).30  Despite broad recognition of the need for specific guidelines for residue removal, none 
yet exist.  
 With the upsurge in biofuels and the obvious prospects of removing significant quantities 
of residue, many questions remain regarding the long-term effects on soils of residue removal.  
Residues haven’t yet been removed at the contemplated rates over a period sufficiently long for 
the effects to be clearly determined.  Another difficulty is that while the effects of removing a 
residue may appear to one observer to have affected the soil in a certain manner, it may not be 
completely clear that the observed effects were totally related to the residue removal or, were in 
fact related to a change or to combinations of changes in other variables that were simply missed.  
A second observer may view the same results in an honest, but different manner.  There are so 
many variables with so many different interactions among them that assigning effects is very 
difficult at best.  There simply are no real-world data available for determining long-term effects.   
Nevertheless, we can describe some of the interactions that take place and how they can 
potentially affect soil health. 
Soil Erosion 
 Soil erosion is an extremely important national issue.  Most, if not all, agricultural 
cropland in the United States experiences some degree of soil erosion each year due to rainfall 
(water) and/or wind forces.  Rainfall erosion (sheet and rill) occurs when rain directly strikes the 
soil, dislodging particles in the top layer.E  When soil becomes saturated, particles are 
                                                 
E
 rill: A small intermittent watercourse with steep sides, usually only a few inches deep;  
www.hancockcoingov.org/surveyor/drainage_glossary_of_terms.asp.  
 11 
transported down the slope of the field.  Soil erosion due to wind occurs in much the same 
manner as rainfall with wind forces dislodging soil particles and carrying them along and above 
the field surface (creep and saltation) or suspending them above the field.F  While eroded soil 
does not disappear, the erosion process moves soil particles to other locations in the field (either 
downslope or downwind) where they can be transferred into waterways or onto non-croplands.   
 The amount of soil erosion that agricultural cropland experiences is a function of many 
factors: field operations (field preparation, tillage, etc.) in preparation for the next crop, timing of 
field operations, present throughout the year, soil type, field characteristics such as field slope, 
and the amount of residue (cover) left on the field from harvest until the next crop planting. Crop 
rotation cover provided by agricultural crop residues, both fallen and standing, helps to minimize 
rainfall and wind energy as it strikes or blows across the ground as well as  helping to keep soil 
particles from being transported after they have been dislodged.   Climatic conditions such as 
rainfall, wind, temperature, etc. must be accounted for.  Studies predict that up to 30% of surface 
residue can be removed from some no-till systems without increased erosion or runoff.   
 The NRCS has established tolerable soil loss limits (T values) for all soil types in all 
counties throughout the United States.  The tolerable soil loss values denote the maximum rate of 
soil erosion that can occur for a particular soil type that does not lead to prolonged soil 
deterioration and/or loss of productivity.  Tolerable soil loss limits take into account the rate of 
topsoil formation, role of topsoil formation, loss of nutrients, erosion rate at which gully erosion 
would commence, and potential erosion-control factors that farmers would be able to implement.  
However, T values are not a function of the type of crop grown.  
Soil Tilth 
 Another important aspect associated with soil conservation involves soil tilth.  Soil tilth is 
defined as the physical condition of the soil as related to its ease of tillage, fitness as a seed bed, 
impedance to seedling emergence and root penetration, and all other physical conditions that 
influence crop development.  Tilth depends upon soil granulation and its stability (soil 
workability) as well as organic matter content, moisture content, porosity, water retention, degree 
of aeration, rate of water infiltration, drainage, and capillary-water capacity, all of which are 
affected by crop residue removal.  Preliminary values of required tilth have been estimated by 
the NRCS.    
Tillage 
 Various tillage operations are associated with management of agricultural crop residues 
and planting preparation throughout the year.  Type and number of tillage operations employed 
for any particular crop from the time of harvest until the next planting have a tremendous effect 
on the amount of soil lost to erosion during the year, and hence, the amount of residue that can 
possibly be removed for energy purposes.  It must be noted that even though crop residues may 
be used for energy purposes, the farmer is, first and foremost, in the business of producing grain. 
Therefore, he will be concerned with using those tillage operations that will provide him with the 
                                                 
F
  saltation: the movement of sand-sized particles by a skipping and bouncing action in the direction the wind is 
blowing uizlet.com/print/10948/ 
 12 
highest possible yield at the next harvest, and not necessarily those that tend to maximize erosion 
control on his lands.31 
In summary, all agricultural cropland upon which nearly any crop is grown within a 
particular county can exhibit a wide variation in soil erodbility, field slope and length, climate 
conditions, and management practices.  Within any one particular county there can be many 
different soil types (50 or more) used to grow agricultural crops.  In addition, and possibly more 
importantly, not all soil types within a county may be suitable for agricultural crop production.  
Some soils possess characteristics that make them highly susceptible to erosion that may not be 
able to sustain certain cropping practices.  Production of conventional agricultural crops on these 
lands may severely and/or permanently reduce the soil’s ability to provide sustained, economical 
production.  For this reason, the NRCS implemented a land capability classification (LCC) that 
ranges from I (one) to VIII (eight) that is applied to all soils within a county.   
Organic Matter, Carbon, and Nutrients  
 With added nitrogen fertilizers, residues can increase soil organic matter (SOM). 
However, roots appear to be the largest contributor to new SOM, making residues less important 
for carbon accrual.  Residue removal leading to higher erosion and runoff rates would greatly 
decrease SOM and nutrients.  Residue harvest would also require increased fertilizer inputs to 
make up for nutrients removed in the plant material.  When returned to the land, crop residue 
also replenishes soil organic carbon (SOC) that typically has already been reduced 30 to 50% of 
precultivation levels through crop production activities.  Soil organic carbon retains and recycles 
nutrients, improves soil structure, enhances water exchange characteristics and aeration, and 
sustains microbial life within the soil.  It’s been reported that crop yield and the value of 
environmental services (C and N sequestration) were greater for soils with greater SOC.  Limited 
research has shown that removing stover reduces grain and stover yield of subsequent crops and 
further lowers soil organic matter levels.32 
Beneficial and Deleterious Soil Organisms   
 Residue removal can result in detrimental changes in many biological soil quality 
indicators including soil carbon, microbial activity, fungal biomass and earthworm populations, 
indicating reduced soil function. Some disease-producing organisms are enhanced by residue 
removal, others by residue retention, depending on crop and region.   
Available Water and Drought Resistance  
 Residue cover can reduce evaporation from the soil surface, thereby conserving moisture 
and increasing the number of days a crop can survive in drought conditions.  Improved soil 
physical properties related to crop residues, such as reduced bulk density, e.g., the soil is looser 
and lighter, and greater aggregate stability, also lead to better water infiltration and retention.   
 13 
Soil Temperature and Crop Yield   
 In colder climates, residues are linked to reduced yields due to lower soil temperatures 
resulting in poor germination.  Stubble mulching, as opposed to residue chopping, can help 
overcome this problem.  Even though residue-associated yield reductions have been found on 
poorly drained, fine–textured soils, these soils often have low erosion risk and residues might 
safely be removed.   
Summary 
 Despite the many important benefits of crop residues, research shows their effects can 
vary.  For instance, some reports showed lower yields in systems with high crop residues due to 
increased disease or poor germination; others reported higher yields when soil moisture is 
limiting.  Other studies suggest that residues do not contribute significantly to soil carbon. Many 
studies found that additional N fertilizer is needed when residues are left on soils to avoid N 
uptake (immobilization) from soil or allow for soil carbon accrual.  For appropriate residue 
removal recommendations, the conditions leading to these varied effects of residues must be 
elucidated. 
 Soil health as related to residue removal is an extremely complex issue for which, as yet, 
there are no specific guidelines for residue removal.  Wrong decisions, carried out over extended 
periods could have far reaching deleterious effects.  Sustainable residue removal rates for biofuel 
production vary by system, according to such factors as management and cropping practice, crop 
yield, climate, topography, soil type and existing soil quality.  Keeping in mind that gravimetric 
rates are not the same as percent soil cover (% mass is not the same as % coverage), appropriate 
conversion is necessary and varies by crop and region.  While areas with low slopes and high 
yields may support residue harvest, in many areas the residue amounts required to maintain soil 
quality could be even higher than current practices.  What is meant by ‘high’ and ‘low’ slopes 
has yet to be absolutely determined, which determination also depends on soil type and other 
cropping practices.  Removal rates will need to be reduced as climates become warmer or more 
humid, for lower C:N residue or lower yielding crops, as soil disturbance (e.g. tillage) increases, 
or as soils become coarser textured, compared to the conditions in which most studies occurred 
(in the U.S. Midwest Corn Belt for no-till corn).33  The most important aspect of this is that any 
or all of the interacting variables that determine how much residue can be removed, can, and 
usually do, change from year-to-year, across both wide regions of the country as well as across 
single counties and farms.  A change in one variable nearly always changes how all the variables 
interact.   
 Given all the issues we’ve discussed regarding residue removal and soil health, rather 
than try to predict, county-by-county how much residue will be available, we assumed in our 
FASOM modeling that the available amount will be somewhere between 0% and 50%, at least 
until the issues we’ve been discussing are settled.  We based the amount removable based on the 
tillage practice: 0% removed for conventional tillage, 35% removed for conservational tillage, 
and 50% removed for no-till.  We believe that given the uncertainties in removal rates, our 
assumptions are reasonable. 
 
 14 
1.1.2.2 Forest Residues  
  
 There is a substantial amount of forestland here in the U.S.  It is estimated that 749 
million acres, or one-third, of the U.S. land area is forested. Of this forested land, two-thirds (504 
million acres) is considered timberland which contains more than 20 ft3 of woody material per 
acre – the other one-third of the forest land contains less than 20 ft3 of woody material per acre.  
Most of this forested land, 58 percent, is privately owned, another 29 percent of the forest land is 
publicly owned, and 13 percent is owned by the forest industry.  A higher percentage of the land 
is privately owned in the East, and a higher percentage of the land is publicly owned in the West. 
 
Of the 749 million acres of forestland, 77 are reserved as parks or wilderness and would 
likely be considered off limits for harvesting for biomass.  Also, 168 million acres of timberland 
is believed to be not suitable for harvesting for biomass because of poor soil, lack of moisture, 
high elevation, or rockiness.   
 
The U.S. forestry industry harvests a portion of this forest land to produce its products, 
and in the process of doing so, it generates woody residues that can be recovered for the purpose 
of producing cellulosic biofuels.  Major sources of solid waste wood generated in the U.S. 
include forestry residues, primary and secondary mill residues, and urban wood residues.  In 
addition, forests which are not currently harvested for wood could be thinned.  This thinning of 
the forests would not just be to provide biomass, but as part of a strategy which may be 
beneficial for the forests, or to avoid external costs such as forest fires.  Each of these categories 
is further described below: 
 
Forestry residues 
 
In-forest operations generally include four major sources of materials: logging residues, 
other removals, fuelwood, and fuel treatment wood.34  In the process of removing, or logging, the 
larger woody portion of the trees (5 inch diameter and greater), the logging industry creates 
logging residues.  Logging residues typically include tops of harvested trees and unwanted trees 
cut or knocked down and left on site, including dead and cull trees.  Other removals are growing 
stock and other sources cut and burned or otherwise destroyed in the process of converting forest 
land to non-forest uses, such as for making way for new housing or industrial developments.  
They also include growing stock removed in forestry cultural operations.  Forest residues are 
also available from fuelwood, which is harvested wood used in the residential and industrial 
sectors for energy.  Thus, forest residues are already being created or harvested today.   
 
Primary and secondary mill residues 
 
Harvested wood from forests is converted into consumer products at wood processing 
mills.  Primary mills convert roundwood products (i.e., tree trunks and logs) into other wood 
products, including sawmills that produce lumber, pulp mills, veneer mills, etc.  Secondary mills 
use the products from primary mills to produce other products such as millwork, containers and 
pallets, buildings and mobile homes, furniture, flooring and paper and paper products.  While 
primary and secondary mills are typically separate facilities, both primary wood processing and 
secondary conversion to finished consumer products can occur in the same facility.35 
 15 
 
Both primary and secondary mills produce residue and waste woody material.  For 
example, the residue generated by primary mills includes bark, slabs and edgings, sawdust and 
peeler cares.  This waste material could be used as feedstock to produce biofuels.   
 
Urban wood residues 
 
The two principal sources of urban wood residues are municipal solid waste (MSW) and 
construction and demolition (C&D) debris.  Municipal solid waste contains solid wood from 
both wastewood and yard trimmings.  Yard trimmings include herbaceous material and woody 
trimmings.  Information on the composition of MSW is limited. However, it has been assumed in 
one report that approximately two thirds of the total volume consists of woody material.36  
Construction waste is made of contemporary building materials with little contamination.  
Sources include new residential construction, new nonresidential building construction and 
repair and remodeling of existing buildings.  Demolition waste, on the other hand, is a 
heterogeneous mixture of material from demolishing buildings and structures and is difficult to 
separate as it is often contaminated.  The potential contribution of urban wood residues to the 
production of biofuels will be addressed in the section 1.1.2.3 of this DRIA.   
 
The Thinning of Forests 
 
While the above categories are associated with existing forest harvesting or other removal 
activities, the thinning of forests would largely be a new activity.  Many U.S. forests have 
become overgrown and very dense with forest material, and a portion of this overgrown forest 
will die, dry out and decay.  This decaying forest material can provide a source of fuel for forest 
fires that are expensive to fight or contain.  Over the previous 10 years forest fires have 
consumed 49 million acres and cost the U.S. taxpayer $8.2 billion. 37   This cost does not include 
the additional cost due to the loss of human life, the loss of personal property and the impact on 
the environment.  Thinning forests involves the removal of excess forest material from the 
forests that could help to prevent some of these forest fires, or at least help to reduce their 
impact.  Also, thinning these forests to prevent them from becoming overly dense could 
potentially help them to remain healthier.  There are many thinning operations today, but the 
material is burned or left to decompose instead.  The removed excess woody material from 
overgrown forests could provide a source of biomass for producing biofuels. 
 
Despite the availability of woody residues for producing cellulosic biofuels, there are 
several obstacles for woody residues that are not present when utilizing feedstocks such as 
agricultural residues.  For instance, forestlands will likely be managed less intensively than 
agricultural lands because forests provide multiple-use benefits (e.g., wildlife habitat, recreation, 
and ecological and environmental services).38  This in effect makes it more difficult to take steps 
to increase the productivity of forest areas.  Also, there are factors or site conditions that can 
affect tree growth, including poor soils, lack of moisture, high elevation, and rockiness.  The 
limits caused by some of these factors would likely not be overcome, resulting in lower 
productivity than what could be theoretically possible.  Also, a couple of these factors, the high 
elevation and rockiness, results in areas of forestland which is inaccessible by forestry 
equipment.  Forestry residues are also demanded for other purposes other than for production of 
 16 
a transportation fuel (e.g. for process fuel).  These reasons would make it more challenging to 
collect and use woody residues in large quantities compared to agricultural residues.   
 
On the other hand, there may be some benefits to the use of woody residues.  One 
example is the removal of excess forestry biomass to reduce the risk of fires and/or to improve 
forest health.  In addition, resources such as primary and secondary mill residues and urban 
wood residues are already collected at the processing facility and it seems probable that some 
cellulosic facilities could be co-located to mills and/or landfills to increase the likelihood of 
having close and steady feedstocks readily available.  Some states may also be endowed with 
larger wood resources than agricultural residues.   
 
The following sections further describe some of the additional factors to consider when 
determining the potential availability of woody feedstocks. 
 
Harvest, Transport, and Storage 
 
The largest portion of woody material to produce biofuels is available as forestry 
residues.  However, unlike residues such as primary or secondary mill residues and urban wood 
residues that could be available on-site at a processing facility, forestry residues would need to 
be collected and transported similarly to conventional forest products.  The amount of residues 
potentially available is a function of harvest amount, logging method, and type and location of 
timberlands.39  In addition, residue availability is limited by economic factors.  According to one 
study, “the actual operations of harvesting, collecting, processing and transporting loose forest 
residues are costly and present an economic barrier to recovery and utilization of wood for 
energy”.40  Thus, there are still challenges that need to be addressed before large-scale use of 
forestry residues is possible.    
 
Currently, the most cost-effective method of recovering forest residue for biomass is in-
woods chipping.41  This method is suitable for operations where there is whole-tree skidding to 
roadside, good road access to chip vans and chippers, and sufficient biomass volume per acre.  
However, in-woods chipping systems are not as effective when ground-based skidding is 
restricted or when there are no merchantable products other than biomass.  In addition, the chip 
vans designed to haul wood chips were built for highway use and often do not have sufficient 
suspension systems for remote forest roads.  There are also high costs for wood grinders with 
low production rates.42  Fortunately, there have been developments in alternative methods to 
reduce the costs of biomass collection systems.   
 
Much of the focus has been on developing methods of densifying residues in order to 
increase productivity of handling operations (i.e. hauling, skidding, and loading).  New 
approaches to removing forestry residues are currently being evaluated (e.g. slash bundling 
machines, horizontal grinders, and roll on/off container transport).  One of the advantages of 
using slash bundling machines, for example, is the ability to store biomass longer than in chip 
form.  Storing biomass at roadside in the form of biomass bundles could provide a more secure 
and stable biomass supply than with chips which are smaller and have greater surface area for 
potential weathering. The use of horizontal grinders was also found to be the best at reducing 
 17 
bundles.  Utilizing roll on/off containers allows for recovery of residue from difficult-to-access 
locations and in such situations could be competitive with regular highway chip vans.    
 
While these are just some of the ways to improve recovery operations for forestry 
residues, these methods still have challenges.  For example, there are some difficulties with 
bundling of brittle residues or short, large diameter pieces.  In addition, some residues may 
include rocks or trash that can result in additional saw maintenance and reduced utilization.  
With millions of acres of forest, there is no single residue treatment option that will meet the 
needs of all situations.  Forest land managers will need to weigh the different options for dealing 
with forest residues to determine the most cost-effective means for residue removal in their 
specific locations. 
 
In making estimates of potential forest residue availability, certain assumptions about 
accessibility and recoverability are typically made.  For example, some studies assume that 
residue collection is completed at the same time as harvesting, meaning that all residues are 
regarded as one hundred percent accessible.43 This might become possible due to integrated 
harvesting systems which could harvest forest biomass in a single pass operation such that 
residual forest residue for producing biofuels could be produced along with conventional forest 
products.44  Other estimates for accessibility have been lower, with about sixty percent of North 
American temperate forest considered accessible (not reserved or high-elevation and within 15 
miles of major transportation infrastructure).45  In terms of recoverability, some studies have 
assumed sixty-five percent of logging residues and fifty percent of other removal residues as 
being recoverable while others report an average potential recovery of sixty percent and as much 
as sixty-five percent when utilizing newer technology. 46  
 
Sustainable Removal 
 
 While there has been some discussion of sustainable removal practices for crop residues, 
there has been less review on the topic for woody residues.  As forest residues have been 
traditionally left in the forest to decompose, there remains much to be learned about the 
harvesting of forest residues in a sustainable way that still leaves sufficient nutrients to maintain 
the forest and to replenish the soil.  This is reiterated in reports on woody residue removal which 
emphasize the need for more detailed studies on the range of ecological effects, from wildlife to 
soils.   
  
 Currently, practices for how much forest residue shall be maintained in the forest to 
maintain forest health vary substantially.  For example, a district for one study on the removal of 
forestry residues required about 5 tons per acre be left whereas other districts had no such 
requirements.47  In a different source, a summary of national forest land management plans from 
1995 indicated about 60 percent of western national forest timberland base to be suitable for 
timber production operations.48 This issue is not only applicable in the United States, but also in 
Europe, where the use of forest biomass for energy is also being considered.  A Swedish study 
showed that the main incentive for forest owners not to sell forestry residues was concerns for 
soil fertility.49  Therefore, although there have been limitations to the amount of residue suitable 
for removal there has yet to be consensus over the optimal amount. 
 
 18 
 Yet another issue regarding sustainable removal is the affect of forest residue extraction 
on biodiversity.  The removal of forest residue may affect biodiversity because lower amounts of 
wood in the forest imply fewer habitats for species using wood for breeding.  Species may also 
be threatened because certain insects colonize in wood that may be burned for energy purposes.  
Quantitative predictions about how much habitat loss various species can tolerate are almost 
impossible to make.  Instead, one study recommended making qualitative predictions on which 
types of habitats or wood types are most threatened.  For instance, this study examined Sweden’s 
forest fuel extractions and concluded that coniferous wood can be harvested to a rather large 
extent, whereas deciduous tree species should be retained to a larger degree.50  As different 
regions will certainly have species specific to their own regions, more research is necessary to 
determine appropriate recommendations on maintaining biodiversity.  
 
 Another issue that has been considered is the occurrence of soil disturbance due to the 
use of forest residue collection equipment.  Studies have shown that the growth of woody plants 
and yields of harvestable plant products are decreased by soil compaction from residue collection 
equipment, because of the combined effects of high soil strength, decreased infiltration of water 
and poor soil aeration.51  In another study, the use of a residue bundling machine caused some 
measurable amounts of soil disturbance and an increase in “soil exposed” area at some 
locations.52  Thus, it is important to limit the severity of soil disturbances with minimal passes 
and relatively low ground pressure. 
 
Energy Content of Forest Residue and Biofuel  
 
 Woody material obtained by the harvesting or thinning of forest is somewhat more 
energy dense compared to other forms of biomass.  On its Biomass Program webpage, the 
Department of Energy lists the higher heating values (lower heating values were not available) 
for many different types of biomass for dry samples.  These values for woody biomass are 
summarized in Table 1.1-7. 
 
Table 1.1-7.  Energy Content of Forest Material 
Tree name Higher Heating Value 
(BTU/lb dry wood) 
Hybrid Popular 8,384 - 8,491 
Black Locust 8,409 - 8,582 
Eucalyptus 8,384 - 8,432 
American Sycamore 8,354 - 8,481 
Eastern Cottonwood 8,431 
Monterey Pine 8,422 
  
 Because woody material is energy dense, it can produce a large amount of renewable 
fuels per ton of feedstock.  We assumed that 89 gallons of ethanol could be produced per each 
ton of dry (15 percent moisture) woody feedstock in 2022. 
 
 19 
Quantity of Forest Residue 
 
 The quantity of forest residue available to produce biofuels was estimated by two 
different studies.  We summarize those two studies, and then summarize data which we received 
directly from the U.S. Forest Service 
 
Billion Ton Study 
 
 A landmark assessment of the potential biomass available from existing forest land in the 
U.S. was recently conducted by the USDA and the Department of Energy (DOE).53  This 
landmark assessment was titled “Biomass as Feedstock for a Bioenergy and Bioproducts 
Industry:  The Technical Feasibility of a Billion Ton Supply,” which is also known as the Billion 
Ton Study.  We reviewed this study and are summarizing much of the information contained in 
that report here because it is very useful background about U.S. forest land and its potential 
contribution to biofuels. 
 
 The total forest inventory is estimated to be about 20.2 billion dry tons.  The report 
authors estimated that about 2.2 percent of the total forest inventory is harvested each year, 
which corresponds to 444 million dry tons.  This removal rate is estimated to be less than the 
annual average forest growth, which suggests, at least on an aggregate basis, that this removal 
rate is sustainable.  It is estimated that 78 percent of this removal was for roundwood products 
(sawlogs, pulpwood, veneer logs and fuel wood), 16 percent was logging residue and about 6 
percent was classified as other removals.  Thus, the Billion Ton study authors estimate that 67 
million dry tons of logging residue would potentially be available for biofuel production, which 
is comprised of 49 million dry tons of primary logging residue, and 18 million dry tons of other 
removals.  The Billion Ton study estimates that 65 percent of the total logging and other residue 
would be recovered for use.  The two reasons cited for not collecting the other 35 percent is that 
some of the logging residue is comprised of small pieces, such as small branches and leaves, 
which would not be economically recoverable, and that it would be necessary leave behind a 
portion of the logging residue would be to protect the sustainability of the forest as well as the 
wildlife which thrives in the forest.  For these reasons, the Billion Ton Study authors estimated 
that 41 million dry tons of forest residue could be sustainably removed from the U.S. forests as 
byproduct from existing logging operations.  Virtually all this removal is from privately owned 
land where the logging operations occur today. 
 
 Additional forest residue is available downstream of the logging operations at mills.  In 
the process of making their products, primary wood processing mills create some waste or 
residue.  However, almost all of this waste wood is recovered or burned for process heat.  For 
example, the bark from the logged wood is burned as fuel or converted into mulch.  However, 
the Billion Ton authors estimated that just under 2 million dry tons per year of residue would be 
available from the primary wood processing mills as feedstock for producing biofuels.   
 
 The Billion Ton study estimates that additional wood waste could also be available from 
secondary wood processing mills, which refine crude wood into more refined products.  The 
report authors could not find any data on how much residue is produced by these secondary 
wood processing mills, however, a study of these facilities did provide an estimate.  
 20 
Approximately 15.6 million dry tons per year would be available from the smaller of these 
secondary wood processing mills, however, the report estimated that only 40 percent, or 6 
million dry tons per year, would be available for biofuels production. 
 
 Another industry which processes the harvested wood is the pulp and paper mills.  These 
companies process wood into fiber to make paper and cardboard.  Most of the pulp and paper 
mills use the Kraft process or sulfate pulping process which converts half of the woody material 
into fiber, while the other half is a byproduct termed black liquor.  The black liquor contains a 
substantial amount of biomass.  The pulp and paper industry is already using all of this black 
liquor, plus purchasing and using some fossil fuels, to generate the electricity and heat that it 
needs for its plants.  Therefore, the authors of the Billion Ton Study estimated that there would 
not be any residue available from the pulp and paper industry to produce biofuels. 
 
  The Billion Ton study estimates that another potential source of biomass from forests 
would be the selective thinning of forests to help reduce the risk of fire, or to facilitate the 
fighting of fires in the case that fires break out (as discussed above).  Using a forest evaluation 
tool called the Fuel Treatment Evaluator, the Forest Service has estimated tree densities for 
forests all across the U.S. and has identified forests which contain excess woody material.  The 
forests which contain excess woody material are candidates for providing additional biomass for 
producing biofuels.  The Forest Service has estimated that the total amount of excess woody 
material to be 8.4 billion dry tons.   
 
 The Forest Service next estimated the portion of this excess woody material that could be 
harvested for biofuels production.  Despite the fact that this inventory exists today, the Billion 
Ton Study authors assumed that this excess woody inventory would be used over a 30 year 
period to reflect a sustainable removal rate.  This assumption reduces the total yearly available 
amount of excess woody biomass to 280 million dry tons per year.  Another limiting factor is 
that much of our nations forest is remote, thus, only 60 percent of this excess woody material 
was estimated to be removable for use.  The next assumption made is that the best of this woody 
material, which is the woody material more than 5 inches in diameter and which comprises 70 
percent of this material, would be used for feedstock for the logging industry.  Thus, the 
remaining 30 percent would be residue that would serve as feedstock for the biofuels industry.  
Finally, the last assumption made is that of the excess woody material harvested, 15 percent 
would be lost between harvesting and use, thus the total amount of woody biomass was adjusted 
to be 15 percent lower.  These assumptions result in 18 million dry tons of additional woody 
biomass that could be used to supply the biofuels industry annually, and 42 million dry tons that 
would supply the logging industry. 
 
 As shown below in Table 1.1-8, the Billion Ton Study estimates that a total of 67 million 
try tonnes per year would be available from non-urban forests.  
 
 21 
Table 1.1-8. 
Quantity of Forest Biomass Available for Producing Biofuels 
 Quantity  
(million dry tons) 
Logging Residue 41 
Primary Mill Residue 2 
Secondary Mill Residue 6 
Forest Thinnings 18 
Total 67 
 
 The Billion Ton Study authors projected that forest harvesting and mill activity will 
increase in the future, thus increasing the amount of forest residues that would be available for 
producing biofuels.  The authors estimated the future forest residue supply in the year 2050 and 
concluded that the logging residue is expected to increase from 41 million dry tons to 64 million 
dry tons.  Also in 2050, the primary and secondary mill residue quantity is projected to increase 
from a total of 8 million dry tons per year to a total of 24 million dry tons per year.  No estimate 
was provided for any increase, or decrease, in the amount of forest woody material that would be 
available from thinning forests.  If the projected 39 million dry ton increases in forest residue 
comes to fruition, then the total amount of forest residue that would be available for producing 
biofuels in 2050 would be 106 million dry tons per year.  We are primarily interested in 
compliance with the RFS2 biofuels standard in 2022, which is just over 1/3rd of the way between 
today and 2050.  Thus, by interpolating the projected future forest residue in 2022 relative to 
current levels and those in 2050, the report supports the conclusion that 79 million dry tons of 
forest residue would be available in 2022 .   
 
U.S. Cellulosic Biomass Study 
 
 Another estimate for the amount of forest residue that could be used to produce biofuels 
was made by Marie Walsh, formerly of the Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL).54  The 
report was titled “US Cellulosic Biomass Supplies and Distribution” and it is dated January of 
2008.  This report also uses the Forest Service data base for its estimates, so its conclusions 
resemble those of the Billion Ton study.  However, an important difference between this 
Cellulosic Biomass Study and the Billion Ton Study is that Marie Walsh estimated a cost curve 
for amount of biomass available for her Cellulosic Biomass study for multiple future years. 
 
 In this report, Marie Walsh estimates that 63 million dry tons of logging residue is 
created in the lower 48 states.  Of this total amount of logging residue, 65 percent is estimated to 
be accessible by roads, and not all the accessible logging residue is considered recoverable 
because some of it is too small to recover.  This study also estimates the cost for recovering this 
available logging residue for future years for five year intervals through 2030.  The amount of 
logging residue available at different price points and for different years is summarized in Table 
1.1-9.   
 
 22 
Table 1.1-9.  Quantity of Logging Residue Available at Varying Prices 
          
 $20/dt $25/dt $30/dt $35/dt $40/dt $45/dt $50/dt $75/dt $100/dt 
2007 0.06 1.84 6.22 10.89 24.02 31.29 31.29 36.19 38.50 
2010 0.065 1.81 6.41 13.23 29.37 38.70 38.70 45.02 47.89 
2015 0.065 1.95 6.80 13.62 29.99 39.35 39.35 45.71 48.60 
2020 0.067 2.10 7.22 14.41 31.51 41.20 41.20 47.79 50.77 
2025 0.067 2.17 7.46 14.81 32.32 42.19 42.19 48.90 51.95 
2030 0.068 2.25 7.70 15.22 33.12 43.17 43.17 50.01 53.13 
 
 Marie Walsh also identified the quantity of woody material that would be available from 
other removal supplies – trees removed to make way for the construction of buildings.  Marie 
Walsh estimates that a total of approximately 24 million dry tons of forest residue falls within 
this category.  She estimated that perhaps 50 percent of this material would be available for 
biofuel production.  Marie Walsh added the other removal supplies to the logging residue and 
estimated their availability at different price points, increasing the available biomass by 25 
percent.  The combined total is summarized in Table 1.1-10. 
 
Table 1.1-10.   
Price at which Forest Residue and Other Removals are Available for Producing Biofuels 
          
 $20/dt $25/dt $30/dt $35/dt $40/dt $45/dt $50/dt $75/dt $100/dt 
2007 0.09 2.63 10.49 15.16 32.16 41.62 41.62 47.71 50.49 
2010 0.09 2.63 10.76 17.59 38.08 49.17 49.17 56.68 60.03 
2015 0.09 2.79 11.26 18.08 38.87 50.00 50.00 57.56 60.93 
2020 0.09 2.96 11.80 19.00 40.58 52.04 52.04 59.84 63.31 
2025 0.10 3.07 12.15 19.50 41.56 53.21 53.21 61.15 64.68 
2030 0.10 3.17 12.51 30.02 42.55 54.39 54.39 62.47 66.07 
 
 This report also estimates the amount of primary and secondary mill residues available 
for biofuels production.  Like the Billion Ton study, Marie Walsh also concludes that only a very 
small amount of primary mill residue is estimated to be currently unused and available for 
producing biofuels.  She concludes that out of the 88.7 million dry tons of primary mill residue 
which are generated, that only 1.3 million dry tons is not used for fuel, fiber or other sources as 
discussed above.  However, she provides an additional assessment that, at the right price, the 
primary mill residue could be drawn away from these other users of the primary mill residue.  
The assumption is that for fiber uses, the primary mill residue could be drawn away from the 
current users at 35% of the product price.  For other uses, including for fuel, it is assumed that at 
65% of the market price of the raw wood value, the primary mill residue could be purchased 
away from the current users.  Table 1.1-11 below estimates the price that specific estimated 
primary mill residue volumes could be available for producing biofuels.   
 
 23 
Table 1.1-11.   
Price at which Primary Mill Residue is Available for Producing Biofuels 
          
 $20/dt $25/dt $30/dt $35/dt $40/dt $45/dt $50/dt $75/dt $100/dt 
2007 0.43 4.93 6.03 19.34 20.14 41.46 42.38 50.31 51.04 
2010 0.55 5.70 7.29 21.91 22.80 46.03 47.37 56.29 57.33 
2015 0.56 5.93 7.51 22.88 23.77 48.00 49.34 58.55 59.61 
2020 0.58 6.16 7.74 23.85 24.73 49.97 51.31 60.82 61.88 
2025 0.59 6.34 7.93 24.58 25.47 51.46 52.82 62.55 63.61 
2030 0.60 6.52 8.12 25.31 26.20 52.96 54.31 64.28 65.35 
 
 The author also attempted to estimate the amount of secondary mill residue that could be 
available for producing biofuels.  She observed that data is scant on the amount of secondary 
mill residue.  She referenced a study (Rooney, 1998) that estimated that only a very small 
volume of secondary mill residue would be available for producing biofuels.  Of 12.5 million dry 
tons of secondary mill residue which is generated, only 1.2 million dry tons is available for 
producing biofuels.  Unlike the analysis conducted for primary mill residue, the author did not 
attempt to estimate the extent that biofuels producers could bid the secondary mill residue away 
from the current users.     
 
 Marie Walsh also assumes that three very difficult-to-quantify sources of forest material 
could be available as biomass for producing biofuels.  One of these potential sources is the forest 
material that could be available through the thinning of overgrown forests to help reduce the fire 
risk within these forests.  Marie Walsh referenced one study which estimated that 100 to 200 
million acres of overgrown forest could be harvested.  No estimate, however, was provided for 
the amount of this forest material that could be available from forest thinning.   
 
 Another potential source of forest material for biofuel production that the study discussed 
is a portion of the estimated 35.4 million tons of fuel wood used to heat homes and to provide 
heat for industries.  The author cited a report which estimated that fuel wood use decreased from 
1986 to 2000, but began to increase again and is expected to increase through 2050.  This 
presumably means that if the demand for fuel wood is lower than previously, that some of that 
fuel wood could be available for producing biofuels.   However, in this report, Marie Walsh did 
not make any firm estimate for this. 
 
 The Marie Walsh report also discussed that forest pulpwood supply is exceeding demand 
in the Southwest.  The demand of forest pulpwood decreased from 131 to 121 million tons per 
year from 1993 to 2003, and this demand is expected to further decrease through 2020, and some 
have projected that this decrease in demand will continue beyond 2020.  During the period 
between 1993 and 2003, pulpwood acreage and management intensity have increased, which 
suggests that the Southwest is and will continue to be over supplied.  This oversupply of forest 
pulpwood could potentially provide additional biomass to the biofuels industry, although she did 
not provide any firm estimate for this.  
  
 While both of these studies provide quality assessments for the total amount of forest 
residue available for producing biomass, they both have an important limitation as well.  The 
 24 
limitation is that these reports did not assess whether the forest residue in any particular area, 
along with other potential biomass, is of sufficient density to adequately supply a potential 
cellulosic biofuel plant.  This feedstock density assessment must also consider the feedstock 
availability requirements made by cellulosic plant investors or banks, which may choose to 
require that a certain excess amount of feedstock be available to justify the use of that biomass in 
a cellulosic ethanol plant.  Without considering these limitations, these studies may overestimate 
the quantity of biomass that would be truly usable and also the ultimate amount of biofuel that 
could be produced. 
 
U.S. Forest Service Data 
 
 To assess forest residue supply within the feedstock density and supply constraints, we 
obtained county-by-county forest residue data from the U.S. Forest Service.55  The information 
was provided by the subcategories of logging residue, primary mill residue, timberland 
thinnings, and other removals.  The information also included urban forest residue, however, 
because that material is included with the other MSW, we did not consider it here.  Like the 
studies discussed above, the national forest lands are omitted from consideration, and the urban 
forest residue is not considered here, but in the section discussing MSW.  The information was 
also provided at different price points.  The quantities of forest residues are summarized by 
source type in Tables 1.1-12, 1.1-13 and 1.1-14.  To avoid presenting a huge amount of data, we 
aggregated the county data by state, and we are presenting the data at specific price points:  
$30/dry ton, $45/dry ton and $70/dry ton.   
 
 
 25 
Table 1.1-12.   
Volume of Forest Residue Available for Producing Biofuel  
Biomass Available at $30/ton 
Logging Other Timberland Primary Total
Residue Removals Thinnings Mill Residue Quantity
Alabama 2,405,083 507,240 867,038 7,117 3,786,478
Arizona 17,698 44,871 66,171 1,351 130,091
Arkansas 1,703,543 770,985 738,165 12,889 3,225,582
California 669,740 0 1,742,702 65,088 2,477,530
Colorado 18,405 14 0 2,302 20,721
Connecticut 8,391 30,678 20,929 3,949 63,948
Delaware 30,101 24,218 9,835 0 64,155
Florida 1,070,430 515,407 481,893 2,202 2,069,932
Georgia 3,113,907 993,262 1,107,254 45,138 5,259,561
Idaho 253,145 0 83,095 6,006 342,247
Illinois 278,202 235,178 230,863 18,523 762,766
Indiana 562,483 104,173 396,225 10,627 1,073,508
Iowa 112,098 55,160 97,983 159 265,400
Kansas 14,658 88,405 19,353 8,720 131,136
Kentucky 1,027,977 664,358 689,896 55,196 2,437,427
Louisiana 2,634,279 880,585 601,848 30,075 4,146,788
Maine 2,412,877 940 160,628 42,483 2,616,927
Maryland 181,443 830 81,988 17,067 281,327
Massachusetts 70,921 62,087 27,602 0 160,610
Michigan 758,926 244,952 655,280 13,763 1,672,922
Minnesota 697,614 662,985 265,424 26,878 1,652,900
Mississippi 3,097,069 710,142 850,688 95,138 4,753,038
Missouri 774,868 530,292 684,154 79,787 2,069,100
Montana 262,670 0 133,185 9,136 404,990
Nebraska 21,145 18,771 23,414 4,971 68,302
Nevada 29 105 0 0 134
New Hampshire 314,642 348 95,604 7,019 417,613
New Jersey 5,918 77 4,847 1,437 12,279
New Mexico 23,858 2,557 51,796 4,902 83,113
New York 734,006 109,342 326,672 27,390 1,197,410
North Carolina 2,026,330 1,259,265 1,121,627 12,811 4,420,033
North Dakota 2,906 15,202 7,644 265 26,017
Ohio 370,795 18,106 167,351 22,600 578,853
Oklahoma 347,738 197,587 106,086 495 651,906
Oregon 1,520,552 63 1,055,405 16,316 2,592,335
Pennsylvania 1,087,327 1,372 449,956 170,972 1,709,626
Rhode Island 1,769 45,721 5,600 389 53,478
South Carolina 1,429,102 696,577 603,700 1,051 2,730,431
South Dakota 13,944 28,873 5,986 2,294 51,096
Tennessee 633,412 489,840 847,812 187,583 2,158,647
Texas 1,233,553 436,927 371,437 3,021 2,044,938
Utah 5,946 0 19,817 4,437 30,200
Vermont 209,752 37,304 96,790 0 343,845
Virginia 1,483,346 813,600 873,740 39,366 3,210,052
Washington 1,282,288 44 1,850,958 21,446 3,154,736
West Virginia 976,712 49,428 323,306 118,779 1,468,225
Wisconsin 1,137,600 982,264 520,587 60,410 2,700,862
Wyoming 22,685 0 28,100 34,014 84,799
Total 37,061,885 12,330,137 18,970,435 1,295,560 69,658,018
 
 
   
 26 
Table 1.1-13.   
Tons of Forest Residue Available for Producing Biofuel  
Biomass Available at $45/ton 
Logging Other Timberland Primary Total
Residue Removals Thinnings Mill Residue Quantity
Alabama 2,405,083 507,240 1,012,090 7,117 3,931,530
Arizona 27,131 49,020 69,934 1,351 147,436
Arkansas 1,703,543 770,985 858,827 12,889 3,346,244
California 1,166,955 0 1,898,937 65,088 3,130,980
Colorado 20,112 22 61,238 2,302 83,674
Connecticut 8,601 32,190 20,929 3,949 65,670
Delaware 35,863 28,290 13,400 0 77,554
Florida 1,070,430 515,407 533,194 2,202 2,121,234
Georgia 3,113,907 993,262 1,288,591 45,138 5,440,898
Idaho 432,605 0 105,188 6,006 543,799
Illinois 278,305 235,178 230,863 18,523 762,869
Indiana 562,928 104,173 443,691 10,627 1,121,419
Iowa 112,100 55,215 99,102 159 266,576
Kansas 14,658 88,405 19,353 8,720 131,136
Kentucky 1,027,977 664,358 814,743 55,196 2,562,273
Louisiana 2,634,279 880,585 661,023 30,075 4,205,963
Maine 2,561,023 989 204,885 42,483 2,809,379
Maryland 189,159 842 81,988 17,067 289,054
Massachusetts 78,254 66,382 27,602 0 172,239
Michigan 783,465 257,201 820,603 13,763 1,875,033
Minnesota 717,037 683,787 319,980 26,878 1,747,683
Mississippi 3,097,069 710,142 935,870 95,138 4,838,219
Missouri 774,868 530,292 932,163 79,787 2,317,110
Montana 431,194 0 141,549 9,136 581,879
Nebraska 21,419 18,867 23,414 4,971 68,672
Nevada 44 142 0 0 186
New Hampshire 331,037 395 115,132 7,019 453,583
New Jersey 6,368 79 4,847 1,437 12,731
New Mexico 34,478 2,575 53,724 4,902 95,679
New York 768,914 113,104 379,391 27,390 1,288,799
North Carolina 2,026,330 1,259,265 1,336,840 12,811 4,635,245
North Dakota 2,907 15,202 7,644 265 26,018
Ohio 372,045 18,139 177,144 22,600 589,927
Oklahoma 347,738 197,587 125,400 495 671,220
Oregon 2,502,187 68 1,095,253 16,316 3,613,824
Pennsylvania 1,092,836 1,386 604,355 170,972 1,869,549
Rhode Island 1,913 50,079 5,600 389 57,981
South Carolina 1,429,102 696,577 704,036 1,051 2,830,767
South Dakota 23,743 31,161 6,505 2,294 63,704
Tennessee 633,412 489,840 1,015,395 187,583 2,326,230
Texas 1,233,553 436,927 438,374 3,021 2,111,876
Utah 7,515 0 21,571 4,437 33,524
Vermont 217,084 38,363 107,673 0 363,120
Virginia 1,483,346 813,600 1,048,745 39,366 3,385,057
Washington 2,135,174 46 1,963,678 21,446 4,120,344
West Virginia 976,712 49,428 482,367 118,779 1,627,287
Wisconsin 1,153,876 998,604 654,054 60,410 2,866,943
Wyoming 36,327 0 36,405 34,014 106,745
Total 40,084,609 12,405,402 22,003,291 1,295,560 75,788,862
 
 
 
 27 
Table 1.1-14.   
Tons of forest residue Available for Producing Biofuels  
Biomass available at $70/ton 
Logging Other Timberland Primary Total
Residue Removals Thinnings Mill Residue Quantity
Alabama 2,405,083 507,240 1,163,309 7,117 4,082,749
Arizona 27,131 49,020 77,357 1,351 154,859
Arkansas 1,703,543 770,985 984,188 12,889 3,471,605
California 1,166,955 0 2,001,231 65,088 3,233,274
Colorado 20,112 22 61,238 2,302 83,674
Connecticut 8,601 32,190 20,929 3,949 65,670
Delaware 35,863 28,290 13,400 0 77,554
Florida 1,070,430 515,407 664,706 2,202 2,252,745
Georgia 3,113,907 993,262 1,553,823 45,138 5,706,130
Idaho 432,605 0 123,852 6,006 562,463
Illinois 278,305 235,178 230,863 18,523 762,869
Indiana 562,928 104,173 443,691 10,627 1,121,419
Iowa 112,100 55,215 99,102 159 266,576
Kansas 14,658 88,405 19,353 8,720 131,136
Kentucky 1,027,977 664,358 927,808 55,196 2,675,339
Louisiana 2,634,279 880,585 750,104 30,075 4,295,044
Maine 2,561,023 989 332,233 42,483 2,936,728
Maryland 189,159 842 81,988 17,067 289,054
Massachusetts 78,254 66,382 27,602 0 172,239
Michigan 783,465 257,201 1,066,214 13,763 2,120,643
Minnesota 717,037 683,787 401,197 26,878 1,828,900
Mississippi 3,097,069 710,142 1,033,196 95,138 4,935,545
Missouri 774,868 530,292 1,287,857 79,787 2,672,803
Montana 431,194 0 166,045 9,136 606,375
Nebraska 21,419 18,867 23,414 4,971 68,672
Nevada 44 142 0 0 186
New Hampshire 331,037 395 116,195 7,019 454,646
New Jersey 6,368 79 4,847 1,437 12,731
New Mexico 34,478 2,575 64,375 4,902 106,330
New York 768,914 113,104 385,701 27,390 1,295,109
North Carolina 2,026,330 1,259,265 1,600,910 12,811 4,899,315
North Dakota 2,907 15,202 7,644 265 26,018
Ohio 372,045 18,139 177,144 22,600 589,927
Oklahoma 347,738 197,587 163,268 495 709,088
Oregon 2,502,187 68 1,133,187 16,316 3,651,758
Pennsylvania 1,092,836 1,386 680,995 170,972 1,946,189
Rhode Island 1,913 50,079 5,600 389 57,981
South Carolina 1,429,102 696,577 791,111 1,051 2,917,842
South Dakota 23,743 31,161 8,258 2,294 65,457
Tennessee 633,412 489,840 1,033,100 187,583 2,343,935
Texas 1,233,553 436,927 507,340 3,021 2,180,841
Utah 7,515 0 29,434 4,437 41,386
Vermont 217,084 38,363 142,210 0 397,658
Virginia 1,483,346 813,600 1,260,733 39,366 3,597,045
Washington 2,135,174 46 2,059,970 21,446 4,216,636
West Virginia 976,712 49,428 575,278 118,779 1,720,198
Wisconsin 1,153,876 998,604 841,550 60,410 3,054,440
Wyoming 36,327 0 43,195 34,014 113,536
Total 40,084,609 12,405,402 25,186,746 1,295,560 78,972,317
 
 
 28 
 The U.S. Forest Service data reveals that there is a lot of forest material in the Southeast, 
the far Northeast and the Northwest portions of the U.S.  The data also shows that the price curve 
for this forest material is fairly flat over the range summarized here.  This suggests that the 
forests which are already accessible by roads provide access to low cost forest material from the 
thinning of timberland.  However, to access more and more of the timberland, the costs ramp up 
quickly to gain access to more of the timberland.  
 
Summary 
 
 We compared the quantity of potential biomass supplies projected to be available in 2022 
by the two studies and the data that the Forest Service provided us in Table 1.1-15. 
 
Table 1.1-15.   
Forest Biomass Availability in 2022 at Different Prices (million dry tons/yr) 
Price ($/ton) 30 45 70 
Billion Ton Study 79 
U.S. Cellulosic 
Biofuels 20 103 118 
Forest Service Data 70 76 79 
 
1.1.2.3 Urban wastes  
 
 Cellulosic feedstocks available at the lowest cost to the ethanol producer will likely be 
chosen first.  This suggests that urban waste which is already being gathered today and typically 
incurs a fee for its disposal may be among the first to be used.  Urban wood wastes are used 
today in a variety of ways.  Most commonly, wastes are ground into mulch, dumped into 
landfills, or incinerated with other MSW or construction and demolition (C&D) debris.  
Estimating the amount of urban waste available for biofuel production involves understanding 
the types of materials that can be found in urban waste, potential competing uses of urban waste, 
and the challenges with separating a mixed feedstock. 
 
1.1.2.3.1 Municipal Solid Waste 
 
 MSW consists of paper, glass, metals, plastics, wood, yard trimmings, food scraps, 
rubber, leather, textiles, etc. See Figure 1.1-2 for the percent composition of MSW generated 
(before recycling) in 2006.56  Construction and demolition debris is not included in the estimate.   
 29 
Figure 1.1-2.   
Total MSW Generation (by Material), 2006 
251 Million Tons (Before Recycling). 
 
 
 The portion of MSW containing cellulosic material and typically the focus for biofuel 
production is wood and yard trimmings.  In addition, paper, which made up approximately 34 
percent of the total MSW generated in 2006, could potentially be converted to cellulosic biofuel.  
Food scraps could also be converted to cellulosic biofuel, however, it was noted by an industry 
group that this feedstock could be more difficult to convert to biofuel due to challenges with 
separation and the materials degrading.   
  
 Although recycling/recovery rates are increasing over time, there appears to still be a 
large fraction of biogenic material that ends up unused and in landfills.  In order to project the 
portion of material that can potentially be used for biofuel purposes, we must understand how the 
composition of landfilled material changes over time.  To do this, we first analyzed the trends 
from 1960-2006 for the percent composition of total MSW generated from paper/paperboard, 
wood, and yard trimmings over time as shown in Table 1.1-16 in order to project the percent 
composition of total MSW generated for the year 2022 for those categories (i.e. calculated to be 
26.9% paper, 5.5% wood, and 12.7% yard trimmings).57 In general, there appears to be a 
decrease in the percentage of total MSW generated from paper and yard trimmings while the 
composition of wood relatively remained stable.     
 
Table 1.1-16.  Percent Composition of Total MSW Generated  
(including recyclable material): Paper, Wood, and Yard Trimmings  
 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2002 2004 2005 2006 … 2022 
Material            
Paper/paperboard 34 36.6 36.4 35.4 36.8 35.1 35.1 34.3 33.9 … 26.9 
Wood 3.4 3.1 4.6 6.0 5.5 5.6 5.5 5.6 5.5 … 5.5 
Yard Trimmings 22.7 19.2 18.1 17.1 12.8 13.0 12.7 12.9 12.9 … 12.7 
 
 We also analyzed the trends from 1960-2006 for the percent composition of total MSW 
discarded (i.e. after recycling has occurred) to project the percent compositions for the year 2022 
(i.e. calculated to be 11% paper, 8% wood, and 2% yard trimmings), see Table 1.1-17 and Table 
 30 
1.1-18.  Comparing Table 1.1-16 and Table 1.1-17, we note that there is a lower percent of paper 
and yard trimmings that is discarded than generated for MSW.  This makes sense because a large 
percentage of these materials are recycled.  Other than recycling, some MSW material is also 
combusted for energy use.  This material we assume would be unavailable for biofuel use, and 
therefore report in Table 1.1-18 the percent composition of total MSW discarded after 
accounting for both recycling and combustion for energy use.  Therefore, we have taken into 
account MSW that could potentially be diverted towards recycling instead of future biofuel 
production.   
 
Table 1.1-17.  Percent Composition of Total MSW Discarded  
(not including recycled material): Paper, Wood, and Yard Trimmings 
 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2002 2004 2005 2006 
Material        
Paper/paperboard 30.2 33.2 31.7 30.5 29.7 27.3 27.3 25.5 24.3 
Wood 3.7 3.3 5.1 7.0 7.0 7.2 7.3 7.4 7.4 
Yard Trimmings 24.2 20.5 20.1 17.9 8.7 9.0 7.0 7.2 7.3 
 
Table 1.1-18.  Percent Composition of Total MSW Discarded  
(not including recycled or combusted material): Paper, Wood, and Yard Trimmings 
 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2002 2004 2005 2006 … 2022 
Material        
Paper/paperboard 30.2 33.1 28.8 26.1 25.5 23.5 23.5 22.1 21.3 … 11.2 
Wood 3.7 3.3 4.6 6.0 6.0 6.2 6.3 6.4 6.5 … 7.6 
Yard Trimmings 24.2 20.4 18.3 15.3 7.5 7.7 6.0 6.2 6.4 … 1.9 
  
 The total amount of MSW generated (prior to recycling) is assumed to increase over time 
due to population growth.  Biocycle magazine (2006) reports MSW estimates for each state in 
the U.S. based off of 2004 population data.58  We used U.S. Census Bureau population 
projections by state to scale up or down the MSW estimates depending on whether the state 
populations increase or decrease by 2022.  The total amount of MSW generated (prior to 
recycling) was estimated to be 391 million tons.  As we are interested in the volume of MSW 
available for biofuel use, we focused only on waste estimated to be landfilled, which is a portion 
of the total MSW generated.  We used estimates on the percentage of MSW landfilled by state 
from Biocycle in order to estimate the amount of MSW potentially available to biofuels (after 
recycling).      
 
 Knowing the total amount of MSW landfilled is only part of the picture. We also need to 
understand the types of cellulosic material likely to make up the MSW landfilled.  For this, we 
were able to gather state composition data (i.e. percent wood vs. paper vs. other materials) of 
landfills for MSW generated, however, we were in fact interested in acquiring state composition 
data for the MSW landfilled.59,60,61,62,63,64,65,66,67,68,69  Using the state composition data, we 
estimated the percent composition of MSW landfilled by state using a ratio of percent 
composition of national material generated (estimated in Table 1.1-16) and landfilled (estimated 
in Table 1.1-18) and state percent composition data for MSW generated (gathered from the 
multiple state reports).  We then multiplied the volume of MSW (in tons) generated for each 
state in the year 2022 by the percent of MSW estimated to be landfilled (provided in Biocycle) 
and by the percent composition of MSW landfilled by state.  Some states did not provide 
 31 
composition data, therefore, we estimated average percentages based on the states within a 
similar location in the U.S. where data was provided (e.g. if Utah data was unavailable, we 
assumed compositions would be similar to other rocky mountain states).  
 
 Furthermore, the amount of MSW potentially available is limited by assumptions on 
percent moisture and percent contamination.  We assumed that paper, wood, and yard trimmings 
have a 10%, 20%, and 40% moisture content, respectively.70,71 We also assumed that wood is 
approximately 50% contaminated, due to objects such as nails, paint, chemicals, etc. typically 
associated with such feedstocks.  Paper and yard trimmings are assumed to be mostly 
uncontaminated, assuming 75% uncontaminated.  We account for contamination because it is 
likely to affect the quality of the wood waste and could potentially cause problems in the 
processing steps of cellulosic material to biofuel.  Thus, for this analysis we assumed that the 
estimated contaminated portions would not be used for biofuel production.  In addition, not all 
yard trimming can be assumed to be wood, only 25% is assumed to be from wood. 72 We 
estimate that 22 million tons could be available from paper, 0.2 million tons from yard trimmings 
and 4 million tons from wood.   
 
 At the time of this proposal we did not include food scraps in our estimates for urban 
wastes as this source was observed to have difficulties in separation and more easily degraded, 
making an assessment of this feedstock complex.  Food scraps made up 12.4% of the total MSW 
generated in 2006, meaning that potentially 31 million tons (and perhaps more by the year 2022) 
could be available for cellulosic biofuel production. 
 
1.1.2.3.2 Construction and Demolition (C&D) Debris 
 
 C&D debris mostly comes from building demolition and renovation, and the rest comes 
from new construction.73  Roughly equal percentages of building-related waste are estimated to 
come from the residential and commercial building sectors.  The composition of C&D materials 
varies significantly, depending on the type of project from which it is being generated.  For 
example, materials from older buildings is likely to contain plaster and lead piping, while new 
construction materials may contain significant amounts of drywall, laminates, and plastics.  For 
building materials, EPA estimates the overall percentage of debris in C&D materials falls within 
the following ranges: 
 
Table 1.1-19.  
Percentage Composition of C&D Debris 
 (by volume) 
Concrete and mixed rubble 40-50% 
Wood  20-30% 
Drywall 5-15% 
Asphalt roofing 1-10% 
Metals  1-5% 
Bricks 1-5% 
Plastics 1-5% 
 
 32 
 In 1996, total C&D debris generated was estimated to be approximately124 million 
metric tons.74  As seen in Table 1.1-19 above, only a portion of this, however, would be made of 
woody material.  We based our estimate of C&D wood in 2022 on the equation adopted from 
Wiltsee’s analysis.75 The equation estimated C&D wood based on population size. We estimated 
approximately 31 million tons could be available from this resource by 2022; however, we 
assumed that 50% of that could potentially be contaminated.  Thus, we estimate that only 15.4 
million tons would be available for biofuels. 
 
1.1.2.4 Dedicated Energy Crops 
 
Crops developed and grown specifically as a renewable source of cellulosic material for 
biofuel production are not yet commercial, but have the potential for negating some of the 
problems surrounding other feedstocks.  Currently, crops such as corn that are grown and 
harvested for energy uses in the United States are also used for agricultural purposes and serve 
many important uses other than biofuel production.  This competition could be reduced by the 
use of non-agricultural feedstocks for cellulosic biofuel production.  Urban wastes and forest and 
agriculture residues will likely be the first feedstocks used in cellulosic biofuel production; 
However, there are many uncertainties over land availability and sustainable removal rates for 
residues.  
 
Most energy crops will be perennial species grown from roots or rhizomes that remain in 
the ground after harvesting the above-ground biomass.  While most agricultural crops are annual 
species, perennials are considered beneficial in many ways.  Dedicated perennial energy crops 
have the potential to grow on marginal lands, produce high yields, and may have low input 
needs.  Once a perennial crop is established costs are reduced, as the need for tillage is lowered.  
The root system that remains in the soil can also facilitate the acquisition of nutrients thus 
decreasing the need for large fertilizer inputs.  In southern climates, perennials have the potential 
for higher yield per acre of land than other annual crops.  This is due to the fact that perennial 
plants develop more quickly in the spring and the canopy of foliage can sustain for longer in the 
fall.  This makes it possible for the plants to be more photosynthetically active and have a more 
efficient energy conversion system.  Perennial energy crops also increase soil productivity, 
sequester carbon, and provide refuge for wildlife.   
 
1.1.2.4.1 Types of Energy Crops 
 
 The following sections describe several of the most commonly discussed dedicated 
energy crops (switchgrass, miscanthus, and hybrid poplars) as well as some less familiarly 
known crops. 
 
1.1.2.4.1.1 Switchgrass 
 
The energy crop that has received the most attention is switchgrass.  Switchgrass 
(Panicum virgatum) is perennial warm season grass that is native to the United States.  It 
typically reaches heights of 3-5 feet, but can grow to more than 10 feet in some southern regions. 
It has a deep root system that extends many feet below the earth.  It may be the ideal energy crop 
mainly because it can tolerate many soil types and climates from drought conditions to floods.  It 
 33 
is also resistant to many pests and diseases.  The photosynthetic pathway of switchgrass (and 
other perennials) allows it to produce high biomass yields with low amounts of chemical input. 
In the spring, switchgrass develops a photosynthetic canopy of biomass more quickly, and it also 
persists longer in the fall than annual plants, allowing for a high net conversion of solar energy 
per year.76 
 
Highly variable yields have been estimated at 1-12 dry tons/acre per year (3-30 dry 
tons/ha) depending on soil, location, and variety.  A yield of 4-5.5 tons/acre (10-13 tons/ha) is a 
reasonable commercial average today.77  In a long term study sponsored by the DOE, average 
yield after 10 years of growth was 4.8-7.6 tons/acre (12-19 tons/ha) for switchgrass when 
harvested annually.G,78  Biannual harvests were also done experimentally to try and achieve the 
maximum yields possible but show little difference in total yield.  Biannual harvests result in 
approximately 70% of the yield for the first cut and 30% for the second.79  
 
Water and nitrogen availability are the main resources that limit production of warm-
weather grasses such as switchgrass.  Nitrogen accessibility for these plants depends on many 
factors.  Harvesting frequency, soil content, and removal rates all affect the nitrogen available to 
the plant.  In the previously mentioned study by S.B. McLaughlin, initial nitrogen fertilization 
rates were 40-120 kg/acre (36-107 lbs/acre); however they discovered that a reduction to only 20 
kg/ha (17.8 lbs/acre) of nitrogen was sufficient to produce similar yields in single cut systems in 
the mid-Atlantic region.80  Reduced nitrogen amounts were similar in other regions of the 
country.  In comparison, the US fertilization rate for corn is an average of 138 lbs/acre.  
 
With commercial growth of switchgrass, growers would sell the crop for conversion to 
cellulosic ethanol.  Our economic modeling shows that in order to meet the cellulosic biofuel 
goal of 16 Bgal set by the EISA mandates, dedicated energy crops will need to be utilized.81   
 
1.1.2.4.1.2 Miscanthus  
 
Miscanthus is a tall perennial grass that has been evaluated as a potential energy crop 
most extensively in Europe where it is already being produced for biofuel.  The genus is 
primarily tropic or sub-tropic in origin but there is a wide climactic range at the species level.82  
This characteristic makes it more suitable for establishment over the ranging climates of North 
America.  Giant miscanthus (Miscanthus x gigantus) is a hybrid variety that can grow 12-14 feet 
tall.  It is a cold-tolerant warm season grass and has similar characteristics of switchgrass with 
high yields and low amounts of input.83 
 
Research on miscanthus is currently being conducted at the University of Illinois.  In the 
Midwest, the growing season is April to October.  The plant grows large green foliage that 
maximizes in approximately late August.  As the temperature falls the foliage fades and drops off 
leaving the stem.  The stem is the commercially important part of the plant and resembles 
bamboo.  Stems can reach nine feet in length, ½ to ¾ in diameter, and are harvested in the winter 
after drying occurs.84  
 
                                                 
G
 Switchgrass variety used in this study was Alamo.  Other varieties could result in different yields. 
 34 
Establishment of a crop takes approximately 2 years, with maximum yields reached in the 
third year depending on soil fertility.  The grass could require 4-5 years on low quality soils.  In 
established crops 5-10 shoots per square foot can be developed.  Yields in various studies from 
the University of Illinois were 9-16 tons/acre in various regions in Illinois.  The southern regions 
of the state with poor soil quality also saw high yields illustrating that miscanthus is suitable for 
growth and high achievable yields on marginal land.85  Yields in Europe ranged widely, with 
irrigated crops reaching12 tons/acre and un-irrigated yields of 4-10 tons/acre in the fall. 
According to trials conducted in Europe, the quality of miscanthus biomass for conversion to 
biofuel improves by delaying harvesting until after the winter months and the plant has time to 
dry sufficiently.  However, this reduced yields by 30 percent. 86  In comparison to switchgrass, 
research out of Illinois also concluded that miscanthus can yield more biomass for conversion to 
biofuel because of its even higher photosynthetic efficiency and longer growing season.87  In 
terms of input, miscanthus uses nitrogen extremely efficiently and therefore does not need to be 
fertilized for high yields to be achieved.  There is also no need for pesticides; however, 
herbicides have been used to control weed populations.88 
 
Challenges in growing and producing miscanthus crop include high establishment costs, 
problems in winter survival during the first year, and high water needs.  European cost estimates 
are similar to other perennial plants at approximately $64 per dry ton;  however they estimate 
that a growing cycle of 10-12 years is required to recover the start-up costs of $267 per planted 
acre.89  The bulk of the high initial cost comes from planting and harvesting machinery. 
Establishment of a stronger market for growing these energy crops, as well as increased 
knowledge of propagation of the species, will inevitably lower overhead costs.90 
 
1.1.2.4.1.3 Hybrid Poplar  
 
The poplar tree (Populus trichocarpa) is another option being investigated for use as a 
dedicated energy crop.  Herbaceous or woody perennial plants have some of the same 
characteristics of the perennial grasses that make them suitable for possible use as an energy 
crop.  They retain significant amounts of root biomass below ground, require little tillage thus 
decreasing labor and erosion, grow fast large canopies, and require less fertilization than their 
agricultural counterparts. 
 
Technological advances in harvesting and genetics must be utilized in order to produce 
species that will be more suitable for use as an energy crop.  Genetic information has helped to 
understand the characteristics the poplar tree.  The complex genetic information obtained from 
the genome of this plant will make possible the engineering of faster growing trees with more 
biomass available for harvest.91   
 
1.1.2.4.1.4 Other Potential Feedstocks 
 
Several other perennial plants have the possibility to be used as dedicated energy crops. 
As previously described, the characteristics of perennial species make some optimal for use in 
this capacity.  Because these plants have not been grown in agricultural sectors, they have not 
been extensively researched and developed for optimization.  Corn is a crop that has been 
scientifically studied for decades because of its continued importance in the market.  Dedicated 
 35 
energy crops must see this type of investment to bring about further knowledge of basic biology 
which will lead to advances in breeding and eventual domestication of the species that have 
promise.  The DOE along with university research have implicated several other plants as 
potential energy crops.  These include additional types of grasses such as reed canary grass and 
sorghum. Hybrid willow, silver maple, black locust, sweetgum, and eucalyptus are other 
perennial woody plants that are possibilities.92  
 
Significantly accelerated testing and selection for populations will be necessary in 
establishing these plants.  Breeding for desired traits and adaptability across a wide array of 
environments in multiple physiologic and geographic regions will be necessary.  No single 
species of dedicated energy plant will be optimal for all areas of the country, especially 
considering the amount of biofuels needed.  Temperature, rainfall, and soil composition are 
highly variable across the continental United States; therefore, using a diverse group of plant 
species optimal for each growing region is a likely strategy.  With current information and 
characteristics of each plant, the DOE has estimated where the possible growing areas could 
occur (see Figure 1.1-3). 93  
            
        Figure 1.1-3.   
            Possible Geographic Distribution of Dedicated Biomass Crops 
 
A
 U.S Department of Energy. Breaking the Biological Barriers to Cellulosic Ethanol:  
   A Joint Research Agenda. (2006). 
 
1.1.2.4.2   Land Assessment 
 
 There is evidence that perennial species are suitable for growth on marginal lands that 
are not useful for growth of food crops.  A new study by Elliot Campbell out of Stanford 
University assessed abandoned land availability and the potential for this land to be used for 
energy crops.  Because of the increased demand for biomass energy, using abandoned crop or 
pasture lands to grow some of these crops could be a better alternative than converting forested 
areas or using food agriculture lands.  This study estimated the amount of global abandoned land 
available, the amount of biomass that could be grown on these lands, and the corresponding 
 36 
energy that could be obtained.  Historical land use data, satellite imagery, and a global ecosystem 
model were used for the estimates.  They considered “abandoned land” as land that was 
previously used for pasture or crops but has since been abandoned and not converted to urban or 
forested areas.  Historical land use data was obtained from the History Database of the Global 
Environment 3.0 (HYDE) which consisted of gridded maps which show the fraction of crop and 
pasture land within each grid cell for decades between 1700 and 2000.  Also, the Center for 
Sustainability and the Global Environment (SAGE) land use database was used to check and 
supplement the HYDE database.  They used a MODIS satellite map to exclude areas that have 
transitioned into forest or urban areas.  Two different mathematical approaches were then used to 
estimate a conservative and a high estimate of total land available.  Biomass production was 
estimated using the Carnegie-Ames-Stanford Approach ecosystem model which takes into 
account climate data, soil texture, land cover and the normalized difference vegetation index 
(NDVI), but does not take into account fertilizer use or irrigation, which could increase yields 
(see Figure 1.1-4).94  
 
Figure 1.1-4.  Global View of Crop and Pasture Abandoned Lands 
 
 
Obtained from: Campbell, J.E. at al. The global potential of bioenergy on abandoned agriculture lands. Environ. Sci. Technology. (2008). 
(A) SAGE supplemental data showing abandoned crop lands. (B) HYDE data showing crop lands that have been 
converted to uses other than cropping. (C) HYDE data showing former pasture lands that have been converted to 
uses other than for pasture. (D) HYDE data showing an average of total abandoned agriculture land (excludes areas 
of land use transition of crop to pasture, pasture to crop, agriculture to forest, and agriculture to urban). 
 
 The low and high estimates for global abandoned land, excluding forested and urban 
areas are 385 and 472 million hectares.  The authors found that these lands could produce 
between 1.6 and 2.1 billion tons of biomass respectively. In the United States an average of 
approximately 58 million ha (146 million acres) of abandoned land was estimated.  Assuming 
natural growth on these lands, approximately 321 million tons/year of biomass could be 
produced.  At 80 gallons of ethanol per ton of biomass, there would be the potential to produce 
approximately 26 billion gallons from a grass crop such as switchgrass.  It is pointed out that 
there will be significant differences between crop types and management styles which will effect 
growth and yields.  There is not a specified crop type; however, as the author’s point out that 
 37 
growing conventional crops such as corn on this land could increase erosion and polluted runoff.  
Growing perennial grasses such as switchgrass, for use as a feedstock would be the best option.95 
Although perennial grasses are able to grow on these lands, yields may be lower than they would 
be on more suitable agricultural lands.  
 
 On a state-by-state basis, the areas with the highest amount of available abandoned lands 
are in the West. Wyoming, Utah, Oregon, New Mexico, Nevada, Colorado and California all 
contribute over 5 million abandoned acres to the total.  Texas has the largest amount of 
abandoned land estimated at 10.37 million acres.  Midwestern states including Iowa, Wisconsin, 
Illinois, and Ohio have approximately 3-4 million acres of abandoned land each (see Table 1.1-
20). These lands may be more conducive to crop production than the more arid parts of the West. 
However, the condition and quality of these lands is unknown at this time.  It would be difficult 
to estimate the specific types of energy crops that could be grown on these lands.  Also, in the 
DOE assessment previously referenced, most of the Western states are not implicated as areas of 
possible biomass growth (above Figure 1.1-3).  
 
Table 1.1-20.  Abandoned Agriculture Land and Potential Production by State96 
 
State 
Area 
(Million ha) 
Area 
(Million acres) 
Production 
(MM tons biomass/yr) 
Ethanol 
Production Rate 
(gallons/tons) 
Minnesota 1.6 3.95 10.7 2.71 
Montana 1.7 4.2 6.8 1.62 
North Dakota 1 2.47 4.4 1.78 
Idaho 1.4 3.46 4.7 1.36 
Washington 0.9 2.22 4 1.8 
Arizona 1.9 4.69 2.4 0.51 
California 3.6 8.89 13.2 1.48 
Colorado 2.7 6.67 8.1 1.21 
Nevada 2.1 5.19 3 0.58 
New Mexico 3 7.41 5.4 0.73 
Oregon 2.2 5.43 8.2 1.51 
Utah 2.6 6.42 4.7 0.73 
Wyoming 2.8 6.92 6.1 0.88 
Arkansas 1.1 2.72 11.1 4.09 
Iowa 1.6 3.95 12.7 3.21 
Kansas 0.3 0.74 1.8 2.43 
Missouri 1.5 3.71 14.1 3.81 
Nebraska 0.4 0.99 2.2 2.23 
Oklahoma 1.1 2.72 8.8 3.24 
South Dakota 0.3 0.74 2 2.7 
Louisiana 0.9 2.22 7.8 3.51 
Texas 4.2 10.37 25.3 2.44 
Connecticut 0.1 0.25 0.6 2.43 
Massachusetts 0.2 0.49 1.1 2.23 
New Hampshire 0 0 0.3 0 
Rhode Island 0 0 0.2 0 
Vermont 0.1 0.25 1 4.05 
Alabama 1.4 3.46 13.2 3.82 
Florida 0.5 1.24 2.7 2.19 
Georgia 1.6 3.95 15.2 3.85 
 38 
Mississippi 1 2.47 9.1 3.68 
South Carolina 0.8 1.98 7.3 3.69 
Illinois 1.6 3.95 11.4 2.88 
Indiana 1.2 2.96 8.5 2.87 
Kentucky 0.8 1.98 6.7 3.39 
North Carolina 0.7 1.73 6.2 3.59 
Ohio 1.4 3.46 8.9 2.57 
Tennessee 1.1 2.72 10.3 3.79 
Virginia 0.7 1.73 6.7 3.88 
Wisconsin 1.4 3.46 9.9 2.86 
West Virginia 0.1 0.25 0.5 2.02 
Delaware 0.1 0.25 0.5 2.02 
District of 
Columbia 0 0 0 0 
Maryland 0.4 0.99 2.7 2.73 
New Jersey 0.2 0.49 1.9 3.85 
New York 1.7 4.2 10.2 2.43 
Pennsylvania 1 2.47 8.2 3.32 
Maine 0.1 0.25 0.8 3.24 
Michigan 1.5 3.71 9 2.43 
Alaska 0.3 0.74 0.4 0.54 
     
Totals 58.9 145.483 321 2.21 
     
Total Ethanol 
Volumea    
25.68 Bgal 
Ethanol/yr  
a. Assuming 80 gal/ton conversion rate 
 
The estimates of abandoned agricultural land do not include land enrolled in the 
Conservation Reserve Program (CRP), which could be an additional source of land available for 
energy crops.  Land in this program is farmland that is converted to trees, grass, and areas for 
wildlife cover, but is considered crop land by the models in the abandoned land study.  
Environmental benefits of this land include the creation of wildlife habitat, increasing soil 
productivity, reducing soil erosion and improving ground and surface water quality.97  As of July 
2008, there were 34.67 million acres under the CRP contract which is down 2.1 million acres 
from last year.98  Approximately 28 million CRP acres are growing with native or introduced 
grasses, suggesting that there is a significant amount of switchgrass already in the environment. 
Figure 1.1-21 shows the land allocation in the United States in 2007.99  Recently, the 2008 Farm 
Bill capped the number of acres in the CRP at 32 million acres for 2010-2012.  Following 
historical trends, it is assumed that some of these acres will go into crop production.  While some 
of this land may go for biofuel production, the benefits of producing energy crops will have to be 
weighed against the benefits of having the land in the CRP.  
 
 39 
Figure 1.1-5. CRP land in 2007 
 
USDA. Farm Services Agency. Conservation Reserve Program Summary and Enrollment Statistics. FY 2007 
 
1.1.3 Biodiesel & Renewable Diesel Feedstocks  
 
 In general, plant and animal oils are valuable commodities with many uses other than 
transportation fuel.  Therefore we expect the primary limiting factor in the supply of both 
biodiesel and renewable diesel to be feedstock availability and price.  Primary drivers for this are 
increasing worldwide demand as incomes rise in developing countries, as well as increased 
recognition that these materials have value based on their energy or hydrocarbon content as 
substitutes for petroleum.  Expansion of biodiesel market volumes beyond the mandates is 
dependent on it being able to compete on a price basis with the petroleum diesel being displaced. 
 
 The primary feedstock for domestic biodiesel production in the U.S. has historically been 
soybean oil, with other plant and animal fats and recycled greases making up a small portion of 
the biodiesel pool.  We estimate that 2-4 percent of biodiesel came from waste cooking oils and 
greases in calendar year 2007. 100   
 
1.1.3.1 Virgin Plant Oils 
 
 Agricultural commodity modeling we have done for this proposal (see Chapter 5 of this 
document) suggests that soybean oil production will stay relatively flat in the future, meaning 
supplies will be tight and prices supported at a high level as biofuels demand increases.  
Modeling scenarios conducted for the year 2022 with the EISA mandates indicates that domestic 
soy oil production could support about 560 million gallons of biodiesel production.  The model 
also projects that some food-grade corn oil will also be directed to biodiesel production based on 
its price and availability, resulting in an additional 109 million gallons of fuel from this source in 
2022.  These materials are most likely to be processed by biodiesel plants due to the large 
available capacity of these facilities and their proximity to soybean production.  Compared to 
other feedstocks, virgin plant oils are most easily processed into biofuel via simple 
transesterification due to their homogeneity of composition and lack of contaminates.   
 40 
 
1.1.3.2 Corn Oil Extracted During Ethanol Production 
 
 A source of feedstock which could provide significant volume is oil extracted from corn 
or fermentation co-products in the dry mill ethanol production process.  Often called corn 
fractionation or dry separation, these are a collection of processes used get additional product 
streams of value from the corn.  This idea is not new, as existing wet mill plants create several 
streams of product from their corn input, including oil.  In a dry mill setting, the kernel can be 
separated into the bran, starch, and germ components ahead of fermentation, or alternatively, oil 
can be extracted from the distillers’ grains after fermentation.  Both have advantages and 
disadvantages related to plant capital cost and energy consumption, as well as yield of ethanol 
and the other coproducts. 
 
 Extraction of oil from the thin stillage or distillers’ grains with solubles (DGS) streams is 
a proven technology that can be retrofit to existing plants relatively cheaply.  Front-end 
separation requires more intensive capital investment than is required to extract oil from the 
DGS, and therefore is best designed into the plant at the time of construction.  However, it yields 
a larger array of co-products, and generally also results in ethanol process energy savings since 
less unfermentable material is going through the process train.  We expect that this technology 
will be increasingly deployed in new plants in parallel to existing plants pursuing extraction of 
oil from DGS.  For the sake of simplicity, for this proposal we have chosen to focus for cost and 
volume estimates on the DGS extraction process.   
 
 Specifically, our estimates come from a process developed and marketed by GS 
Cleantech, Inc., though there are others who will likely develop and market similar processes.  
Depending on the configuration, this system can extract 20-50 percent of the oil from the 
fermentation co-products, producing a distressed corn oil stream which can be used as feedstock 
by biodiesel facilities.  Since it offers another stream of revenue from the corn flowing into 
ethanol plants, we assumed approximately 40 percent of projected total ethanol production will 
implement this or other oil extraction process by 2022, generating approximately 150 million 
gallons per year of corn oil biofuel feedstock.101,H  We expect this material to be processed in 
biodiesel plants for the same reasons given above for soy oil.  At this time it is uncertain whether 
there will be third party aggregators of this extracted oil, or whether individual ethanol plants 
will contract directly with nearby biodiesel facilities, which may ultimately impact where and 
how this feedstock is processed. 
 
1.1.3.3 Yellow Grease and Other Rendered Fats 
 
 Rendered animal fats and reclaimed cooking oils and greases are another potentially 
significant source of biodiesel feedstock.  In 2007, Tyson Foods announced plans to produce 
renewable diesel at multiple sites in joint venture with ConocoPhillips and Syntroleum Corp, 
suggesting these operations are technologically feasible if market conditions are right.   
 
                                                 
H
 The projected fraction of plants doing corn oil extraction was based on a conversation with someone working in 
the ethanol industry, as well as Table 3 of the Mueller report referenced in this paragraph.   
 41 
 National Renderer’s Association gives a quantity of approximately 11 billion lbs of fats 
and greases available annually for all uses, and suggests this will grow by 1% per year.102  This 
figure is broken down into several categories, and includes “yellow grease” and “other grease” 
collected and processed by rendering companies each year.  NRA defines yellow grease as 
material primarily derived from restaurant grease or cooking oil (they do not define “other 
grease” but we can assume this is trap grease or other reclaimed material).  Adding together the 
NRA’s “yellow grease” and “other grease” categories, we arrive at 2.7 billion lbs per year (all 
figures there are for 2005). 
 
 Similarly, a 2004 report prepared for New York State Energy Research and Development 
Authority by LECG, LLC describes yellow grease as material produced by restaurants and food 
service.103  (This report describes grease recovered from sewer traps as brown grease, and 
suggests it is too low in quality to be used for biodiesel production.)  Based on USDA and US 
Census data, LECG shows production of yellow grease by restaurants to be on the order of 9 lbs 
per capita per year, equivalent to about 2.7 billion lbs/yr.  Unfortunately, it's not clear whether 
this quantity would include or be in addition to the NRA figures, but given the similarity of 
numbers, it seems reasonable to suspect that the NRA total includes the same sources of grease 
as assessed by LECG.   
 
 Thus, the figures we use here assume that the NRA figures already include collection of a 
large portion of restaurant and trap grease by rendering companies; we have not included 
additional waste greases that other studies have suggested might be available based on per-capita 
use of cooking oils, wastewater treatment disposal, etc.   Perhaps there is some additional waste 
grease out there not being collected or counted by NRA that is, or could be, aggregated and 
funneled into biofuel production, but there is unfortunately no good way for us to determine this.   
 
 In addition to the named sources above, there is also a written statement by David 
Meeker of the NRA asserting that not more than 30% of the 11 billion lbs could be directed to 
biofuel production on a long-term basis. 104   So, along with the total volume of fats and greases 
as estimated above, we have 0.3 x 11 billion lbs per year / 7.6 lbs per gallon = 434 million 
gallons.  With 1% annual growth between 2005 (the year of the figures cited) and 2022, we 
arrive at a potential 514 million gallons of biodiesel per year from all available sources.  Our 
projections in this proposal suggest that 375 million gallons or 73% of this will be actually be 
utilized for biofuel.  This figure was derived from FASOM modeling of other sources of 
feedstock we expect to be available (such as soy oil), as well as our assumptions about corn oil 
extracted at ethanol plants, in the context of the standard set forth in the EISA.  This 73% seems 
reasonable considering market inefficiencies and potential competition from other high-value, 
non-fuel uses of these feedstocks.  
 
 Much of biodiesel production seems to rely on niches of feedstock availability and 
market outlets.  Thus we could assume that the 2-4% of biodiesel volume to be produced from 
fats and greases as reported by FO Licht for 2007 will continue indefinitely.  We speculate that 
much of any new fat and grease feedstock use would be routed to renewable diesel in the long 
term, however, because that process appears to have lower operating costs for this material, and 
because there have been intent or construction announcements for RD plants to utilize a 
significant portion of the 375 MMgal.  Furthermore, we suspect that some of the feedstock these 
 42 
plants will use may be obtained through direct contract or joint venture with animal processing 
or rendering operations, such that it would not typically be available on the open market to 5 or 
10 or 20 MMgal/yr biodiesel plants in a different county or state.  Thus we chose to assume the 
vast majority of this feedstock would be routed to RD production by the time of the fully phased-
in RFS2 program, and ignored its use in biodiesel production.   
 
1.1.3.4 Jatropha  
 
 Jatropha is a genus of plants, consisting of both shrubs and trees, some of which hold 
some promise as a feedstock for the production of biofuels. One species in particular, Jatropha 
curcas, yields seeds that contain between 25-45 percent lipids, which can be processed to 
produce biodiesel. Claims regarding the production potential of J. curcas have led to the 
popularity of the crop as a potential biofuel feedstock. In particular, these claims state that the 
crop: 
 
-grows on marginal lands and reclaims wasteland, 
-is tolerant of drought, 
-requires low nutrient input, 
-requires low labor inputs, 
-does not compete with food production, and 
-has a high oil yield. 
 
 J. curcas has been traditionally cultivated for living fences, to conserve soil moisture, 
reclaim soil, control erosion, and used locally in soap production, insecticide, and medicinal 
application.105,106  J. curcas is also a toxic plant. Safety of large-scale J. curcas plantations is also 
a concern, especially for children. Accidental ingestion can have severe consequences. 
“Hundreds of cases have been reported from different parts of India. In Meerut (in Uttar 
Pradesh), over 50 children were recently hospitalized due to jatropha poisoning.”107 Even two J. 
curcas seeds are like a strong purgative, while four to five seeds can cause death.  
 
J. curcas has recently been cultivated as an energy crop. J. curcas originated in Central 
America, mainly growing in arid and semi-arid conditions; now it is also found in the tropical 
regions of Africa, Asia, and North and South America.108 Because of J. curcas’ deep root 
system, it can grow in lands that have been previously heavily cultivated or otherwise have low 
levels of essential minerals and nutrients in the top levels of soil; this results in the recycling of 
nutrients from deeper soil levels.109,110  In addition, because the plant is a perennial (living up to 
50 years) the root system stays in place, which can significantly reduce erosion and even reverse 
desertification.111,112 However, J. curcas may not produce efficiently on marginal lands without 
significant extra expense.  
 
1.1.3.4.1 Jatropha Input and Cultivation 
 
 As a wild plant which has not yet been domesticated, J. curcas may be considered 
drought-tolerant. However, “there is little known on water use efficiency of J. curcas as a 
crop.”113 Even though J. curcas can survive moderate droughts by dropping its leaves, the effect 
of water starvation on seed yield and oil content in the seeds is mostly unknown. No studies 
 43 
relating water use and yield of Jatropha curcas were available. Water use efficiency of sister 
species Jatropha pandurifolia and Jatropha gossypifolia are reported as 3.68 and 2.52 mol CO2 / 
mol H2O, respectively.114 This is similar to that of other oil seed species like soybean, with a 
water use efficiency of 3.90 mol CO2 / mol H2O.115  Thus, it is conceivable that water 
requirements of J. curcas will be similar to that of other oil seed species; although the plant may 
survive droughts, it may not produce efficiently or economically when it is water-deprived.116 
Obviously, further studies relating water use to crop production must be performed.  
 
 Because J. curcas has been observed growing on low quality soils with low nutrient 
amounts, it was assumed that the plant would be able to grow as a crop in these conditions. 
However, research indicates that J. curcas growth and production of seed is severely limited by 
soil fertility.117,118 In the initial growth phase of the plantation, when competition between plants 
for radiation, water, and nutrients is negligible, “nutrient content in mature leaves is not 
significantly affected by crop density.”119  However, in the competition phase, “nutrient uptake 
from the soil was negatively correlated with plant density;”120,121  fertilization with J. curcas 
seedcake significantly increased seed yield.122  This indicates that J. curcas plantations should at 
least be fertilized with remaining seedcake (bulk of seed after oil is pressed out), which is very 
nutrient rich. Thus, this seedcake cannot be sold as a fertilizer, or burned for energy production 
to make the cultivation of the plant more cost effective, as was suggested in various studies,123,124 
if J. curcas cultivation is to require low external nutrient input. Even in the case that the 
seedcake and other oil extraction by-products is recycled to maintain soil fertility, “initiating a 
plantation on low or non fertile soils … implies the need to use other fertilizers, at least at the 
start, to boost crop growth and seed production in the initial stages.”125  The long-term impact of 
monocultures of jatropha on soil health has not been studied. Although J. curcas can potentially 
grow on marginal land, whether it is safe to plant on current crop land is still unknown. There are 
some indications that J. curcas will not be sustainable, unless specific steps are taken to ensure 
the plantations’ long term health.126,127  
 
 Because it was observed that J. curcas thrived on marginal soils, it was assumed that the 
labor required to maintain the crop and harvest the seeds would be minimal. However, in order to 
prepare J. curcas for use as an energy crop, significant labor is required, including: preparing 
land, setting up nurseries, planting, irrigating, fertilizing, pruning, harvesting, and processing.128 
At present, there are no data to show that any of these labor intensive activities, which are 
assumed in the cultivation of other perennials, can be eliminated. Labor input required for crop 
maintenance actually rose from 22 person days / ha / year to 70 person days / ha / year from the 
1st to 6th year in one study, indicating that there will be no reduction in labor inputs required even 
as the plantations mature.129 Especially in the United States, where labor costs are high, this is a 
severe hindrance for the cultivation of J. curcas on a large scale. Furthermore, the development 
of any sort of mechanized harvesting will be problematic, as “continuous flowering results in a 
sequence of reproductive development stages on the same branch, from mature fruits at the base, 
to green fruits in the middle, and flowers at the top of the branch;” seeds still need to be picked 
by hand.130,131  
 
 Because it was assumed that J. curcas could thrive on marginal land with low resource 
inputs, it was thought that the crop’s cultivation would not compete with that of food crops.132 
However, until present, most studies on the crop’s oil production have been carried out given 
 44 
optimal growing conditions that may be unrealistic in many parts of the world. “A major 
constraint for the extended use of J. curcas seems to be the lack of knowledge about its potential 
yield under sub-optimal and marginal conditions;” it is unknown whether J. curcas can produce 
economically on marginal lands.133  Even if J. curcas could be grown successfully on these 
lands, it is likely that, in order to achieve economic yields, significant resource inputs will be 
needed. In this case, food crops could likely be grown on these same lands anyways; in addition, 
the cultivation of J. curcas will draw scarce water and labor resources from food crops. There are 
examples of farmers leaving successful food crop plantations to cultivate J. curcas, leading to 
increased food scarcity.134  Finally, even if successful cultivation of J. curcas were entirely 
possible on marginal lands with low inputs, the widespread success of the crop “might lead to 
rapid expansion of production at the cost of food crops.”135  Although advances are being made 
on several of these fronts, currently, J. curcas can likely not be cultivated on a large scale 
without displacing food corps because of land, water, and labor constraints.  
  
1.1.3.4.2 Jatropha Yield  
 
Optimal seed production of 1.5-7.5 tons/ha occurs with 1200 to 1500 mm water/year 
under different trial conditions.136  However, a minimum of 500 to 600 mm water/year is required 
to produce approximately 1 seed ton/ha.137  It is unknown whether this variation is a result of 
environmental or genetic variation, or a combination of both. Maximum production is attained in 
mature plantations, about 3-5 years after planting, with a maximum productive life of over 30 
years.138,139 
 
 The seed of J. curcas has a lipid content of roughly 25-45 percent by weight.140,141 
However, the oil content of the seed was “significantly higher in soils that had not been used for 
arable farming before (42.3 vs 35 percent).142  Thus, assuming a seed oil content of 35 percent 
and an extraction efficiency of 75 percent, this would yield 404-2040 kg oil / ha or 439-2217 liter 
oil/ha.143 This is somewhat higher than other oil producing crops like soybean, sesame, 
sunflower, rapeseed, and castor with a range of 375-1200 liter oil/ha. However, at this time, it is 
difficult to assess production potentials on marginal land because of the lack of data. “The hype 
in J. curcas oil production is not sufficiently supported by hard data on crop production, well 
controlled or optimal management production conditions, and environmental impact.”144,145,146,147 
 
Table 1.1-21.  Jatropha Yield148,149,150 
 Conservative projection Optimistic projection 
Oil    500 liter/ha (53 gal/acre) 2000 liter/ha (213.8 gal/acre) 
Biodiesel 460 liter/ha (49 gal/acre) 1840 liter/ha (196.7 gal/acre) 
(1 L/ha = 0.1069 US gallons per acre) 
  
 
J. curcas is only currently present in 2 counties (both in Florida) in the United States.151 
Because of J. curcas’ intolerance to frost, only small portions of the United States can be 
considered for cultivation. At the most, cultivation can extend as far as 30° N in latitude;152 this 
would include the southern parts of Texas and Louisiana, and most of Florida. Assuming no 
irrigation (as J. curcas is assumed to be a low-input crop), an absolute minimum of 500 mm of 
rainfall is required for substantial production, this occurs only in the easternmost portions of 
Texas, and all of Louisiana and Florida.153 The University of Florida has done some breeding 
 45 
and genetic manipulation of J. curcas, with the goal of increasing hardiness and tolerance to 
colder climates; no results have yet been published.154 
 
Table 1.1-22. Timeline (for US cultivation)155,156  
 Conservative projection Optimistic projection 
Test plantations 5-10 years 2-5 years 
Commercialization 10-20 years 6 years 
 
 Cost data for US cultivation of J curcas is not available. Because of high labor costs, the 
need to reuse seedcake as organic fertilizer (instead of selling it for further economic gain), and 
irrigation needs, J. curcas biodiesel production in the United States will likely may not be 
economic. Other countries with significantly lower labor costs may find it more economic to use 
jatropha as a biodiesel feedstock.   
 
1.1.3.4.3 Jatropha Conclusions 
 
 It is unlikely that Jatropha curcas will be able to help the United States meet its energy 
needs in the future without disrupting current food crops, water resources, and other US interests. 
Currently active large projects to cultivate J. curcas around the world are based on very 
optimistic assumptions; many of the strong selling points of J. curcas a may not be valid under 
more reasonable assumptions. Still very little is known about the crop’s sustainability impacts, 
its long-term yields, or its ability to be grown economically as a monoculture. Even under 
optimal conditions, jatropha yields are unlikely to be radically different from that of other 
conventional oil plants; thus, its possible impact on US energy supply is limited.  
 
1.1.3.5 Algae  
 
 Microalgae are single-celled algae species that grow quickly and have high lipid content, 
and thus are a promising feedstock for biodiesel production. Some of the benefits of using algae 
as a biofuel feedstock are that it: 
 
-grows on marginal land, 
-requires low water inputs, 
-can recycle waste streams from other processes, 
-does not compete with food production, and 
-has high oil yield. 
 
1.1.3.5.1 Algae Overview 
 
 Mass cultivation of microalgae has been ongoing since the 1950s for medical and 
pharmaceutical purposes. Since the 1980s, algae-to-biofuel research has been heavily funded by 
governments such as Japan, France, Germany and the United States.  The research program in 
the US was especially large.  The Aquatic Species Program, backed by the National Renewable 
Energy Laboratory, ran from 1978-1996 to look at the use of aquatic plants, specifically algae, as 
sources of energy.  From about 1982 through the termination of the program, research 
concentrated on algae for biofuel production, specifically in open ponds.157 Two branches to 
 46 
research large scale algaculture systems were funded: the “High Rate Pond” and the “Algae 
Raceway Production System” from 1980 to 1987.  By 1988 several large (1,000 m2) systems 
were designed and built at the “Outdoor Test Facility.”158  However, overall productivity of the 
ponds was lower than expected at around 10 grams algae / m2 / day, due to cold temperatures and 
native species of algae taking over the ponds. 
  
 Recently, many small companies in the United States and Europe have begun developing 
processes for algae-to-biodiesel production, most notably, GreenFuel Technologies, Solazyme, 
LiveFuels, Solix Biofuels, and AlgaeLink.159 Even large energy corporations have shown interest 
in algae development: Chevron, for example, has partnered with NREL to collaborate on 
research to produce transportation fuel using algae.160  
 
 Microalgae, which can have a high mass percentage of triacylglycerols, or natural oils, 
can be cultivated using either of two methods. One method that is currently in use, and was 
studied widely by the Aquatic Species Program, involves using large, open ponds to grow algae; 
these are often called “raceway” ponds, as their shape is similar to an oval racetrack. They use a 
paddle wheel to keep the water in motion around the pond. The other method of algae cultivation 
utilizes closed “photobioreactors;” these are long, clear tubes through which the algae-water 
mixture flows. The mixture is still exposed to sunlight and CO2 (through gas bubblers) but is 
shielded from contaminants that may occur in the environment. 
  
 After the algae are grown, the oil must still be extracted from the mixture. Usually this 
involves a dewatering process, to dry the algae, which is followed by an oil extraction process. 
The oil may be extracted using presses, expellers, or chemical processes. The triacylglycerols 
can then be processed into biodiesel by transesterification, a chemical process.  The 
transesterification process is discussed further in section 1.4.4 of this document. 
 
1.1.3.5.2 Algae Input and Cultivation 
 
 Because algae are marine species and can be grown wherever sufficient water is 
available, algaculture does not require fertile lands. While other oil crops such as soy, sunflower, 
rapeseed, and jatropha need large amounts of agricultural land in order to meet a sizable portion 
of US liquid fuel demand, algae do not displace agricultural crops. 161,162,163  Algae grow most 
effectively in regions with high solar insolation, such as the US southwest, as discussed later. 
 
 When cultivated in enclosed photobioreactors, evaporation of water in limited, and water 
extracted during the drying process can be mostly reclaimed.164  Even in open raceway-style 
ponds where evaporation is not negligible, water requirements are still considerably lower than 
with conventional agricultural crops. It is estimated that, in order to produce enough algal 
biomass for 60 billion gallon biodiesel/year, between 20-120 trillion gallon water/year are 
needed. This is several orders of magnitude lower than the 4,000 trillion gallon/year used to 
irrigate the entire US corn crop.165 (which, if used exclusively for the production of conventional 
ethanol, would not reach the energy equivalent of 60 billion gallons of algae biodiesel). 
 
 Algae can also thrive in brackish water, with salt concentrations up to twice that of 
seawater, which is often available in saline groundwater aquifers in the southwest.166, 167  The 
 47 
salt, other minerals, and contaminants may pose a problem to the dewatering and extraction 
process, depending on the method used. However, this is a technical, not fundamental, issue with 
the use of saltwater.  Thus, water usage is not a constraint and should not displace conventional 
crops, as no water currently used for conventional crops will need to be diverted to algae.168,169 
 
Aside from sunlight, algae require two main physical inputs for growth: CO2 and 
nutrients.170  These nutrients can be obtained from conventional fertilizers, or from domestic or 
industrial waste sources, such as farm refuse and manure.171 Co-locating algae farms with animal 
husbandry, in order to directly use the manure as a nutrient, would reduce transportation costs.172 
In addition, both of these inputs can be obtained from waste streams from other energy 
processes. They can be coupled with coal-burning power plants or even ethanol plants, and can 
effectively recycle between 50% and 90% of flue gasses, depending on the size of the algae 
farm.173,174,175 The highly controlled environment of algae photobioreactors make them 
especially suitable to process and recycle CO2 in flue gasses, as the gas can be bubbled or 
channeled into the water.176 One study shows approximately 1,700 power plants in the United 
States have enough unused surrounding land to support a commercial-scale algae biofuel 
system.177 A more localized analysis of Arizona, one of the more promising algae cultivation 
states, only identified 7 coal-burning power plants suitable for co-location with algae farms.  
 
1.1.3.5.3 Algae Yield 
 
 Certain species of algae can produce 80 percent of their body weight as oils, and oil 
levels of 20-50 percent are common.178,179 Thus, the projected outputs of algae farms are many 
times higher than traditional farms, on the order of 30,000 to 130,000 liter oil/ha/yr, which can 
be processed into 27,600 to 119,600 liter biodiesel/ha/yr (2,950 to 12,780 gallons 
biodiesel/acre/yr).180,181,182,183,184 
 
 Raceway systems are low-cost but have low productivity compared to photobioreactors. 
Most current research focuses on the photobioreactor system of cultivation for optimal pH, gas 
level, salinity, and temperature control, and to prevent contamination from invasive algae 
species.185,186 Photobioreactors also increase the concentration of algae in the water, by around 
30 times, somewhat simplifying the dewatering process.187  
 
Table 1.1-23.  Potential Algae Yield (assuming photobioreactor system)188, 189,190 
 Conservative projection Optimistic projection 
Oil 30,000 liter/ha/yr (3207 gals/acre) 130,000 liter/ha/yr  (13898 gals/acre) 
Biodiesel 28,000 liter/ha/yr (2993 gals/acre) 120,000 liter/ha/yr  (12829 gals/acre) 
 
1.1.3.5.4 Algae Timeline and Cost Projections 
 
Table 1.1-24.  Algae Timeline191,192,193  
 Conservative projection Optimistic projection 
Commercialization 10 years Now 
 
 One company, AlgaeLink, has developed the first made-to-order industrial algae 
production facility in the world, though it is currently selling it at high cost.194 Also, a company 
 48 
called XL Renewables has developed an approach to use a potentially lower cost photobioreactor 
system for algae production.195 Estimated costs are detailed in the table below. 
 
Table 1.1-25.  Algae Costs (assuming photobioreactor system)196,197 
 Conservative projection Optimistic projection 
Algae biomass    $0.47/kg ($0.21/pound)        $0.05/kg ($0.02/pound) 
Oil (recovered; estimate) 
estesestimate) 
$2.80/liter ($10.60/gallon) $0.20/liter ($0.75/gallon) 
Biodi el $2.95/liter ($11.17/gallon) $0.35/liter ($1.32/gallon) 
 
 Concrete information about harvesting and oil extraction costs is not available, but may 
be up to 50% of the cost of recovered algae oil.  Refining of algae oil into biodiesel will add 
roughly $0.15/L ($0.57/gal).198  Thus, a large production facility of 10,000 tons algae 
biomass/year using current algaculture technology could produce algae oil at roughly $2.80/L 
($10.60/gallon), and algae biodiesel at $2.95/L ($11.17/gal). In comparison, during 2006, the 
cheapest vegetable oil available (crude palm oil) cost roughly $0.52/L ($1.97/gal), and palm oil 
biodiesel roughly $0.66/L ($2.50/gal). 
  
1.1.3.5.5 Possible U.S. Locations  
 
 The US southwest is the most promising location for economic algae-for-biofuel 
cultivation, due to its high solar insolation (see Figure 1.1-6), availability of saltwater aquifers, 
and relatively low current land use.199  Ideally, algae farms could be co-located with coal-burning 
power plants in order to recycle the carbon emissions and increase algae.200 However, although 
one study states that 1,700 power plants throughout the United States have enough surrounding 
land to support a commercial-scale algae system, only a limited number of these are in the 
southwest, due to lower population densities.201  
 
Figure 1.1-6.  
PV Solar Radiation in the United States 
 
 
 49 
1.1.3.5.6 Algae Challenges 
 
 Unlike other feedstocks that have fundamental land use, water use, and yield/efficiency 
issues, the main problem facing future development of algae-to-biodiesel systems is 
underdeveloped technology and high cost. “Producing microalgal biomass is generally more 
expensive than growing crops.”202 The high cost is due mainly to the relative complexity of 
cultivation, harvesting, and oil extraction systems needed for algae, which translates to high 
capital and operating costs.203,204,205,206 “Economics of producing microalgal biodiesel need to 
improve substantially to make it competitive with petrodiesel, but the level of improvement 
necessary appears to be attainable.”207  Specific technological hurdles include temperature 
control, dewatering methods and lipid extraction.  Harvesting the algae is particularly difficult 
and energy intensive, but is made somewhat easier with photobioreactors, which yield higher 
algae concentrations in the water than open-ponds. 
 
1.1.3.5.7 Algae Conclusions 
 
 Algae-to-biofuel production has significant potential because of high oil yields and 
ability to be cultivated on marginal land. Indeed, algae could supply all of the United as much as 
60 billion gallons of biodiesel/year using a land area as small as 6 million acres (about 8% of 
Arizona’s land area).208 However, several technical hurdles must still be overcome, and costs 
must come down significantly, before algae is viable as a commercial biofuel feedstock. 
 
1.1.3.6 Imported Biodiesel 
 
 In 2007, the EU produced 58 percent of worldwide biodiesel.  Another 20 percent was 
produced in the U.S., with the remainder split between South America and the rest of the 
world.209 
  
 In terms of historical production, EU biodiesel output increased from 200 million gallons 
in 2000 to almost 1,500 million gallons in 2007.210 According to some analysts, however, the EU 
does not have the capacity to expand oilseed areas and in comparison to other climates, the 
climate in the EU is not particularly good for oilseed production.211  Thus,  estimates for future 
EU biodiesel production appear to be roughly 2.2 billion gallons by 2017.212 
 
 In addition to leading production, the EU is currently the largest market for biodiesel in 
the world, consuming almost 900 million gallons in 2005.  Preliminary estimates for 2006 show 
biodiesel consumption increasing to approximately 1500 million gallons.213  Even with the 
increase in domestic production, however, it seems likely that the EU’s future biofuels 
consumption goals will not be met. 
 
 In 2007, the European Commission (EC) proposed a binding minimum target requiring 
10 percent biofuel use for transport by 2020.214,215  The International Energy Outlook forecasts 
OECD European countries will consume 147 billion gasoline gallons equivalent (gge) of 
transportation fuel in 2010, growing to 151 gge by 2020.  Currently, approximately 60 percent of 
the EU’s transportation fuel demand is met by diesel.  Assuming this split continues in the future, 
a 10 percent biofuel requirement would translate to roughly 8 billion gallons of biodiesel demand 
 50 
by 2017.  Thus, it appears likely that the EU will not be able to produce enough biodiesel to meet 
its goals by 2020 and will need to depend on other countries to make up the remaining 5.8 billion 
gallon demand (after accounting for domestic production of 2.2 billion gallons as estimated from 
above). So not only will the EU, the largest current producer of biodiesel, not have any biodiesel 
available for export in the future; they will likely be a net importer competing with the U.S. for 
surplus biodiesel supplies. 
 
 As imports of finished biodiesel (or biodiesel feedstocks) are relatively new in the U.S. 
domestic market, volumes are currently small and not well-tracked by industry groups and EIA.  
Therefore, there is limited historical data from which to better understand the U.S.’s position to 
import biodiesel.  Alternatively, in order to answer these questions, we analyzed the following 
countries that have been noted as having a large potential for producing biodiesel:  Brazil, 
Malaysia, Indonesia, and India.   
 
 Currently, there is a large interest in Brazil to develop a strong biodiesel program.  As 
Brazil has mandates of B2 by 2008 and B5 by 2013 216 much of its production of biodiesel will 
be consumed domestically before any biodiesel will be available for exports.  If the mandates as 
well as Brazil’s biodiesel production goals are met217, this would mean that approximately 500 
million gallons could be available for exports by 2010 and around 600 million gallons by 2020. 
Although this is a relatively large amount compared to what is produced today, this volume is 
still not enough to meet all of the EU’s demand for biodiesel.  Therefore, the amount of biodiesel 
exported from Brazil will likely be split among those countries demanding biodiesel, with the 
amount allocated to the U.S. uncertain at this point in time. 
 
 We also analyzed the biodiesel situation in the top two world producers of palm oil, 
Malaysia and Indonesia.  Although Malaysia and Indonesia have a large potential for biodiesel 
production from palm oil, these countries appear to be marketing their exports to European and 
Asian nations as well as implementing their own biofuels goals.  In fact, Malaysia is anticipating 
biodiesel export opportunities in the European market and is expected to export biodiesel 
specifically to Europe in the range of 100-120 million gallons by 2010.218  This volume is still 
relatively small in comparison to the production of biodiesel in the U.S. from domestic sources.  
The prospect for Indonesian palm oil biodiesel is similar as most Indonesian exports of biodiesel 
are to China and other Asian markets.  
 
 As far as mandates are concerned, Malaysia is planning on introducing a B5 mandate 
which could demand up to 166 million gallons of biodiesel.219  Indonesia has a smaller mandate 
of B2.5, as a decline in fossil fuel prices and the increase in crude palm oil prices resulted in the 
decrease from its original B5 mandate.220  In fact, historically, palm oil prices have been lower 
than soybean and rapeseed oil, suggesting that the use of palm oil could be the most cost-
effective.221  However, in 2006, palm oil prices began to track soybean and rapeseed oil prices.222  
Since feedstock costs make up the largest portion of production costs for biodiesel, this suggests 
that the production of biodiesel may not be profitable if palm oil prices remain high.  With 
Malaysia and Indonesia’s eyes set on importing biodiesel to the EU and Asian nations, possible 
biodiesel mandates in the future, and increases in palm oil feedstock costs, it seems unlikely that 
the U.S. will potentially receive large volumes of biodiesel from this part of the world.     
 
 51 
 As described above, another potential source of biofuel feedstock is jatropha.  Although 
the potential for India to produce biodiesel from jatropha is large, there are still great 
uncertainties as to whether India can meet even its own biodiesel goals (i.e., B20 by 2020)223, let 
alone the goals of other nations.  Historically, India has neither imported nor exported bio-fuels 
for fuel purposes, nor does the government provide any financial assistance for these products.  
Thus, India’s lack of experience in transporting large volumes of biofuels to other nations may 
limit how much is available internationally.  Given that large-scale cultivation of jatropha has yet 
to be seen, and that jatropha has unpredictable yields, it seems unlikely that India could provide 
large volumes of biodiesel to the U.S.224 
 
 Our analysis of the countries with the most potential to produce and consume biodiesel in 
the future suggests that there will be very limited supplies of biodiesel. Supplies to the U.S. will 
be limited by factors such as mandates and goals of other countries, preferential shipment of 
biodiesel to European and Asian nations, and how quickly non-traditional crops such as jatropha 
can be developed.  Thus, we are estimating that there will be negligible amounts of biodiesel 
available to the U.S. in the future.  
 
1.1.3.7 Biodiesel Feedstock Summary 
 
 
Table 1.1-26.  
Estimated 2022 Potential Biodiesel & Renewable Diesel Volumes  
Based on Feedstock Availability (million gallons of fuel) 
FASOM Non-FASOM FASOM Non-FASOM FASOM Non-FASOM
Soy oil 551 551
Corn oil (food grade) 109 109
Corn oil (fractionation) 150 150
Etallow 14 14 28
NonETallow 29 29 57
Lard 26 26 52
YGrease 94 94 188
Poultry fat (not in FASOM) 25 25 50
Total 823 175 163 25 985 200
Biomass-based diesel Other advanced biofuel Totals
998 188 1,185
 
 
 52 
 53 
1.2 RFS2 Biofuel Volumes  
 
 Our assessment of the renewable fuel volumes required to meet the Energy Independence 
and Security Act (EISA) necessitates establishing a primary set of fuel types and volumes on 
which to base our assessment of the impacts of the new standards.  EISA contains four broad 
categories: cellulosic biofuel, biomass-based diesel, total advanced biofuel, and total renewable 
fuel.  As these categories could be met with a wide variety of fuel choices, in order to assess the 
impacts of the rule, we projected a set of reasonable renewable fuel volumes based on our 
interpretation of likely fuels that could come to market.   
 
 The following subsections detail our rationale for projecting the amount and type of fuels 
needed to meet EISA.  For cellulosic biofuel we have assumed that the entire volume will be 
domestically produced cellulosic ethanol.  Biomass-based diesel is assumed for our analyses to 
be comprised of a majority of fatty-acid methyl ester (FAME) biodiesel and a smaller portion of 
non-co-processed renewable diesel.  Subsequent to the analyses being conducted, our lifecycle 
analysis was completed showing that biomass-based diesel from soy oil failed to meet the 50% 
GHG threshold.  The analyses contained in this DRIA are still based on the presumption that soy 
and other virgin plant oils used for biodiesel would qualify as biomass-based diesel.  
Adjustments in the analysis will be conducted for the FRM.  The portion of the advanced biofuel 
category not met from cellulosic biofuel and biomass-based diesel is assumed to come mainly 
from imported (sugarcane) ethanol with a smaller amount from co-processed renewable diesel.  
The total renewable fuel volume not required to be comprised of advanced biofuels is assumed to 
be met with corn ethanol. 
 
 In addition, the following subsections also describe other fuels that have the potential to 
contribute to meeting EISA, but because of their uncertainty of use, or because their use likely 
might be negligible we have chosen to not assume any use for our analysis.  Examples of these 
types of renewable fuels or blendstocks include bio-butanol, biogas, cellulosic diesel, cellulosic 
gasoline, biodiesel from algae, jatropha, or palm, imported cellulosic ethanol, other biomass-to-
liquids (BTL), and other alcohols or ethers. 
 
1.2.1 Cellulosic Biofuel 
 
 As defined in EISA, cellulosic biofuel means renewable fuel produced from any 
cellulose, hemicellulose, or lignin that is derived from renewable biomass and that has lifecycle 
greenhouse gas emissions, as determined by the Administrator, that are at least 60 % less than 
the baseline lifecycle greenhouse gas emissions.   
 
 When many people think of cellulosic biofuel, they immediately think of cellulosic 
ethanol.  However, cellulosic biofuel could be comprised of other alcohols synthetic gasoline, 
synthetic diesel fuel, and synthetic jet fuel, propane, and biogas.  Whether cellulosic biofuel is 
ethanol will depend on a number of factors, including production costs, the form of tax subsidies, 
credit programs, and issues associated with blending the biofuel into the fuel pool.  It will also 
depend on the relative demand for gasoline and diesel fuel.  For instance, European refineries are 
undersupplying the European market with diesel fuel supply and oversupplying it with gasoline, 
and based on the recent high diesel fuel price margins over gasoline, it seems that the U.S. is 
 54 
falling in line with Europe.  Therefore, if the U.S. trend is toward being relatively oversupplied 
with gasoline, there could be a price advantage towards producing renewable fuels that displace 
diesel fuel rather than a gasoline fuel replacement like ethanol.   
 
 Current efforts in converting cellulosic feedstocks into fuels focus on biochemical and 
thermochemical conversion processes.  In terms of production costs, at least for the current state 
of technology, neither biochemical nor thermochemical platforms (comparing enzymatic 
biochemical processing to ethanol and thermochemical processing to cellulosic diesel) appear to 
have clear advantages in capital costs or operating costs.225  We further discuss these 
technologies in Section 1.4 of the DRIA, while feedstock and production costs are discussed in 
Chapter 4 of the DRIA.  The economic competitiveness of cellulosic biofuels will also depend on 
the extent of financial support from the government.  Under the Farm Bill of 2008, both 
cellulosic ethanol and cellulosic diesel receive similar tax subsidies ($1.01 per gallon each).  The 
tax subsidy, however, gives ethanol producers a considerable advantage over those producing 
cellulosic diesel due to the feedstock quantity needed per gallon produced (i.e. typically the 
higher the energy content of the product, the more feedstock that is required).  In a similar 
manner, our proposed approach for the equivalence values for generating RINs based on volume 
rather than energy content would likewise provide advantage for the production of cellulosic 
ethanol over cellulosic diesel.  
 
 One large advantage that cellulosic diesel has over ethanol is the ability for the fuel to be 
blended easily into the current distribution infrastructure at sizeable volumes.  There are 
currently factors tending to limit the amount of ethanol that can be blended into the fuel pool (see 
Section 1.7. of the DRIA for more discussion).  Thus, the production of cellulosic diesel instead 
of cellulosic ethanol could help increase consumption of renewable fuels.   
 
 Thus, there is uncertainty as to which mix of cellulosic biofuels will be produced to fulfill 
the 16 Bgal mandate by 2022.  The latest release of AEO 2008, for example, estimates a mixture 
of cellulosic diesel and ethanol produced for cellulosic biofuel.  For assessing the impacts of the 
RFS2 standards, we made the simplifying assumption that cellulosic biofuel would only consist 
of ethanol, though market realities may also result in cellulosic diesel and other products. 
 
 Cellulosic biofuel could also be produced internationally.  One example of internationally 
produced cellulosic biofuel is ethanol produced from bagasse or straw from sugarcane processing 
in Brazil.  Currently, Brazil burns bagasse to produce steam and generate bioelectricity.  
However, improving efficiencies over the coming decade may allow an increasing portion of 
bagasse to be allocated to other uses, including biofuel, as the demand for bagasse for steam and 
bioelectricity could remain relatively constant. 
 
 One recent study assessed the biomass feedstock potential for selected countries outside 
the United States and projected supply available for export or biofuel production.I,226  For the 
report’s baseline projection in 2017, it was estimated that approximately 21 billion ethanol-
equivalent gallons could be produced from cellulosic feedstocks at $36/dry tonne or less.  The 
majority (~80%) projected is from bagasse, with the rest from forest products.  Brazil was 
projected to have the most potential for cellulosic feedstock production from both bagasse and 
                                                 
I Countries evaluated include Argentina, Brazil, Canada, China, Colombia, India, Mexico, and CBI 
 55 
forest products. Other countries include India, China, and those belonging to the Caribbean Basin 
Initiative (CBI), though much smaller feedstock supplies are projected as compared to Brazil.  
Although international production of cellulosic biofuel is possible, it is uncertain whether this 
supply would be available primarily to the U.S. or whether other nations would consume the fuel 
domestically.   Therefore, for our analyses we have chosen to assume that all the cellulosic 
biofuel would be produced domestically. 
 
1.2.2 Biomass-Based Diesel 
 
 Biomass-based diesel as defined in EISA means renewable fuel that is biodiesel as 
defined in section 312(f) of the Energy Policy Act of 1992 with lifecycle greenhouse gas 
emissions, as determined by the Administrator, that are at least 50 % less than the baseline 
lifecycle greenhouse gas emissions.J  Biomass-based diesel can include fatty acid methyl ester 
(FAME) biodiesel, renewable diesel (RD) that has not been co-processed with a petroleum 
feedstock, as well as cellulosic diesel.  Although cellulosic diesel produced through the Fischer-
Tropsch (F-T) process could potentially contribute to the biomass-based diesel category, we have 
assumed that the fuel and its corresponding feedstocks (cellulosic biomass) are already 
accounted for in the cellulosic biofuel category as discussed in the previous Section 1.2.1. 
 
 FAME and RD processes can make acceptable quality fuel from vegetable oils, fats, and 
greases, and thus will generally compete for the same feedstock pool.  For our analyses, we have 
assumed that the volume contribution from FAME biodiesel and RD will be a function of the 
available feedstock types.  For our analysis we assumed that virgin plant oils would be 
preferentially processed by biodiesel plants, while the majority of fats and greases would be 
routed to RD production.  This is because the RD process involves hydrotreating (or thermal 
depolymerization), which is more severe and uses multiple chemical mechanisms to reform the 
fat molecules into diesel range material.  The FAME process, by contrast, relies on more specific 
chemical mechanisms and requires pre-treatment if the feedstocks contain more than trace 
amounts of free fatty acids or other contaminates which are typical of recycled fats and greases.  
In terms of volume availability of feedstocks, supplies of fats and greases are more limited than 
virgin vegetable oils.  As a result, our control case assumes the majority of biomass-based diesel 
volume is met using biodiesel facilities processing vegetable oils, with RD making up a smaller 
portion and using solely fats and greases.   
 
 The RD production volume must be further classified as co-processed or non-co-
processed, depending on whether the renewable material was mixed with petroleum during the 
hydrotreating operations (more details on this definition are in Section III.B.1 of the preamble).  
EISA specifically forbids co-processed RD from being counted as biomass-based diesel, but it 
can still count toward the total advanced biofuel requirement.  What fraction of RD will 
ultimately be co-processed is uncertain at this time, since little or no commercial production of 
RD is currently underway, and little public information is available about the comparative 
                                                 
J
 Subsequent to the analyses being conducted, our lifecycle analysis was completed showing that biomass-based 
diesel from soy oil failed to meet the 50% GHG threshold.  The analyses contained in this DRIA are still based on 
the presumption that soy and other virgin plant oils used for biodiesel would qualify as biomass-based diesel.  
Adjustments in the analysis will be conducted for the FRM. 
 56 
economics and feasibility of the two methods.  We assumed in our control case that half the 
material will be non-co-processed and thus qualify as biomass-based diesel. 
 
 We assumed that all biomass-based diesel would be produced from soy oil, corn oil, 
tallow, lard, yellow grease, and poultry fats.  In the future, however, other feedstocks such as 
algae and jatropha may develop as discussed previously in Section 1.1 of the DRIA. 
 
1.2.3 Other Advanced Biofuel 
 
 As defined in EISA, advanced biofuel means renewable fuel, other than ethanol derived 
from corn starch, that has lifecycle greenhouse gas emissions, as determined by the 
Administrator, that are at least 50 % less than baseline lifecycle greenhouse gas emissions. As 
defined in EISA, advanced biofuel includes the cellulosic biofuel, biomass-based diesel, and co-
processed renewable diesel categories that were mentioned in Section 1.2.1 and Section 1.2.2 
above.  However, EISA requires greater volumes of advanced biofuel than just the volumes 
required of these fuels.  It is entirely possible that greater volumes of cellulosic biofuel, biomass-
based diesel, and co-processed renewable diesel than required by the Act could be produced in 
the future.  Our control case, however, does not assume that cellulosic biofuel and biomass-based 
diesel volumes will exceed those required under EISA.K  As a result, to meet the total advanced 
biofuel volume required under EISA, advanced biofuel types are needed other than cellulosic 
biofuel, biomass-based diesel, and co-processed renewable diesel through 2022. 
 
 We have assumed for the analyses conducted that for our control case the most likely 
source of advanced fuel other than cellulosic biofuel, biomass-based diesel, and co-processed 
renewable diesel would be from imported sugarcane ethanol.L  Our assessment of international 
fuel ethanol production and demand indicate that anywhere from 3.8-4.2 Bgal of sugarcane 
ethanol from Brazil could be available for export by 2020/2022.  If this volume were to be made 
available to the U.S., then there would be sufficient volume to meet the advanced biofuel 
standard.  To calculate the amount of imported ethanol needed to meet the EISA standards, we 
took the difference between the total advanced biofuel category and cellulosic biofuel, biomass-
based diesel, and co-processed renewable diesel categories.  The amount of imported ethanol 
required by 2022 is approximately 3.2 Bgal.  Refer to Section 1.5.2 for a more detailed 
discussion on imported ethanol. 
   
Recent news indicates that there are also plans for sugarcane ethanol to be produced in 
the U.S.  For instance, sugarcane has been grown in California’s Imperial Valley specifically for 
the purpose of making ethanol and using the cane’s biomass to generate electricity to power the 
                                                 
K
  While cellulosic biofuel will not be limited by feedstock availability, it likely will be limited by the very 
aggressive ramp up in production volume for an industry which is still being demonstrated on the pilot scale and 
therefore is not yet commercially viable.  On the other hand, biomass-based diesel derived from agricultural oils and 
animal fats are faced with relatively high feedstock costs which limit feedstock supply. 
L
 Subsequent to the analyses being conducted, our lifecycle analysis was completed showing that biomass-based 
diesel from soy oil failed to meet the 50% GHG threshold.  The analyses contained in this DRIA are still based on 
the presumption that soy and other virgin plant oils used for biodiesel would qualify as biomass-based diesel.  Our 
lifecycle analyses also show that imported sugarcane ethanol does not meet the 50% GHG threshold, though our 
analyses contained in this DRIA assume that imported sugarcane ethanol would qualify as an advanced biofuel.  
Adjustments in the analysis will be conducted for the FRM.   
 57 
ethanol distillery as well as export excess electricity to the electric grid.M  There are at least two 
projects being developed at this time that could result in several hundred million gallons of 
ethanol produced.  The sugarcane is being grown on marginal and existing cropland that is 
unsuitable for food crops and will replace forage crops like alfalfa, Bermuda grass, Klein grass, 
etc.  Harvesting is expected to be fully mechanized.  Thus, there is potential for these projects 
and perhaps others to help contribute to the EISA biofuels mandate.  This is discussed in Section 
1.1.  
 
 Butanol is another potential motor vehicle fuel which could be produced from biomass 
and used in lieu of ethanol to comply with the RFS2 standard.  Production of butanol is being 
pursued by a number of companies including a partnership between BP and Dupont.  Other 
companies which have expressed the intent to produce biobutanol are Baer Biofuels and Gevo.  
The near term technology being pursued for producing butanol involves fermentation of starch 
compounds, although it can also be produced from cellulose.  Butanol has several inherent 
advantages compared to ethanol.  First, it has higher energy density than ethanol which would 
improve fuel economy (mpg).  Second, butanol is much less water soluble which may allow the 
butanol to be blended in at the refinery and the resulting butanol-gasoline blend then more easily 
shipped through pipelines.  This would reduce distribution costs associated with ethanol’s need 
to be shipped separately from its gasoline blendstock and also save on the blending costs 
incurred at the terminal.  Third, butanol can be blended in higher concentrations than 10 % which 
would likely allow butanol to be blended with gasoline at high enough concentrations to avoid 
the need for most or all of high concentration ethanol-gasoline blends, such as E85, that require 
the use of fuel flexible vehicles.  For example, because of butanol’s lower oxygen content, it can 
be blended at 16% (by volume) to match the oxygen concentration of ethanol blended at 10 % 
(by volume).  Because of butanol’s higher energy density, when blending butanol at 16 % by 
volume, it is the renewable fuels equivalent to blending ethanol at about 20 %.  Thus, butanol 
would enable achieving most of the RFS2 standard by blending a lower concentration of 
renewable fuel than having to resort to a sizable volume of E85 as in the case of ethanol.  The 
need to blend ethanol as E85 provides some difficult challenges.  The use of butanol may be one 
means of avoiding these blending difficulties. 
 
 At the same time, butanol has a couple less desirable aspects relative to ethanol.  First, 
butanol is lower in octane compared to ethanol – ethanol has a very high blending octane of 
around 115, while butanol’s octane ranges from 87 octane numbers for normal butanol and 94 
octane numbers for isobutanol.  Potential butanol producers are likely to pursue producing 
isobutanol over normal butanol because of isobutanol’s higher octane content.  Higher octane is 
a valuable attribute of any gasoline blendstock because it helps to reduce refining costs.  A 
second negative property of butanol is that it has a much higher viscosity compared to either 
gasoline or ethanol.  High viscosity makes a fuel harder to pump, and more difficult to atomize 
in the combustion chamber in an internal combustion engine.  The third downside to butanol is 
that it is more expensive to produce than ethanol, although the higher production cost is partially 
offset by its higher energy density.   
 
                                                 
M
 Personal communication with Nathalie Hoffman, Managing Member of California Renewable Energies, LLC, 
August 27, 2008 
 58 
 Another potential source of renewable transportation fuel is biomethane refined from 
biogas.  Biogas is a term meaning a combustible mixture of methane and other light gases 
derived from biogenic sources.  It can be combusted directly in some applications, but for use in 
highway vehicles it is typically purified to closely resemble fossil natural gas for which the 
vehicles are typically designed.  The definition of biogas as given in EISA is sufficiently broad 
to cover combustible gases produced by biological decomposition of organic matter, as in a 
landfill or wastewater treatment facility, as well as those produced via thermochemical 
decomposition of biomass. 
 
 Currently, the largest source of biogas is landfill gas collection, where the majority of 
fuel is combusted to generate electricity, with a small portion being upgraded to methane suitable 
for use in heavy duty vehicle fleets.  Current literature suggests approximately 16 billion 
gasoline gallons equivalent of biogas (referring to energy content) could potentially be produced 
in the long term, with about two thirds coming from biomass gasification and about one third 
coming from waste streams such as landfills and human and animal sewage digestion. 227, 228  
 
 Because the majority of the biogas volume estimates assume biomass as a feedstock, we 
have chosen not to include this fuel in our analyses since we are projecting most available 
biomass will be used for cellulosic liquid biofuel production in the long term.  The remaining 
biogas potentially available from waste-related sources would come from a large number of 
small streams requiring purification and connection to storage and/or distribution facilities, 
which would involve significant economic hurdles.  An additional and important source of 
uncertainty is whether there would be a sufficient number of vehicles configured to consume 
these volumes of biogas.  Thus, we expect future biogas fuel streams to continue to find non-
transportation uses such as electrical power generation or facility heating. 
 
1.2.4 Other Renewable Fuel 
 
 The remaining portion of total renewable fuel not met with advanced biofuel is assumed 
to come from corn-based ethanol.  The Act essentially sets a limit for participation in the RFS 
program of 15 Bgal of corn ethanol by 2022.  It should be noted, however, that there is no 
specific “corn-ethanol” mandated volume, and that any advanced biofuel produced above and 
beyond what is required for the advanced biofuel requirements could reduce the amount of corn 
ethanol needed to meet the total renewable fuel standard.  This occurs in our projections during 
the earlier years (2009-2014) in which we project that some fuels could compete favorably with 
corn ethanol (e.g. biodiesel and imported ethanol).  Beginning around 2015, fuels qualifying as 
advanced biofuels likely will be devoted to meeting the increasingly stringent volume mandates 
for advanced biofuel.  It is also worth noting that more than 15 Bgal of corn ethanol could be 
produced and RINs generated for that volume under our proposed RFS2 regulations.  However, 
obligated parties would not be required to purchase more than 15 Bgal worth of corn ethanol 
RINs.  
 
 We are assuming for our analysis that sufficient corn ethanol will be produced to meet 
the 15 Bgal limit.  However, this assumes that in the future corn ethanol production is not limited 
due to environmental constraints, such as water quantity issues (see Section 6.10 of this DRIA).  
This also assumes that in the future either corn ethanol plants are constructed or modified to meet 
 59 
the 20% GHG threshold, or that sufficient corn ethanol production exists that is grandfathered 
and not required to meet the 20% threshold.  Our current projection is that up to 15 Bgal could be 
grandfathered, but actual volumes will be determined at the time of facility registration.  Refer to 
Section 1.5.1.4 of the DRIA for more information.  Since our current lifecycle analysis estimates 
that most corn ethanol would not meet the 20 % GHG reduction threshold required of non-
grandfathered facilities, without facility upgrades if actual grandfathered corn volumes are less 
than 15 Bgal, then it may be necessary to meet the volume mandate with other renewable fuels or 
through the use of advanced technologies that could improve the corn ethanol lifecycle GHG 
estimates.   
 
1.2.5 Control Case for Analyses 
 
 Table 1.2-1 summarizes the fuel types used for the control case and their corresponding 
volumes for the years 2009-2022.
Table 1.2-1 
Control Case Projected Renewable Fuel Volumes (billion gallons)  
 
Advanced Biofuel 
Cellulosic 
Biofuel Biomass-Based Diesela Other Advanced Biofuel 
Non-Advanced
 Biofuel 
Year 
Cellulosic 
Ethanol 
FAMEb 
Biodiesel 
Non-Co-processed 
Renewable Diesel 
Co-processed 
Renewable Diesel 
Imported 
Ethanol Corn Ethanol
2009 0.00 0.50 0.00 0.00 0.50 9.85 
2010 0.10 0.64 0.01 0.01 0.29 11.55 
2011 0.25 0.77 0.03 0.03 0.16 12.29 
2012 0.50 0.96 0.04 0.04 0.18 12.94 
2013 1.00 0.94 0.06 0.06 0.19 13.75 
2014 1.75 0.93 0.07 0.07 0.36 14.40 
2015 3.00 0.91 0.09 0.09 0.83 15.00 
2016 4.25 0.90 0.10 0.10 1.31 15.00 
2017 5.50 0.88 0.12 0.12 1.78 15.00 
2018 7.00 0.87 0.13 0.13 2.25 15.00 
2019 8.50 0.85 0.15 0.15 2.72 15.00 
2020 10.50 0.84 0.16 0.16 2.70 15.00 
2021 13.50 0.83 0.17 0.17 2.67 15.00 
2022 16.00 0.81 0.19 0.19 3.14 15.00 
 
aBiomass-Based Diesel includes FAME biodiesel, cellulosic diesel, and non-co-processed renewable diesel.  
bFatty acid methyl ester (FAME) biodiesel
 61 
 We needed to make this projection soon after EISA was signed to allow sufficient time to 
conduct our long lead-time analyses.  As a result, we used the same ethanol-equivalence basis for 
these projections as was used in the RFS1 rulemaking.  However, as described in Section III.D.1 
of the preamble, we are proposing that volumes of renewable fuel be counted on a straight 
gallon-for-gallon basis under RFS2, such that all Equivalence Values would be 1.0.  While the 
control case volumes used as the basis for our analyses do not reflect this proposed approach to 
Equivalence Values, the net effect on projected volumes is very small; instead of 36 billion 
gallons of renewable fuel in 2022, our control case includes 35.3 billion gallons.  We do not 
believe that this difference will substantively affect the analyses that are based on our projected 
control case volumes.  Nevertheless, we will update these volumes for the final rule. 
 
1.2.6 Construction Feasibility for Cellulosic Ethanol Industry 
 
 Start-up of cellulosic ethanol plants is expected to begin in earnest with a few small 
plants in 2010-11, followed by addition of industry capacity continuing at an increasing pace due 
to more plant starts per year as well as increasing plant size.  This is typical as an industry 
progresses up the learning curve, and investors become more confident and are willing to fund 
larger, more efficient plants.  During the period from 2010-12, we also expect a slowing of starch 
ethanol plant construction, such that engineering and construction personnel and equipment 
fabricators would potentially be able to transition to work on cellulosic ethanol facilities. 
 
 Here we examine the build rate required to construct cellulosic plants in time to meet the 
standards in Table 1.2-1, and we compare this to the historic build rate of capacity in the starch 
ethanol industry.  Figure 1.2-1 depicts these construction trends.   
 
 
 62 
Figure 1.2-1.   
Historic and projected U.S. ethanol production trends 2001-2022. 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
20
02
20
04
20
06
20
08
20
10
20
12
20
14
20
16
20
18
20
20
20
22
Pl
a
n
ts
/y
r
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
B
ga
l/y
r
Starch Plants Cellulosic Plants Total Ethanol Capacity
2008 and later data are projected
 
 
 
 Historical plant build rates for starch ethanol were derived from figures in Chapter 1.5 of 
this DRIA (see Figure 1.5-1).  Average plant capacity figures were estimated from existing 
capacity and plant counts, and we project that the recent trend toward larger plant sizes continues 
going forward.  Approximately 200 starch ethanol plants are expected to be operating by 2022.   
 
 For cellulosic ethanol plant construction, we assumed new plant size would begin 
relatively small at 40 million gal/yr for 2010-13, increasing to 80 million gal/yr for 2014-17, and 
100 million gal/yr afterwards.  Given the volume standards laid out in the EISA, as well as the 
number of cellulosic ethanol plants projected in Chapter 1.5 to be roughly 180 by 2022 (see 
Table 1.5-36), we arrive at a maximum required build rate of approximately 2 billion gal/yr from 
2018-2022.  This is similar to the rate of starch ethanol construction in recent years.  Table 1.2-2 
shows a summary of the figures used in the analysis.   
 
 
 63 
Table 1.2-2.   
Summary of figures used in the ethanol plant construction rate analysis 2001-2022. 
Build Avg Plant Capacity Industry Build Avg Plant Capacity Industry
Rate Capacity Change Capacity Rate Capacity Change Capacity
Year Plants/yr Mgal/yr Bgal/yr Bgal/yr Plants/yr Mgal/yr Bgal/yr Bgal/yr
2001 1.8
2002 6 50 0.3 2.1
2003 14 50 0.7 2.8
2004 12 50 0.6 3.4
2005 10 50 0.5 3.9
2006 20 50 1.0 4.9
2007 16 100 1.6 6.5
2008 27 100 2.7 9.2
2009 20 100 2.0 11.2
2010 15 100 1.5 12.7 2 40 0.1 0.1
2011 10 100 1.0 13.7 5 40 0.2 0.3
2012 8 100 0.8 14.5 7 40 0.3 0.6
2013 5 100 0.5 15.0 10 40 0.4 1.0
2014 15.0 12 80 1.0 1.9
2015 15.0 15 80 1.2 3.1
2016 15.0 17 80 1.4 4.5
2017 15.0 18 80 1.4 5.9
2018 15.0 20 100 2.0 7.9
2019 15.0 20 100 2.0 9.9
2020 15.0 20 100 2.0 11.9
2021 15.0 20 100 2.0 13.9
2022 15.0 20 100 2.0 15.9
Starch Ethanol Cellulosic Ethanol
 
 
 
 This work suggests that it may be feasible to construct plants quickly enough to meet the 
standard if plant starts can reach a rate as high as for starch ethanol in recent years.  While 
cellulosic plant technology is still developing, it is expected that the plants will be considerably 
more complex and expensive to construct than the starch ethanol plants being built today.  
Therefore, we believe the market will need to react even more quickly with capital funding, as 
well as design and construction resources. 
 64 
1.3 Agricultural Residue Harvesting, Storage & Transport  
 The amount of agricultural residue that can be removed is limited by how much residue 
must be left on the field to maintain soil health and by the mechanical efficiency (inefficiency) of 
the harvesting operation.  We have already discussed sustainable removal rates in Section 1.1 
and will discuss the technical challenges related to the harvesting, storage, and transport of 
agricultural residues in the following sections.   
1.3.1 Harvesting Technologies  
 The amount of residue that can be harvested from any one field is dependent on the 
combined mechanical inefficiencies of the harvesting operation and on erodibility and 
sustainable productivity of the site.  In any case,  the mechanical inefficiencies of the harvest 
operation make it impossible to remove 100% of the residue. A controlling principle is that 
increasing amounts of dry matter are lost as the stover is handled by increasing numbers of 
different machines used in the harvest operation.  For example, multiple machines are currently 
necessary for stover harvest:  shredders, rakes, balers, bale wagons, and stackers just to get the 
stover bales to the side of the field; dry matter is lost during each operation.  Currently, there are 
no harvesting machines designed specifically for residue harvest, other than perhaps, for small 
grain straws that use common hay equipment.  One proposal for corn stover harvest is to shut the 
spreader off on the grain combine in order to form a windrow, of sorts, following which the 
windrow is baled.229  However, modern combines leave most of the stalk standing.  In order to 
harvest as much of the stover as possible, it is necessary to shred the standing stalks and then 
rake all of it together prior to baling.230  The baler pickup must be set high enough to avoid 
picking up dirt and dirt clods, which can damage harvesting equipment and that would need to be 
removed in downstream processing stage, which would translate into further dry matter losses.  
Consequently, it is likely that some stover will be left on the field.  
Small grain straws, such as those from wheat, oats, barley, and rice have been harvested 
for many years.  A significant difference between the harvesting equipment used for corn stover 
and these grains, is that the small grain plant is cut off near the ground and passes through the 
combine at the time of harvest.  It falls to the ground from the harvester into a windrow; in some 
cases, the windrow many need to be raked together before baling to maximize removal 
efficiency.  Since the whole grain plant had dried prior to harvest, it’s not necessary to wait for 
the straw to dry before it’s baled.  Small grain straws can be baled, hauled, and stacked in 
standard small bales, in larger 3’ x 4’ x 8’ square bales, or large round bales with existing hay 
equipment.    
 Sugarcane bagasse is not harvested, in the same way as corn stover or small grain straws.  
It is a byproduct of sugar production from sugarcane, delivered by truck and trailer from the 
sugar processing facility to the ethanol plant. 
Researchers are already studying the possibility of using a single-pass operation to 
harvest corn stover.231, 232  It seems possible that by 2022, the corn stover harvest could be 
accomplished in a single-pass operation during which, hopefully, the amount of residue left on 
the field will be less a function of harvest efficiency and more a function of the amount that must 
 65 
be left to maintain soil productivity, e.g., meet soil erodibility and sustainability requirements.  A 
combine designed specifically for the job must still be constructed, but we expect that it will cut 
the whole stalk a few inches above the soil, leaving some stalk anchored to the ground. The 
single-pass harvester cuts the entire plant a few inches above the soil surface and pulls stalks, 
leaves, cobs, and grain into the combine, where they become a single, mixed grain and stover 
stream.  The harvester blows the entire stream into tractor-pulled grain-carts that run along-side 
the harvester.  When a cart is filled, it is replaced by an empty cart, and the full cart is hauled to 
the field side, where it’s unloaded into bulk ‘walking-floor’ semi trailers, and hauled to a co-op 
or depot type elevator/facility for further processing and storage.  At the elevator, the 
stover/grain mix is unloaded into equipment for further processing before it’s sent to storage.  
Although a facility (equipment, buildings, etc.) at an elevator for separating the corn grain from 
the stover has not been constructed, we anticipate that it will operate very much like a modern 
grain harvester/combine, except it will obviously be stationary.   
One of the issues yet to be solved is how the proper quantity of residue required for soil 
maintenance is either left on or returned to the field and how it will be evenly spread.  This of 
course could add another operation or two and would likely require heavy equipment to travel on 
fields, which would undoubtedly exacerbate compaction problems.  We don’t anticipate any 
major future changes in the way the small grain straws will be harvested. 
1.3.2 Feedstock Storage 
Corn stover bales and small grain straw bales will likely be stored in similar ways.  Bales 
of any of the feedstocks could be stored out in the open, outside covered or inside coverage, such 
as in hay sheds.  Large, round stover bales store better in the open than large square bales, in that 
rain and particularly snow collect on flat surfaces more readily than on round which could result 
in significant deterioration and dry matter loss of large, square bales.  Another important issue is 
that round balers cost significantly less than large square balers, which could encourage some 
producers to use round balers.  It’s been determined that net wrapping, as apposed to twine-
wrapping round bales improves water runoff and helps maintain bale shape.  Bale shape is 
important for maintaining stable stacks.  We note that large square bales are easier to stack and 
transport than are round bales.  
As discussed in Section 1.3.1, the stover harvest could become a single-pass operation.  
Equipment at the elevator/depot separates the stover from the grain, following which the stover 
is chopped and dried.  This distributed preprocessing facility can provide significant cost benefits 
by producing a higher value feedstock with improved handling, transporting, and merchandising 
potential.  The stover, now with flowability characteristics similar to small cereal grains, is 
moved by standard grain loading and unloading systems into large corrugated steel bins for 
intermediate storage.  In this harvest format, the stover is handled by only two machines before it 
reaches the roadside and never hits the ground.  Dry matter losses should be significantly 
reduced.O   
                                                 
O
 This information came in a confidential, personal communication. 
 66 
Harvesting wet stover as chopped material, similar to animal forage, and ensiling it in a 
silo bag can be done successfully, with dry-matter (DM) matter loss of about 11% after seven 
months storage.  Harvesting wet stover by baling and tube wrapping was successful with DM 
losses of 3.6%.  Dry stover bales stored indoors or outdoors had average DM losses of 5% and 
15%, respectively.  Wrapping dry bales in net wrap and storing on a well drained surface 
significantly reduced DM loss compared to storing twine wrapped dry bales on the ground.234   
Indoor storage is, in most cases, a concrete slab with a roof, supported by poles, with 
open sides (pole-barn).  Depending on the number of bales to be stored, the slab must be sized to 
include aprons around all four edges with aisles between stacks to accommodate stacking and 
hauling equipment and for fire safety.  Corn stover is usually harvested only once per year during 
an approximately 50- to 70-day period; this period is bounded by the time the corn grain harvest 
begins and the onset of winter weather, which is usually wet, and could include snow cover.  As 
a result, the quantity of stover an ethanol plant expects to use until the next harvest (~one-year) 
must be harvested and stored during the same period.  It is not likely that a 12-month supply of 
feedstock will be stored at a plant site; for larger plants the storage site would cover several 
hundred acres and the logistics of hauling and stacking the required number of bales would be 
impossible.  If large square bales will likely be stored at satellite storage units in pole-barn type 
storage.  A similar slab and pole-barn would be constructed at the ethanol plant to store three- or 
four-days of feedstock.P   
Sugarcane bagasse is typically 60 to 75 percent moisture that’s packed in storage and 
sealed as much as possible to reduce the amount of oxygen that would otherwise promote rotting.  
On the other hand, the anaerobic fermentation in the ensilage creates lactic acid that acts as a 
preservative.  
In the future, as described in Section 1.3.1, stover could be ground into particles that are 
small and stable enough that they can be handled and stored using methods and equipment 
currently used for grains of all kinds, such as silos or tanks.  
1.3.3. Feedstock Transport 
Baled Format:  Following the baling operation, stover bales will be collected from the 
field in 10-bale loads by vehicles designed for that purpose (such vehicles are currently used to 
gather hay bales).   The bales are temporarily stored at the field-edge and later loaded onto 
wagons pulled by high-speed tractors that haul as many as 20-bales per load to satellite storage 
(the pole-barns described in Section 1.3.2).  The bales are unloaded and stacked for storage until 
they are needed at the ethanol plant.  Transport to the plant is by over-the-road trucks and trailers 
that can haul net-loads of up to about 45- to 50-tons.  However, because the bale density is low 
(on average, about half the weight of a similarly sized hay bale), the maximum number of bales a 
truck can haul usually weighs much less than the maximum allowable weight.  Small grain 
straws will be handled in much the same way.  Sugarcane bagasse can contain as much as 60% 
to 75% moisture and is usually hauled in open-topped metal trailers from which the bagasse can 
be dumped onto belts or into auger hoppers that convey it to ensilage type storage.  
                                                 
P
 We discuss this information in greater detail in subsection 4.1.1.2 of this chapter. 
18
 At the time of our May 1, 2008 plant assessment.  For more information, refer to Figure 1.5-4 in Section 1.5.1.1. 
 67 
As previously indicated, low bale density usually means that trucks and trailers can’t haul 
the maximum allowable weight, which translates into increased transportation costs.  Drying and 
grinding the stover (and possibly the other residues) could increase its bulk density and allow the 
transports to haul maximum weight loads to the ethanol plant. 
Grain Elevator Format:  According to process requirement, an ethanol plant could pick up 
its feedstock from the elevator/depot in trucks and trailers for transport to the facility.  Feedstock 
in the ground format will likely have a significantly higher bulk-density than baled stover, which 
should translate into lower transportation costs. 
 68 
 69 
1.4 Biofuel Production Technologies  
 
 Biofuel production technologies continue to evolve as facilities learn to improve their 
processes by reducing energy and materials usage, finding alternative uses for by-products, etc.  
For those technologies not yet commercial, researchers are combining their innovative ideas to 
develop cost-effective processes to produce biofuel at low enough costs to compete with their 
petroleum counterparts.  The following sections describe both proven and new technologies 
which may be used to produce renewable fuels to meet the EISA 36 billion gallon standard by 
2022.   
 
1.4.1 Corn Ethanol  
 
 There are two primary processes for converting corn (and other similarly processed 
grains) into ethanol: wet milling and dry milling. The main difference between the two is in the 
treatment of the grain.  Dry mill plants grind the entire kernel (shown below in Figure 1.4-1) and 
generally produce only one primary co-product: distillers grains with solubles (DGS).  The co-
product is sold wet (WDGS) or dried (DDGS) to the agricultural market as animal feed.    Wet 
mill ethanol plants separate the grain kernel prior to processing into its component parts and 
produce other co-products (usually gluten feed, gluten meal, and food-grade corn oil) in addition 
to DGS.  Each process is described in greater detail below in the subsections that follow. 
 
Figure 1.4-1.  Components of the Corn Kernel 
 
 
ENDOSPERM 
Contains nearly all the 
starch used to make 
ethanol and also 
contains protein used in 
animal feed. 
TIP CAP 
Attachment point of the 
kernel to the cob. 
PERICARP/BRAN 
The protective covering of 
the kernel. Contains fiber 
used in human and animal 
food products. 
GERM 
Contains corn oil used in food 
applications as well as 
biodiesel production. 
 
1.4.1.1 Dry Milling Technology235  
 In traditional dry mill plants, first the corn is screened to remove any unwanted  
 
 
 70 
debris.  Then it goes through a hammer mill where it is ground into a course flour also know as 
“meal.”  Next the meal is cooked to physically and chemically prepare the starch for 
fermentation. 
 The first step of the cooking process is to form a hot slurry.  The meal is mixed with 
water, the pH is adjusted to about 5.8, and an alpha-amylase enzyme is added. The slurry is 
heated to 180–190°F for about 30–45 minutes to reduce viscosity. 
 The second step in the cooking process is liquefaction, which occurs in two steps.  First 
the hot slurry is pumped through a pressurized jet cooker at 221°F and held for 5 minutes. The 
mixture is then cooled by an atmospheric or vacuum flash condenser.  After cooling, the mixture 
is held for 1–2 hours at 180–190°F to give the alpha-amylase enzyme time to break down the 
starch into short chain dextrins.  Once cooking is complete, a pH and temperature adjustment is 
made, a second enzyme (glucoamylase) is added, and the resulting mixture (also know as 
“mash”) is pumped into the fermentation tanks.  
 During the fermentation process, the glucoamylase enzyme breaks down the dextrins to 
form simple sugars. Yeast is added to convert the sugar to ethanol and carbon dioxide. The mash 
is then allowed to ferment for 50–60 hours.  The result is a mixture that contains about 15 
percent ethanol as well as the solids from the grain and added yeast. 
 From here, the fermented mash is pumped into a multi-column distillation system where 
additional heat is added. The columns utilize the differences in the boiling points of ethanol and 
water to boil off and separate the ethanol. By the time the product stream leaves the distillation 
columns, it contains about 95 percent ethanol by volume (190-proof). The residue from this 
process, called stillage, contains non-fermentable solids and water and is pumped out from the 
bottom of the columns into the centrifuges. 
 The final step in the ethanol production process is dehydration to remove the 
remaining 5 percent water.  The ethanol is passed through a molecular sieve to 
physically separate the water from the ethanol based on the different sizes of the 
molecules. This result is 200-proof anhydrous (waterless) ethanol.  At this point, 
denaturant is added (making it unfit for human consumption) and the ethanol is placed 
into storage.   
 During the ethanol production process, two valuable co-products are created: carbon 
dioxide and distillers grains.  As yeast ferment the sugar, they release large amounts of carbon 
dioxide gas. In some plants it’s released into the atmosphere, but where local markets exist, it’s 
captured and purified with a scrubber and sold to the food processing industry for use in 
carbonated beverages and flash-freezing applications. 
 The stillage from the bottom of the distillation columns contains solids from the grain and 
added yeast as well as liquid from the water added during the process. It is separated via 
centrifuge into thin stillage (a liquid with 5–10 percent solids) and wet distillers grain. 
 71 
 Some of the thin stillage is routed back to the cooking tanks as makeup water, reducing 
the amount of fresh water required by the cooking process. The rest is sent through a multiple-
effect evaporation system where it is concentrated into a condensed distillers solubles or “syrup” 
containing 25–50% solids. This syrup, which is high in protein and fat content, is then mixed 
back in with the distillers grain to make wet distillers grains with solubles.  
 Wet distillers grains with solubles (WDGS) contain most of the nutritive value of the 
original feedstock plus added yeast.  Plus they can be easily conveyed into a wet cake for 
transport.  As such, WDGS makes an excellent cattle ration for local feedlots and dairies and it 
can be easily conveyed into a wet cake for transport. However, WDGS must be used soon after 
it’s produced because the wet grains spoil easily. Since many ethanol plants are located in areas 
where there are not enough nearby cattle to utilize all the feed, a portion or all of the WDGS is 
sent through a drying system to remove moisture and extend the shelf life. The resulting dried 
distillers grains with solubles (DDGS) are commonly used as a high-protein ingredient in cattle, 
swine, poultry, and fish diets.  Distillers grains are also being researched for human 
consumption.  A schematic of a typical dry-mill ethanol plant is shown below in Figure 1.4-2. 
 72 
Figure 1.4-2.  Dry Milling Process 
 
 
 
 
 
1.4.1.2 Wet Milling Technology236  
 
 In wet mill plants, first the corn is soaked or "steeped" in water and dilute sulfurous acid 
for 24 to 48 hours. This steeping facilitates the separation of the corn kernel into germ, fiber, 
gluten, and starch. 
 
 After steeping, the corn slurry is processed through a series of grinders to separate out the 
germ. The germ is either extracted on-site or sold to crushers who extract the corn oil. The corn 
oil in its crude state can be sold to the biodiesel or renewable diesel industry.  However, most 
wet mill plants refine the product into food-grade corn oil for use in cooking applications.  The 
remaining fiber, gluten and starch components are further segregated using centrifugal, screen 
and hydroclonic separators. 
 
 The steeping liquor is concentrated in an evaporator. This concentrated product, heavy 
steep water, is co-dried with the fiber component and is then sold as corn gluten feed to the 
 73 
livestock industry. Heavy steep water is also sold by itself as a feed ingredient and is used as a 
component in Ice Ban, an environmentally friendly alternative to salt for removing ice from 
roads. 
 
 The gluten component (protein) is filtered and dried to produce the corn gluten meal co-
product. This product is highly sought after as a feed ingredient in poultry broiler operations. 
 
 The starch and any remaining water from the mash can then be processed in one of three 
ways: fermented into ethanol, dried and sold as dried or modified corn starch, or processed into 
corn syrup. If made into ethanol, the fermentation process is very similar to the dry mill ethanol 
production process described above.  A schematic of the wet milling process is shown below in 
Figure 1.4-3. 
 
Figure 1.4-3.  Wet Milling Process 
 
 
1.4.1.3 Advanced Technologies  
 A number of corn ethanol plants are pursuing technological advancements such as cold 
starch fermentation, dry fractionation and corn oil extraction to improve plant yields and reduce 
energy requirements.  Research is also being done that looks at adding membranes to reduce 
ethanol distillation requirements.  Finally a growing number of companies are utilizing 
alternative boiler fuels and/or incorporating combined heat and power (CHP) technology into 
their facilities to reduce to plant energy requirements, and in some cases, produce excess power 
for the grid.   The advanced technologies currently being pursed by the corn ethanol industry are 
described in more detail below.   
Cold Starch Fermentation237238  
 74 
 POET, the United States’ largest corn ethanol producer18, has developed a cold starch 
fermentation process that uses raw-starch hydrolysis to convert starch to sugar, which then 
ferments to ethanol without heat. The innovative, patent-pending POET technology eliminates 
the cooking process that has been part of ethanol production for hundreds of years. According to 
POET, the BPX™ process not only reduces energy costs, but also releases additional starch 
content for conversion to ethanol, increases protein content and quality of co-products, increases 
co-product flowability, potentially increases plant throughput and significantly decreases plant 
emissions.  The benefits of the process include reduced energy costs, increased ethanol yields, 
increased nutrient quality in the distillers grains and decreased plant emissions.  BPX™ is 
reportedly used in 20 of Poet's 22 U.S. ethanol production facilities. According to Poet, the 
BPX™ process, which yields 20 percent ethanol in fermentation, increases ethanol yields from 
the industry standard of 2.7 gallons of ethanol per bushel of corn up to 3 gallons per bushel.  
Earlier this year, Poet announced that it was funding a research collaboration with Iowa State 
University to help improve the efficiency of the BPX™ process.  
 
Dry Fractionation  
 
Dry fractionation is a mechanical separation of the corn kernel into its three component 
pieces, the germ, bran, and endosperm before fermentation.  This separation decreases the 
amount of non-fermentable material sent through the process and allows each of the components 
to be processed separately to produce new, higher-value co-products.  As shown in Figure 1.4-1, 
the germ is a small, non-fermentable part of the kernel consisting predominantly of protein and 
oil.  Food grade corn oil can be extracted from the germ.  After the oil has been extracted, the 
remainder of the germ can then be blended into the DGS to increase its protein content.  The 
bran, or pericarp, is the protective outer covering of the kernel.  The bran can be sold as cattle 
feed, human fiber additive, or corn fiber for oil extraction.  It can also be burned to reduce the 
amount of coal or natural gas required for ethanol production.  The endosperm, which contains 
approximately 98% of the starch and is the only fermentable portion of the kernel, is sent to the 
fermentation vessels.  Decreasing the amount of non-fermentable materials (germ and bran) in 
the process has many beneficial effects, including increasing the production capacity of the plant, 
decreasing the energy required to dry the DGS, and potentially decreasing the enzyme 
requirement of the plant but up to 30%.  Dry fractionation is currently only used by a few ethanol 
plants; however several companies, including ICM, Delta-T, and POET currently offer dry 
fractionation options for new or existing plants. 
 
Corn Oil Extraction239  
 
Several dry mill corn ethanol plants have implemented corn oil extraction to produce 
fuel-grade corn oil for the biodiesel industry.  The crude corn oil can either be extracted from the 
thin stillage (the non-ethanol liquid left after fermentation) before it enters the evaporator, or 
from the DGS after it has been dried.  While the corn oil is of a lower quality and value than that 
produced from corn fractionation, the equipment can be easily added to existing ethanol 
production facilities and is relatively inexpensive.  In addition to generating an additional 
revenue stream from the fuel-grade corn oil, reducing the oil content of the DGS improves its 
flowability and concentrates its protein content.  The de-fatted DGS is more marketable than 
DGS containing corn oil as higher quantities can be included in dairy and beef cattle feed. 
 75 
 
Membrane Replacement 
 
Several companies are currently working to produce commercially viable polymeric 
membranes that could potentially reduce the energy used in distillation and eliminate the need 
for molecular sieve units currently used in most ethanol plants.  One such company, Vaperma, 
has partnered with GreenField Ethanol to prove the viability of its SiftekTM technology.  SiftekTM 
membranes have been successfully installed in GreenField’s Tiverton, Ontario demonstration 
plant and are scheduled to be installed in their Chatham, Ontario plant, which produces 187 
million liters of ethanol per year, by the end of 2008.  Vaperma claims its SiftekTM membranes 
are capable of producing a fuel grade ethanol product from an ethanol/water mixture that 
contains as much as 60% water.  These membranes would replace the rectifier unit as well as the 
molecular sieves used in a conventional ethanol plant, potentially reducing the energy 
consumption of the ethanol dehydration process by up to 50%.  Another way for these 
membranes to be used is to treat the ethanol/water vapor collected when the molecular sieve 
units are regenerated.  This stream is usually recycled to the rectifier and makes up 
approximately one third of the feed to the rectifying column.  Using SiftekTM technology to treat 
this stream reduces the feed to the rectifier, reducing energy consumption and increasing 
production rate by 20% or more.  While membrane replacement technology has the potential to 
significantly reduce the energy demands of an ethanol plant, they are likely at least a couple of 
years from being commercially available.  It is not expected that membrane replacement units 
would be retrofitted into existing plants due to the significant capital costs.  These two factors 
will effectively limit the use of membrane separation units to new ethanol plants built in 2010 or 
later. 
 
Combined Heat and Power 
  
 Ethanol production is a relatively resource-intensive process that requires the use of 
water, electricity, and steam.  In most cases, water and electricity are purchased from the 
municipality and steam is produced on-site using boilers fired by natural gas, coal, or in some 
cases, alternative fuels (described in more detail below).19  However a growing number of 
ethanol producers are pursuing cogeneration or combined heat and power (CHP) technology.  
CHP is a mechanism for improving overall plant efficiency.  While the form of CHP technology 
used can vary from plant to plant, the most common mode of operation is to use the boiler to 
power a gas turbine generator unit, and to use the waste heat for the production of ethanol.  The 
generator provides electricity that can be used by the ethanol plant or sold to the grid, while the 
waste heat is used to provide steam for the ethanol production process.  While the thermal energy 
demand for an ethanol plant using CHP technology is slightly higher than that of a conventional 
plant, the additional energy used is far less than what would be required to produce the same 
amount of electricity in a central power plant.  The increased efficiency is due to the ability of 
the ethanol plant to effectively utilize the waste heat from the electricity generation process.   
 
The CHP system can be owned and operated solely by the ethanol plant, or jointly 
operated with the local utility company.  In these cases it is common for the utility company to 
                                                 
19
 There are a few ethanol producers that we have been made aware of from EPA Region 7 that pull their steam from 
a nearby utility. 
 76 
purchase the generator and to split the cost of the generator fuel with the ethanol plant.  The 
utility company receives the electricity produced, while the ethanol plant uses the waste heat.  
These arrangements reduce the energy costs for both parties, as well as reducing the green house 
gas emissions that would be produced by operating the generator and boiler separately.  An 
illustration of the more common CHP configuration typically seen in ethanol plants is shown 
below in Figure 1.4-4. 
 
Figure 1.4-4.  Steam Boiler with Steam Turbine240 
 
 
Alternative Boiler Fuels  
 
 In addition to CHP (or sometimes in combination), a growing number of ethanol 
producers are turning to alternative fuel sources to replace traditional boiler fuels (i.e., natural 
gas and coal), improve their carbon footprint, and/or become more self-sustainable.  Alternative 
boiler fuels currently used or being pursued by the ethanol industry include biomass (wood and 
other organic feedstocks), co-products from the ethanol production process (e.g., bran, thin 
stillage or syrup), manure biogas (methane from nearby animal feedlots), and landfill gas 
(generated from the digestion of municipal solid waste).   
 
 For a breakdown of current and near-term20 utilization of CHP technology and alternative 
boiler fuels, refer to Sections 1.5.1.1 and 1.5.1.2.  For our 2022 projections of the potential 
utilization of these and other advanced technologies, refer to Section 1.5.1.3.    
 
1.4.2 Imported Sugarcane Ethanol  
 
    The production of imported sugarcane ethanol is the least complicated method to use 
biomass to produce ethanol since sugarcane contains six-carbon sugars that can be directly 
                                                 
20
 Based on current company plants. 
 77 
fermented.  In contrast, starch or cellulosic feedstocks require additional steps before sugars are 
released for use in the fermentation step.  In addition to ethanol, sugarcane also yields bagasse, 
straw, filter cake, and vinasse.  These by-products are described below: 
 
Bagasse 
 
Bagasse is the crushed stalk of the sugarcane plant that consists of cellulose and lignin valued 
mainly for being a fossil fuel and wood substitute in energy generation.  Mills and other 
industrial units have used bagasse for steam and electricity production.  Plants are also able to 
produce more energy than needed and export excess electricity to the grid. 
 
Straw 
 
Straw, or barbojo, is the tops and leaves of sugarcane.  Straw is not currently harvested for 
production of ethanol; however, there has been growing interest to use hydrolysis (cellulosic) 
technologies to convert straw to ethanol.  Sugarcane straw can also be converted into 
bioelectricity. 
 
Filter Cake 
 
Filter cake is the leftover solid material from decantation (mud) in the cane juice processing 
treatment.  It is reapplied to sugarcane fields as a fertilizer. 
 
Vinasse 
 
Vinasse is a liquid that comes from the distillation process.  It is rich in potassium, organic 
material, and water.  It is produced and used throughout the harvest and has typically been 
sprayed on the sugarcane crop as a fertilizer.  There is environmental legislation which prohibits 
inappropriate disposal of vinasse into rivers, lakes, the ocean, and soils. 
 
 In the production of sugarcane ethanol, the cane is washed to remove organic material 
from the field and shredded into smaller pieces, approximately 20-25 cm.  The sugar is extracted 
through crushing.  The juice contains the sugar and the leftover sugarcane fiber is bagasse.  Next, 
the cane juice is filtered and treated by chemicals and pasteurized.  After a second filter of the 
cane juice, sugar is concentrated through evaporation (14-16°Brix up to 50-58°Brix).  During 
this step, vinasse is also produced.  The syrup is crystallized, leading to a mixture of clear 
crystals surrounded by molasses with a concentration of 91-93°Brix.  Molasses is removed by 
centrifugation and pretreated to yield a sterilized molasses free of impurities.  The sugars are 
then fermented into ethanol by the addition of yeast.  Fermentation varies from 4-12 hours, with 
chemical efficiencies ranging from 80-90%.  The fermented mixture is then distilled to produce 
hydrous (96 percent ethanol) or anhydrous ethanol (99.7 percent ethanol).  The production of 
anhydrous ethanol is normally done by addition of cyclohexane.  See Figure 1.4.5.241  
 
 78 
Figure 1.4-5.  Sugarcane Ethanol Process 
 
 
1.4.3 Cellulosic Biofuel  
 
 The following sections contain descriptions of cellulosic ethanol and cellulosic diesel 
production technologies.  Section 1.4.3.1 introduces the two primary pathways for the production 
of cellulosic ethanol, through biochemical and thermochemical processes while Section 1.4.3.2 
discusses cellulosic diesel which is produced through thermochemical processes.  We end the 
section with specific company descriptions of cellulosic biofuel technologies and briefly describe 
how they differ from generic process discussions.  
 
1.4.3.1 Cellulosic Ethanol 
 
 Cellulosic biomass has long been recognized as a potential source of mixed sugars for 
fermentation to fuel ethanol.  The Germans may have been one of the earliest to try 
commercializing a process to produce ethanol from a cellulosic feedstock, probably from wood 
in the late 1890s.  They used dilute acid to hydrolyze the cellulose to glucose and xylose, but 
were able to only produce a little less than 20 gallons per ton of feedstock; they soon improved 
the process enough to generate yields of around 50 gallons per ton.  Eventually, two commercial-
sized plants that used dilute sulfuric acid hydrolysis were constructed in the U.S.  Yields from 
the U.S. facilities were roughly half that of the German plants, however, the production rate from 
U.S. facilities was significantly higher.  Lumber production decreased following World War I, 
which resulted in the close down of cellulosic plants.242, 243  Although corn-grain ethanol was used 
in the early 20th Century, especially by high-performance race cars and as an additive to raise 
gasoline octane, petroleum-derived gasoline eventually replaced it as the primary fuel for 
automobiles and light-duty trucks.  From the early 1970’s and up through the present,  ethanol 
from corn, has been increasingly used as a fuel;  however, recently, ethanol from cellulose is 
being viewed with increasing interest. 
 
 Several processing options are currently available to convert cellulosic biomass into 
ethanol.  These conversion technologies generally fall into two main categories: biochemical and 
thermochemical.  Biochemical conversion refers to the fermentation of sugars liberated from the 
breakdown of biomass feedstock.  Thermochemical conversion includes the gasification and 
pyrolysis of biomass material into a synthesis gas for subsequent fermentation or catalysis.  The 
 79 
main benefit of gasification/pyrolysis over the biochemical route is that thermochemical 
processes can more easily convert low-carbohydrate or “non-fermentable” biomass materials 
such as forest and wood residues to alcohol fuels and can more readily accept a wider variety of 
feedstocks.244  However, the thermochemical process does have some drawbacks, such as tar 
production and clean-up gas procedures that require additional capital investment.   
 
 Since commercial production of cellulosic ethanol has not yet begun, it is unclear which 
process options will prove most viable or whether additional variations will emerge.  At least in 
the near future, there have been plans to build both stand-alone biochemical and thermochemical 
ethanol processing plants.  In addition, some investors are currently supporting research and 
development in both cellulosic processing procedures, neither choosing one conversion over the 
other.245  The following subsections describe the process steps, current challenges, and targeted 
areas for improvement for each conversion method. 
 
1.4.3.1.1 Biochemical Conversion 
 
 Unlike grain feedstocks where the major carbohydrate is starch, lignocellulosic biomass 
is composed mainly of cellulose (40-60 %) and hemicellulose (20-40 %).  The remainder 
consists of lignin, a complex polymer which serves as a stiffening and hydrophobic (water-
hating) agent in cell walls.246  Cellulose and hemicellulose are made up of sugar residues linked 
together in long chains called polysaccharides.  Once hydrolyzed, they can be fermented into 
ethanol.  Currently, lignin cannot be fermented into ethanol, but could be burned as a by-product 
to generate electricity or used as a feedstock to a thermochemical conversion facility.     
 Both starch (corn grain) and cellulosic feedstocks must be hydrolyzed prior to 
fermentation.   Structural differences at the molecular level make it far more difficult, and 
therefore more costly, to hydrolyze cellulosic biomass than it is to hydrolyze starch.  Glucose, 
C6H12O6, the repeating monomer in both starch and cellulose, is a six-sided ring, similar in 
conformation to the classic ‘chair’ conformation of cyclohexane or benzene, except one carbon 
atom in the ring is replaced by an oxygen atom.  For uniformity (and ease) of discussion, it is 
generally assumed that the first carbon atom next to the oxygen, is carbon #1; the numbering, 2-
5, continues around the ring with oxygen in the 6th position; one of the four bonds of the fifth 
carbon atom is attached to the oxygen atom to complete the ring, one is attached to hydrogen 
atom and the fourth to a -CH2OH group. Thus, a glucose molecule/monomer is a six-sided 
molecule, but not a six-carbon ring (although there are six-carbon molecules present, one of 
which is in the –methylhydroxy group).   
 The main difference between starch and cellulosic plant matter is that starch 
polysaccharides are made up of α-glucose monomers, uniformly strung together by α-linked 1,4-
glucosidic bonds whereas cellulosic polysaccharides are made up of β-glucose monomers, strung 
together with β-linked 1,4-glucosidic bonds.  In the α-conformation, the hydroxyl group on 
carbon #1 is in the axial or α-position, which causes the -OH’s on each successive glucose 
monomer to end up on the same side of the polymer.  There are also 1,6-linked glucose branches 
that occur irregularly on approximately one in twenty-five glucose units.247   The -OH groups on 
the same side of the polymer, along with the randomly attached 1,6-glucose branches, leaves 
 80 
starch polymers relatively weak, flexible, and able to easily wrap and twist together to form tiny 
granules, e.g., common, everyday corn starch.     
 Cellulosic polysaccharides are in the β-conformation with the hydroxyl group on carbon 
#1 is positioned away from the ring, in the equatorial or β-position, which causes the -OH’s on 
each successive glucose monomer, added to the chain, to end up on opposite sides of the 
polymer.  The hydroxyl groups lined up evenly and uniformly along opposite sides of each 
polymer strand allow intra-molecular hydrogen bonds to develop within each monomer.  They 
also allow inter-molecular hydrogen bonds to develop between adjacent polymers to form tight, 
rigid, strong, mostly straight polymer bundles called microfibrils that act as the core constituent 
in the formation of plant cell walls that are also insoluble in water and resistant to chemical 
attack.  The β-conformation and the resulting hydrogen bonds stabilize the glucose chair 
structure to help minimize the polymer’s flexibility (which hinders hydrolysis) and to add to its 
strength.   
 The second cellulosic component is called hemicellulose.  It consists mainly of a random 
mixture of highly branched and heavily substituted five- and six-carbon rings, such as D-xylose,  
L-arabinose, D-galactose, D-glucose, and D-mannose, and uronic and acetic acid.  Hemicellulose 
is not as rigid or strong as cellulose, but does contribute additional strength and helps to protect 
the plant cell wall against attack by microbes or water.  As compared to cellulose, hemicellulose 
is relatively easier to hydrolyze, due to its highly branched, somewhat random or non-uniform 
structure.  
 Lignin, the third principle component, is a complex, cross-linked polymeric, high 
molecular weight substance derived principally from coniferyl alcohol by extensive condensation 
polymerization.  Covalently bonded to the hemicellulose, it is essentially a glue-like polymer that 
covers the cellulose and hemicellulose polymer cell walls and helps hold them together, provides 
additional strength, helps resist microbial decay, and perhaps most importantly, for this 
discussion, inhibits hydrolysis.  Its molecular weight is around 10,000.248  While both cellulose 
and hemicellulose contribute to the amount of fermentable sugars for ethanol production, lignin 
does not, but can be combusted to provide process energy in a biochemical plant or used as 
feedstock to a thermochemical process.249   
 To review, a significant part of the reason it is more difficult and more costly to produce 
ethanol from cellulosic feedstocks, such as corn stover, has to do with the differences in the 
molecular structures of simple starch and those of cellulosic plant matter   That is, as a plant 
grows, glucose monomers are added to the polysaccharide chains of the plant cell walls through 
condensation reactions.  In general, condensation is a chemical process by which two-molecules 
are joined together to make a larger, more complex, molecule, with the loss of water (water 
doesn’t actually condense out and run down the side of the vessel; they simply remain dissolved 
in the mixture).  In the formation of polysaccharides, an enzyme catalyzes the reaction wherein 
the -OH group on carbon #1 of one monomer, or glucose residue, reacts with the -OH on carbon 
#4 or #6 of another residue.  An H-OH (H2O or water) molecule is removed, leaving an -O- that 
links the monomers together to form the polysaccharide chain.  Again, depending on the 
direction of the -OH group at carbon 1, it may be called an alpha (as in starch) or a beta (as in 
cellulose) linkage.250 
 81 
  Hydrolysis is the reverse reaction.  The -H from an H-OH (water) molecule is added to 
one monomer and the remaining -OH is added to its pair, e.g., to the next monomer on the chain, 
to regenerate separate glucose monomers.  During starch hydrolysis, water and water borne 
hydrolyzing enzymes can easily penetrate the randomly formed polymers (the tiny granular 
particles or bundles) in order to break the bonds to release glucose monomers.  However, the 
cellulosic or glucan polymers formed in tightly packed, dense, rigid microfibrils are especially 
resistant to water and hydrolyzing enzymes.  Xylan is easily hydrolyzed, but not easily 
fermented.  Glucan is not easily hydrolyzed, but readily ferments.  These are two of the major 
problems that must be satisfactorily resolved before cellulosic ethanol can become a competitive 
fuel.    
 Biochemical conversion processes typically use dilute acid with enzymes or  
concentrated acid to convert cellulosic biomass to sugar for fermentation to ethanol.  
Concentrated acid hydrolysis is fairly well developed and is being pursued to commercialization 
in certain niche situations.  For example, acid hydrolysis is suitable for feedstocks such as 
municipal solid wastes which have largely heterogeneous mixtures.251  Acid hydrolysis is 
typically much faster than enzymatic approaches, albeit at the cost of reduced sugar yields due to 
undesirable side reactions.252  Enzymatic hydrolysis is mostly suitable for homogeneous mixtures 
because specific enzymes are needed to convert a given type of feedstock.  During the period 
covered by this proposed rule, the cost to enzymatically hydrolyze cellulose is expected to be 
significantly reduced as technologies continue to improve.253   
 
In general, the process steps of the biochemical process include: feedstock pretreatment, 
hydrolysis, saccharification and fermentation, ethanol dehydration, and lignin recovery.  Refer to 
Figure 1.4-6 for an illustration of the enzymatic biochemical production process.  We used 
NREL’s study as a guide to describe, somewhat generically, how such a process might work.255 
  
 82 
Figure 1.4-6.  Cellulosic Ethanol Biochemical Production Process (Enzymatic) 
 
 
 
Stage 1 – Feedstock Pretreatment 
  
Lignocellulosic biomass, such as the corn stover we’re currently discussing, must 
undergo at least some pretreatment prior to hydrolysis.  During the early years (e.g., 2010 to 
2015), we anticipate this stage will likely occur within the facility.  In the out years covered by 
this rule (2022) we believe this stage will likely be moved outside the plant gate, e.g., upstream 
of the ethanol plant, in order to reduce transportation costs that are typically high due to the low 
density of this type of biomass.  The biomass is pretreated with and/or both physical and 
chemical methods in order help the polysaccharides become more accessible to hydrolysis.  
Studies have shown a direct correlation between the removal of lignin and hemicellulose and the 
digestibility of cellulose.256   
 
Physical pretreatment nearly always includes size reduction by some type of grinding, 
shredding, or chopping.  For example, in order to biochemically process wood chips, e.g., poplar 
trees or willows, the chips must be reduced in size to 1-mm or less in order to increase the 
surface area for contact with acid, enzymes, etc.  Breaking up a 5-in tree stem into 1-mm pieces 
would consume a large amount of energy.  On the other hand, corn stover chips for a 
biochemical process can range up to a maximum size of 1.5 inches.258    
 
 Chemicals are also used for pretreatment.  The most common chemical pretreatment 
methods for cellulosic feedstocks are dilute acid, hot water, alkaline, organic solvent, ammonia, 
Feedstock  
Pretreatment 
 
Hydrolysis 
 
Ethanol 
Dehydration  
 
Lignin  
Recovery 
 
Feedstock 
(e.g. corn stover) 
Fuel Ethanol 
Cellulase 
enzymes 
Lignin  
Saccharification 
& 
Fermentation 
 
 83 
sulfur dioxide, carbon dioxide, or other chemicals to make the biomass more digestible by the 
enzymes.259,260  These chemicals cause the biomass to react quite differently.261  For example, 
instead of hydrolyzing the hemicellulose (as in acidic pretreatments), an alkaline approach tends 
to leave the hemicellulose and cellulose intact.  Enzymes are therefore required to digest both 
hemicellulose and cellulose at the same time when a basic pretreatment is used. 
 
Different pretreatment approaches also affect the amounts of degradation products (e.g. 
furfurals, acetates) that occur from the decomposition of hemicellulose and lignin.   This is 
important since these degradation products can inhibit microorganisms in the fermentation step.  
A well known pretreatment method that does not degrade biomass sugars or produce 
fermentation inhibitors is ammonia fiber explosion (AFEX).  During AFEX, liquid ammonia is 
added to the cellulosic material followed by a rapid pressure release, which causes the matter to 
rapidly expand or ‘explode.’   
 
Each type of feedstock, whether softwoods, corn stover or bagasse, requires a particular 
combination of pretreatment methods to optimize the yields of that feedstock, minimize the 
degradation of the substrate, and maximize the sugar yield. Pretreatment of cellulosic biomass in 
a cost-effective manner is a major challenge of cellulose-ethanol technology research and 
development.262 
Stage 2 – Pretreatment & Hydrolyzate Conditioning 
 NREL refers to this stage as a combination of pretreatment and hydrolysis.   In their 
process flow diagram, the washed and size-reduced feed is directly heated with steam and mixed 
with dilute sulfuric acid.  The process converts, primarily, the hemicellulose polysaccharides, 
xylan, mannan, arabinan, and galactan, to produce the mixed sugars and further helps prepare the 
cellulose for hydrolysis.  A small amount of glucan in the hemicellulose and in the cellulose is 
converted into glucose.  The rundown from the acid hydrolysis reactor is fed to a blowdown tank 
that subsequently feeds a filterpress.  The filterpress produces two main streams, a filter cake and 
a liquid filtrate, also called hydrolyzate.  The filter cake carries the un-hydrolyzed portions of the 
feed e.g., glucans, among other insolubles, while the liquid carries that part of the feed that was 
hydrolyzed, mainly the xyloses.   
The liquid portion is neutralized to remove gypsum and other contaminants that would be 
toxic to downstream enzymes.  The cake is washed, mixed back with the detoxified liquid 
hydrolyzate, and fed to the saccharification reactors to hydrolyze the glucan polysaccharides.263    
Stage 3 – Saccharification and Co-Fermentation 
 We should point out that this is not ‘Simultaneous Saccharification and Fermentation’ 
(SSF).  Saccharification, in the process we’re discussing, takes place primarily in several reactors 
along with other intermediate treatments such as filtering and detoxifying.  Using a cellulase 
enzyme cocktail, saccharification of the cellulose to glucose occurs first at an elevated 
temperature to take advantage of increased enzyme activity, which reduces the quantity of 
required enzyme as well as the reaction time.   
 
 84 
 The cellulase enzymes used to convert cellulose to sugars can be obtained in two ways.  
The first option is for a plant to produce it on-site.  The second option requires the plant to 
purchase the enzymes from off-site enzyme manufacturers.  Due to a joint research effort by 
DOE, Genencor International, and Novozymes Biotech, the cost for production of cellulase 
enzymes has been drastically reduced.  Such research and development in areas of enzyme 
production have reduced the cost of cellulolytic enzymes by a factor of 10 to 30, down to 20 to 
30 cents per gallon of ethanol produced.264,265,266   It is estimated, however, that enzyme costs 
will have to be further reduced to a level comparable to those used to produce ethanol from corn 
kernels at a cost of 3 to 4 cents per gallon of ethanol.  The current challenge is to develop the 
correct enzyme “cocktails” to reflect differences in the physical and chemical characteristics of 
all the various types of cellulosic materials.  It may be easier, therefore, to process single 
feedstocks (more homogeneous) rather than multiple feedstocks, in which variations are more 
likely.    
 Following cellulose saccharification, both the glucose and xylose sugars are co-
fermented.  Although xylan, the hemicellulose polysaccharide, is more easily hydrolyzed than 
glucan (cellulose polysaccharides), the xylose sugar is more difficult to ferment than the glucose 
sugar.  Different microbes as well as different residence times and process conditions may be 
required for each.  Therefore, it may be necessary to separate the glucose and xylose monomers 
before fermentation.   
 Because xylan can make up as much as 25% of plant matter it is imperative that as much 
of it as possible be fermented; the economic viability of biochemically produced ethanol depends 
heavily it.  This continues to be high on the list of problems researchers are working on, but good 
progress has been made toward fermenting a higher percentage of xylose during the past few 
years.267 
Stage 3A – Consolidated Bioprocessing, e.g., Simultaneous Saccharification and Fermentation 
(SSF) 
 During the past few years, researchers have been looking for ways to combine 
saccharification and fermentation into a single step through the use of enzyme/microbe cocktails.  
If successful, we expect there could be significant capital cost savings in that fewer reactors and 
other support equipment and piping would be necessary.  Also, it may be possible to reduce 
processing times if hydrolysis reactions can take place simultaneously, rather than sequentially.    
Such strategies are known as consolidated bioprocessing (CBP).  CBP, however, is currently 
hampered by the relative inability of yeast to process recombinant cellulases (enzymes that help 
convert cellulose to sugars), and the relative lag in the development of molecular biological 
methods to manipulate organisms that secrete cellulases naturally.268  
Stage 4 – Ethanol Dehydration   
 NREL’s process model indicates that the fermentation reactor rundown stream, now 
called ‘beer,’ runs down to the beer column feed surge tank.  The beer column feed consists of 
about 83% water and only 5.5% ethanol; the balance of the mixture is very complex, but consists 
mostly of lignin.  The beer column removes the dissolved CO2 overhead and produces a 
 85 
water/ethanol bottom stream, that is fed to a rectification column.  According to NREL’s model, 
the rectification column bottoms would be mostly water with about 0.05% ethanol that’s 
recycled back to the process.  The rectification column overhead that consists of about 92.5% 
ethanol and 7.5% water, is fed to a molecular sieve that produces a 99.5 wt.% ethanol product 
stream with about 0.5 wt.% water.  Gasoline, a denaturant, is added to produce a 95 % to 98 % 
ethanol fuel. 
Stage 5 – Lignin Recovery 
 Following the saccharification and fermentation of the xylan and glucan to ethanol, the 
lignin is gradually concentrated with other solids into a moist cake-like product that is about 48% 
insoluble solids.  About 80% of the 48% insoluble solids is essentially lignin and microbial cells, 
and other unconverted biomass remnants, such as cellulose, xylose, glucan, xylan, other 
oligomers, etc., from the process.   This material can be either combusted to provide process heat 
for the biochemical operation, for a co-located starch ethanol plant, or as we discuss in the 
following section, could be used as feedstock for a thermochemical unit. 
 
1.4.3.1.2  Thermochemical Conversion 
 
 Thermochemical processes involve the decomposition of biomass and the conversion of 
that biomass in the presence of a gasifying agent, usually air, oxygen, and/or steam to yield a raw 
synthesis gas (syngas).269  It is important to note that these processing steps are also applicable to 
other feedstocks (e.g., coal or natural gas); the only difference is that a renewable feedstock is 
used (i.e. biomass) in order to produce cellulosic biofuel.  Pyrolysis oils, or bio-oils, can also be 
produced by condensing the decomposed biomass instead of introducing a gasifying agent.270 
Some believe that pyrolysis could have a significant economic advantage over other cellulosic 
ethanol approaches since very little has been done in terms of optimizing the process, and as 
such, there are still many possibilities yet to be explored.271  A thermochemical unit can also 
complement a biochemical processing plant to enhance the economics of an integrated 
biorefinery by converting lignin-rich, non-fermentable material left over from high-starch or 
cellulosic feedstocks conversion.272   
 There are two general classes of gasifiers.  First, partial oxidation (POx) gasifiers 
(directly-heated gasifiers) use the exothermic reaction between oxygen and organics to provide 
the heat necessary to devolatilize biomass and to convert residual carbon-rich chars. In POx 
gasifiers, the heat to drive the process is generated internally within the gasifier. A disadvantage 
of POx gasifiers is that oxygen production is expensive and typically requires large plant sizes to 
improve economics.   
 The second general class, called indirect gasification, uses steam gasifiers to accomplish 
gasification through heat transfer from a hot solid or through a heat transfer surface.  Either the 
byproduct char and/or a portion of the product gas can be combusted with air (external to the 
gasifier itself) to provide the energy required for gasification.  Although steam gasifiers have the 
advantage of not requiring oxygen, most operate at low pressure and therefore require product 
gas compression for downstream purification and synthesis unit operations.   
 86 
 The general steps of the indirect gasification thermochemical process include: feedstock 
handling, gasification, gas cleanup and conditioning, fuel synthesis, and separation.  Refer to 
Figure 1.4-7 for a schematic of the thermochemical cellulosic ethanol production process.   
 
Figure 1.4-7.  Cellulosic Ethanol Thermochemical Production Process 
 
Stage 1 – Feedstock Handling  
 The particle size requirement for a thermochemical process is around 10-mm to 100-mm 
in diameter.273  Once the feed is ground to the proper size, flue gases from the char combustor 
and tar reformer catalyst regenerator dry the feed from around 30% to 40% moisture to the level 
required by the gasifier.   
Stage 2 – Gasification   
 Heat for the endothermic gasification reactions is supplied by circulating hot synthetic 
“sand” between the gasifier and the char combustor. The biomass is converted to syngas, tars, 
and a solid ‘char.’ Air, introduced to the bottom, serves as the carrier-gas for the fluidized bed 
and as the oxidant for burning the char and coke.  The heat generated by the combustion of the 
Gasification 
 
Feedstock 
Handling 
 
Gas Cleanup & 
Conditioning 
 
Separation 
 
 Fuel 
Synthesis   
 
Feedstock 
(e.g. forest residue) 
 
Fuel Ethanol  
(Other mixed alcohols if using catalyst) 
 
 87 
char and coke heats the heat exchange sand to over 1800°F.  The syngas is separated from the 
sand and ash and sent to gas cleanup.  
Stage 3 – Gas Cleanup & Conditioning   
 Once the biomass is gasified and converted to syngas, the syngas must be cleaned and 
conditioned.  This raw syngas has a low to medium energy content depending on the gasifying 
agent and consists mainly of CO, H2, CO2, H2O, N2, and hydrocarbons.  The minor components, 
tars, sulfur, nitrogen oxides, alkali metals, and particulates have the potential to negatively affect 
the syngas conversion steps.  Therefore, unwanted impurities are removed in a gas cleanup step 
and the gas composition is further modified during gas conditioning.  Gas conditioning steps 
include sulfur polishing to remove trace levels of H2S and water-gas shift to adjust the final 
H2/CO ratio for optimized fuel synthesis. 
Stage 4 – Fuel Synthesis  
 After cleanup and conditioning, the “clean” syngas is comprised of essentially CO and 
H2.  The syngas is further converted into the fuel of choice by either a catalytic process (Fischer-
Tropsch) or through the use of a microorganism.  Once in the syngas form, the fuel producer has 
the choice of producing diesel fuel or alcohols by optimizing the type of catalyst used and the 
H2/CO ratio.  Diesel fuel has historically been the primary focus of such processes, as it produces 
a high quality distillate product, however, with the 45 cent tax subsidy currently available for 
ethanol production, it may be economically advantageous for fuel producers to convert syngas to 
ethanol instead of to diesel fuel.  Production of cellulosic diesel is discussed in further detail in 
the following Section 1.4.3.2.    
 
 Conceptual designs and techno-economic models developed for stand alone biomass 
gasification processes have been developed for ethanol production via mixed alcohol synthesis 
using catalytic processes.  The proposed mixed alcohol process produces a mixture of ethanol 
along with higher normal alcohols (e.g., n-propanol, n-butanol, and n-pentanol).  The by-product 
higher normal alcohols have value as commodity chemicals and fuel additives.   
 
Typically the mixed alcohol products described in literature are often high in methanol, 
but contain a wide distribution of several different alcohols.  A concept proposed in literature is 
to completely recycle this methanol in order to increase the production of ethanol and higher 
alcohols which are generally more valuable.  This concept was modeled by NREL for the 
thermochemical production of ethanol with a baseline ethanol yield of 80 gallons per dry ton by 
2012.  Total mixed alcohol yield was 94.1 gallons per dry ton, which means that about 85 
percent of the total alcohol product was ethanol.  This was possible through the addition of an 
almost complete recycle of methanol within the process.274  
 In contrast to the catalytic processing of syngas, the fermentation process requires a 
special microorganism (Clostridium ljungdahlii) that will convert the syngas to produce 
ethanol.275  This combined process has the benefit of having a significantly faster processing 
time, on the order of minutes, as compared to the typical biochemical process on the order of 
days.276  
 88 
Stage 5 – Alcohol Separation  
 The liquid rundown from the low-pressure separator is dehydrated in vapor-phase 
molecular sieves, producing the dehydrated mixed alcohol feed into a methanol/ethanol overhead 
stream and a mixed, higher molecular weight alcohol bottom stream.  The overhead stream is 
further separated into a methanol stream and an ethanol stream.  
Heat & Power  
 A carefully integrated conventional steam cycle produces process heat and electricity 
(excess electricity is exported).  Pre-heaters, steam generators, and super-heaters generate steam 
that drives turbines on compressors and electrical generators, and that can also be injected into 
the process.  The heat balance around a thermochemical unit or thermochemical/biochemical 
combined unit must be carefully designed and tuned in order to avoid unnecessary losses.277 
1.4.3.2 Cellulosic Diesel  
 
Technology 
 
 One example of a cellulosic diesel fuel technology is biofuels-to-liquids (BTL) plants.  
The BTL process produces a syngas from biomass that is fed to a Fischer-Tropsch (F-T) reactor 
to primarily produce diesel fuel.  Compared to corn ethanol or biochemical cellulosic ethanol 
plants, the use of biomass gasification may allow for greater flexibility to utilize different 
biomass feedstocks at a specific plant. Mixed biomass feedstocks may be used, based on 
availability of long-term suppliers, seasonal availability, harvest cycle, and costs.  Agricultural 
residue, energy crops, forest residue, and municipal solid waste have been discussed as potential 
feedstocks.  Geographic location, availability of biomass, the existence of biomass suppliers, and 
costs would all likely influence the mix of biomass feedstocks utilized.  
 
 The BTL method removes contaminants from the gasification stream prior to the 
reactions that form the liquid compounds.  The resulting liquid fuel is essentially contaminant-
free and is very similar to petroleum-based diesel fuel – in fact, its cetane number is higher than 
diesel fuel making it somewhat better in quality.  Thus it can be easily blended with or used 
interchangeably with petroleum-based diesel fuel.  
 
 BTL plants are capital intensive plants with many subunits associated with them.  The 
first step in BTL plants is the processing of biomass.  Biomass is offloaded from trucks or train 
cars and stored at the BTL site to maintain an acceptable inventory.  If the biomass contains 
substantial amounts of moisture, it must be dried prior to processing.  The feedstock must then be 
pulverized (i.e., ~ 1 millimeter particle size) and is fed along with oxygen to a gasifier unit.  The 
oxygen is created by an air separation unit where air is separated into oxygen and nitrogen and 
the oxygen is sent to the gasifier.  There are several manufacturers of gasifiers, including Shell, 
Rentech and Conoco-Phillips but all work in a similar fashion.   
 
 The gasifier partially combusts the biomass with oxygen to form a syngas comprised 
primarily of carbon monoxide and hydrogen, although this gas also contains some impurities 
 89 
such as hydrogen sulfide and some metals.  The impurities in the biomass which are not 
combusted fall to the bottom of the gasifier to form a slag that is continuously removed.  The 
syngas is then cooled producing high pressure steam, and is scrubbed to remove particulate 
matter.  Impurities such as mercury, arsenic and trace metals are removed by a sulfur 
impregnated carbon reactor.  The syngas is further treated in either a Selexol or Rectisol unit to 
remove hydrogen sulfide and concentrated carbon dioxide (CO2).  The CO2 can be captured and 
sold to a bottling company, used for enhanced the oil recovery from oil wells, or even 
sequestered in the ground for additional life cycle benefits.  The syngas is sent to a water shift 
reactor to convert some of the carbon monoxide to hydrogen, which is necessary to establish an 
optimal mix of hydrogen and carbon for the downstream Fischer-Tropsch (FT) reactor.   
 
 The cleaned and water-shifted syngas is sent to the FT reactor where the carbon 
monoxide and hydrogen are reactor over a FT catalyst.  The FT catalyst is either iron-based or 
cobalt-based.  The cobalt catalyst is more expensive, although it does not require a recycle, while 
the less expensive iron catalyst does require a recycle.  The FT reactor creates a syncrude, which 
is variety of hydrocarbons that boil over a wide distillation range (a mix of heavy and light 
hydrocarbons).  The syncrude from the FT reactor is sent to a distillation column where it is 
separated into various components based on their vapor pressure, mainly liquid petroleum gas 
(LPG), naphtha, distillate and wax fractions.  The heavier compounds are hydrocracked to 
maximize the production of diesel fuel.  The distillate boiling compounds have high cetane and 
thus are of high quality for blending into diesel fuel.  Conversely, the naphtha material is very 
low in octane thus, it would either have to be upgraded, or blended down with high octane 
blendstocks (i.e., ethanol), or be upgraded to a higher octane blendstock to have much value for 
use in gasoline.  The naphtha could also be sold as feedstock for the petrochemical market for 
manufacturing chemical products such as ethylene and benzene. 
 
 The unreacted carbon monoxide and hydrogen and any gaseous hydrocarbon material are 
burned to produce electricity in a turbine.  The waste heat from the gas turbine along with the 
steam created to cool the syn-gas, is sent to steam turbines to produce additional electricity.  
Most of the electricity is used within the CTL plant, however, some can be sold to raise 
additional revenues, particularly in the summer when electricity demand and prices are high. 
 
Industry Characterization 
 
 No commercial BTL plants currently exist in the U.S., however, there are several BTL 
pilot plants.  Choren is currently building a 1 million ton per year commercial Plant in Freiberg/ 
Saxony Germany that is expected to start up in 2011 or 2012.  Initially, the plant will use 
biomass from nearby forests, the wood-processing industry and straw from farmland. 
 
 Although coal-to-liquids (CTL) plants use coal as a feedstock, the process is essentially 
the same, therefore, CTL pilot and full scale plants help to demonstrate the BTL plant 
technology.  Examples of CTL pilot projects include a 10-15 barrel per day (BPD) operation in 
Colorado (Rentech) and a 30 BPD plant in New Jersey (Headwaters Inc.).  Internationally, 
commercial sized CTL plants are currently in operation in South Africa (Sasol) and have been in 
operation for a number of decades.  These plants produce approximately 2.4 billion gallons per 
year (or 160,000 barrels per day) of fuel products.  These liquid fuel products can include 
 90 
finished Fischer-Tropsch diesel, Fischer-Tropsch naphtha (a gasoline blendstock), methanol, and 
dimethyl ether, among others. Worldwide, additional CTL plants are being considered or 
constructed in China, Indonesia, India, Australia, and Malaysia.   
 
 An inventory of current domestic CTL plants under consideration (including those 
without CCS, with CCS, and/or biomass co-feed) involves fifteen projects ranging in size from 
smaller projects (1,800 barrels per day) to large commercial plants up to 80,000 barrels per day 
(BPD). Most plants being considered are in the conceptual stage or are in the project feasibility 
stage.21  Two plants are currently in the design phase (a 13,000 BPD and a 5,000 BPD plant) 
while one plant is in the construction phase (a 1,800 BPD plant).22  Based on discussions with 
plant developers, three of the plant sites under consideration are currently assessing the use of 
both biomass co-firing and carbon capture to reduce GHG emissions.  The plant furthest in 
developing coal and biomass to liquids (CBTL) with carbon capture (with CO2 intended for 
reuse in enhanced oil recovery applications) would be located in Wellsville, OH (a 50,000 BPD 
plant, Baard Energy).  
  
1.4.3.3 Developing Technologies  
 
 The following sections describe specific companies and their cellulosic biofuel 
technologies which the companies have developed or are developing.  This summary is not 
meant to be an unabridged list of cellulosic biofuel technologies, but rather a description of some 
of the more prominent or interesting cellulosic biofuel technologies.  These technologies are 
variants of the biochemical or thermochemical platforms described above in Section 1.4.3.1.1 
and 1.4.3.1.2.  The process technology summaries provided below are those stated by the 
respective companies.  EPA has not confirmed the statements made concerning these 
technologies, nor have we confirmed the process conditions and the process flow steps necessary 
for any of these companies.  As some of these technologies have slightly different process 
designs from the general descriptions found in Section 1.4.3.1 and Section 1.4.3.2., we found it 
important to discuss their differences below.  
 
Amyris Biotechnologies 
 
 A new second generation process from Amyris Biotechnologies has a fermentation 
process that uses custom designed microbes to make renewable fuel alcohols that are substitutes 
for petroleum gasoline and petroleum diesel fuel.   The technology is modular in design and can 
be bolted on to existing ethanol plants.  
 Amyris’s microbes and enzymes are the key drivers of their conversion process.  The 
process uses the same feedstock’s that are currently used to make ethanol, which could be sugar 
cane or corn. At this time, no public information is available to derive production cost estimates 
for the Amyris process.  We are not aware of any pilot or commercial plant announcements as of 
this date.  
                                                 
21
 DOE (2007), “Clean Coal Today: A Newsletter about Innovative Technologies for Coal Utilization,” Office of 
Fossil Energy, U.S. Department of Energy, DOE/FE-0509, Issue No. 72, Summer 2007, Table 1, p. 6. 
22
 The plants currently listed under design status are located near Medicine Bow, WY (DKRW Advanced Fuels, 
13,000 BPD) and near Gilberton, PA (WMPI, 5,000 BPD). The current plant under construction is in East Dubuque, 
IL (Rentech, 1,800 BPD). 
 91 
 
 The produced gasoline alcohol contains more energy than ethanol and is claimed to be 
compatible with use in gasoline and the petroleum distribution system.  The Amyris diesel 
product is also claimed to be compatible with use in existing petroleum distribution system while 
providing better storage and cold flow properties than biodiesel. 
 
BlueFire Ethanol 
 
 BlueFire Ethanol has a commercial acid hydrolysis technology process that converts 
cellulosic materials into ethanol.  The technology can make ethanol from urban trash, rice and 
wheat straws, wood waste and other agricultural residues.  Acid hydrolysis is the main reaction 
mechanism to convert cellulosic and hemicellulosic material into simple sugars such as hexose 
and pentose or "C6 and C5" sugars.  Fermentation of these sugars with microbes converts these 
sugars into ethanol.  This process for converting cellulosic and hemicellulosic material into 
ethanol via acid hydrolysis and fermentation has been around for many decades; though it has 
not been economically competitive as the cost was not competitive with transport fuel made from 
petroleum.  BlueFire’s process is claimed to offer several improvements to existing acid 
hydrolysis technology, giving higher ethanol yields and lower production costs. 
 
 Bluefire uses a proprietary concentrated acid hydrolysis system and several other process 
improvements to make ethanol production more economically attractive than older acid 
hydrolysis methods.  Some of Bluefire’s stated improvements include a more efficient acid 
recovery system; higher sugar purities and concentrations; use of more efficient microbes to 
ferment C6 and C5 sugars into ethanol; the processes ability to use biomass feedstock’s 
containing silica.  The Bluefire process consists of the following main components; feedstock 
preparation; decrystallization/hydrolysis reaction;  filtration of solids and liquids; separation of 
the acid and sugars; fermentation of the sugars and product separation.   For product separation, 
ethanol effluent is separated using distillation and then dehydrated with molecular sieve 
technology.  
 
 Bluefire has successfully operated a pilot plant for five years near their headquarters in 
Southern California.  BlueFire currently, though is in the process of building its first commercial 
facility which will be located in Lancaster California.  The plant is targeted to start up in late 
2009 and will produce up to 3.2 million gallons of cellulosic ethanol per year, using feedstock 
derived from non-foodstock urban, forestry and agricultural residue. 
 
Cello-Energy 
 
 The Cello-Energy process is a catalytic depolymerization technology.  At low pressure 
and temperature, the Cello-Energy process catalytically removes the oxygen and minerals from 
the hydrocarbons that comprise cellulose.  This results in a mixture of hydrocarbon compounds 
that boils in the naphtha boiling range.  The naphtha compounds are polymerized to form 
compounds that boil in the diesel boiling range.  The resulting diesel fuel meets the ASTM 
standards, is in the range of 50 to 55 cetane and typically contains 3 ppm of sulfur, although it 
could contain as much as 15 ppm sulfur.  The resulting diesel fuel has been tested in Caterpiller 
engines to demonstrate the viability of the fuel.  
 92 
 
 The Cello-Energy process is reported to convert 94% of the hydrocarbon material to 
diesel fuel (perhaps some of the product is naphtha), and requires that 12% of the product be 
used to run generators to produce the electricity that it needs.  The only energy input is 
electricity.  However, if outside electricity is used (which normally can be produced more cost 
efficiently by the utility companies), it can produce a very high percentage of the feedstock as 
product.  This process is on the order of 82% efficient, compared to today's biochemical and 
thermochemical processes which are on the order of 50 percent efficient or even lower.   
 
 Because of the simplicity of the process, the capital costs are very low.  A 20 million 
gallon per year plant only incurs a total cost of $12 million.  This is typical of the capital costs 
incurred when refiners expand their refineries, a low cost for a grassroots plant.   
 
 Cello-Energy was founded 14 years ago and after the chemistry was worked out, they 
built their first pilot plant in 1998.  They next converted their pilot plant in 2004 to a larger 
continuously-operating pilot plant that produced 4 million gallons per year of diesel fuel.  They 
recently began work to expand their pilot plant to a 20 million gallon per year plant which is 
expected to startup in the Fall of 2008.  Their plan is to aggressively manufacture 50 million 
gallons per year prefabricated plants that can be shipped anywhere in the U.S. 
 
Choren 
  
 Choren has a technology called Carbo-V, which is a Fischer-Tropsch process that can be 
used to make diesel fuel.   The process can  process a wide variety biomass and recycled material 
materials as feedstocks.  The process converts agriculture biomass, forestry biomass, biogenic 
waste and recycling substances into a synthesis gas which can be further converted to a diesel 
fuel using a Fischer-Tropsch reactor.  The Carbo-V process can also be configured without the 
Fischer-Tropsch hydrocracking technology, so as to produce electricity, heat and power, 
methanol, and other chemical feedstocks. 
 
 The Carbo-V Process is a three-stage gasification process consisting of low temperature 
gasification, high temperature gasification and endothermic entrained bed gasification.   .  In the 
first stage, biomass is partially oxidized with air or oxygen at temperatures between 400 and 500 
°C.  This breaks down the feedstock into a gas containing tar and solid carbon.  In the second 
stage, the tar is oxidized at temperature higher than the ash’s melting point, converting the tar 
into a synthesis gas.  In the third stage, solid carbon is mechanically pulverized and blown into 
the hot gasification stream.  The fluidized carbon endothermicly reacts with the gasification 
stream and is converted into a synthesis gas.  In the next Fischer-Tropsch stage of the process, 
the synthesis gas (CO and H2) interacts with a catalyst to form hydrocarbons.  The resulting 
hydrocarbons produced from the three stages can then be sent to a hydrocracking process to 
primarily produce diesel fuel.  
 
 Choren is currently building a commercial Plant in Freiberg/ Saxony Germany.  Initially, 
the plant will use biomass from nearby forests, the wood-processing industry and straw from 
farmland. 
 
 93 
Coskata 
 
 A combustion based technology which produces ethanol from biomass and other carbon 
supply stocks was recentlyannounced by Coskata.  Initial ethanol production cost estimates are 
lower than the biochemical and thermochemical cellulosic technologies described in Section 
1.4.3.1.1 and 1.4.3.1.2..  
 
 The production process uses gasification followed by biofermentation to make ethanol 
from a wide variety of feedstocks such as biomass, municipal waste, agriculture waste and other 
carbonaceous containing material.  In addition to being able to use many types of feedstock, the 
Coskata process appears to offer advantage in that it is less physically complex than both 
traditional corn-based fermentation and cellulosic ethanol production methods.  Since this 
process uses combustion and biofermentation, it is not easily classifiable as either a biochemical 
or thermochemical production method.   
  
 This process requires the use of grinded dry biomass or carboneous material, which is 
injected into a gasifier.  The gasifier combusts any dry carboneous feed stocks into syngas, 
comprised primarily of carbon monoxide and hydrogen.  The syngas produced is fermented in a 
reactor by micro-organisms, which convert the carbon monoxide and hydrogen directly into 
ethanol utilizing the chemical energy of the syngas.  The micro-organisms are low cost and can 
process a wide range of carbon monoxide and hydrogen molar ratios in the syngas, providing 
feedstock processing flexibility.  No other enzymes are required by this process for producing 
ethanol, providing significant cost savings over current cellulosic and corn based fermentation 
production methods. 
  
 Coskata presented information for woody biomass, being that each ton would generate 
about 100 gallons of ethanol and small amounts of ash which would be burned to supply energy 
needs for the process.  Corn stover is expected to yield similar ethanol yields as woody biomass 
feed stocks, though details about yields from the various feed supply stocks are not yet public. 
  
 The Coskata process is conducted at low pressures, which offers savings on capital and 
energy costs.  Additional energy savings can be relized by employing membrane technology to 
separate ethanol from the reactor decant liquid.  This technology uses gravity and filtration to 
recover ethanol, resulting in significant savings on distillation capital and energy costs used in 
cellulosic and corn based production methods. 
     
 Coskata projects that two plants will be operational by early 2011, with additional plant 
builds anticipated to be announced in the near future.  Considering this, capacity projections at 
this time are uncertain, as the process is still undergoing production, engineering and marketing 
reviews. 
 
Dynamotive Energy Systems 
 
 Dynamotive Energy Systems Corporation has announced a pyrolysis technology that uses 
medium temperatures and oxygen free reactions to convert dry waste biomass and energy crops 
into fuels that can be used in power/heat generation and transportation vehicles.  Additionally, 
 94 
the process can make feedstock’s that can be used to produce chemicals.  The process is flexible 
on the types of biomass feedstock’s that can be processed.   The fuel produced from the 
Dynamotive process is called “BioOil” and contains up to 25% water, though the water is 
intimately mixed and does not easily separate into another phase with time.  Since the Bio Oil 
contains significant amounts of water, it is not directly useable as fuel in conventional vehicles 
and must be converted via another catalytic conversion processing step. The additional catalytic 
step removes the water and converts the bio oil into diesel fuel or methanol, which then can be 
used in conventional vehicles.  For this, Bio Oil is combusted into a synthesis gas which is 
converted into diesel fuel or bio-methanol via a catalytic reaction.  The diesel fuel produced is 
compatible with existing petroleum diesel fuels.    
 
 Three products are produced by the Dynamotive process, Bio Oil (60-75% by weight), 
char (15-20% wt.) and non-condensable gases (10-20% wt.).  The char produced is similar to 
coke and can be used as fuel by other industries while the gases yielded from the process can be 
used to supply about 75% of the energy requirements of the pyrolysis process.  The pyrolysis 
process operates at a reactor temperatures of about 400-500 degrees Celsius. 
 
 The process has two pilot plants, one operating and another in the construction phase.  
These plants are being run to produce bio oil for use in the power sector, though Dynamotive has 
not announced plans for building a facility to make transportation fuels.   The operating pilot 
plant is producing fuel in West Lorne Ontario, Canada.  This plant started operation in early 
2005 and operates with a capacity of 130 tons per day of waste sawdust.  The other pilot plant is 
being built with a stated capacity of 200 tons per day.  This plant will be located in Guelph, 
Ontario, Canada and will process 66,000 dry tons of biomass a year.  This process uses waste 
construction and demolition wood from the private sector and will use about 3,000 tons of 
recycled wood. 
 
POET  
 
 Poet has over twenty years of producing conventional ethanol in 23 plants in seven states 
with production capability of one billion gallons of ethanol annually.  POET has expanded their 
production capability to include cellulosic ethanol technology.   POET’s cellulosic technology 
will make ethanol from plant materials like corn stalks, switch grass, wood chips and refuse.  In 
February 2007, POET was selected by DOE for an award totaling $80 million for federal funding 
for a commercial cellulosic ethanol plant, which will be located in Emmetsburg, Iowa.  As such, 
POET will be one of the first to build a cellulosic plant on a commercial scale.  The plant will 
make ethanol from plant materials such as corn cobs and switchgrass. 
 
 
 
 
 
Range Fuels 
 
 Range Fuels produces cellulosic ethanol via a two step thermochemical process.  Their 
technology converts biomass to syngas followed by catalytic conversion of the syngas to 
 95 
alcohols.  Range claims that their technology produces more ethanol than other cellulosic 
technologies based on yields per energy input.  This is a two step process which can use many 
forms of non food biomass, such as agriculture waste, wood, and corn stocks.  Additionally, the 
technology can process feed stocks with variable water content. 
 
 In the Range process, biomass feedstock are converted by heat, pressure and steam into 
syngas, which is then scrubbed and cleaned before entering into the second stage.  The second 
stage uses catalyst to convert the syngas into mixed alcohols, which are then separated and 
purified into alcohol fuels using distillation equipment.  Overall, the Range process is simple as 
no enzymes or living organisms are used for the main conversion reactions. 
 
 Range has operated a pilot plant for over 7 years using over 20 different nonfood 
feedstocks.  Range broke ground building its first commercial plant late in 2007.  This plant will 
be located in Soperton, Georgia and is partially funded from proceeds of a DOE grant.  The plant 
will use wood, grasses, and corn stover as feedstocks.  Although the initial plant is designed to 
produce 10 million gallons of ethanol per year, the plant is being designed to produce up to 100 
million gallons per year of ethanol. 
 
Virent Bioreforming 
 
 Another new process unveiled by Virent called “Bioforming Process” functions similarly 
as the gasoline reforming process used in the refining industry.  While refinery-based reforming 
raises natural gasoline’s octane value and produces organic chemicals, benzene, xylene and 
toluene as a byproduct, Bioforming reforms biomass-derived sugars into hydrocarbons for 
blending into gasoline and diesel fuel.  The process however, operates at much lower 
temperatures and pressures than reforming used by the refining industry.  The Bioforming 
process is being developed through a partnership with Shell, Cargill, Honda and the University 
of Wisconsin.  Virent currently has 16 pilot plants in operation.  At this stage, though, the data is 
limited.  It appears that Bioforming is a promising technology, as production costs estimates are 
low in comparison to other renewable and biomass production processes while the products are 
compatible with traditional petroleum stocks.    
  
 Biomass feedstocks for the Bioforming process are sugar feeds, such a corn syrup, 
sucrose, glycerol, sorbitol, xylose, glucose, cellulose and hemi cellulose.  These are primarily 
converted into gasoline and diesel fuel, though other hydrocarbons such as jet fuel, LPG, 
benzene, toluene, xylene, hydrogen, natural gas can also be produced. Water is also produced, as 
the reforming process removes oxygen from the sugar feeds.  The resulting properties and energy 
content of gasoline and diesel produced though are physically comparable to those yielded from 
refining industry, probably allowing movement in existing petroleum distribution systems, 
saving on shipping costs.  Additionally, variable operating cots are low because no distillation 
equipment is needed to separate the produced gasoline, diesel and other hydrocarbons, as these 
separate naturally from the aqueous solutions generated in the reforming process.  The net 
energy costs are also low due to low operating pressures and temperatures. 
 
1.4.4 Biodiesel & Renewable Diesel Production  
 
 96 
 Biodiesel 
 
 Plant oils and animal fats consist primarily of triglycerides, a type of a molecule  
consisting of a group of three olefinic hydrocarbon chains linked to a three-carbon backbone via 
an ester bond (see Figure 1.4-8).  Biodiesel is made by separating the chains from the triglyceride 
molecules and adding methanol to their ends to form methyl esters.  Glycerin is formed as a by-
product from the three-carbon backbones that remain.  For relatively pure triglycerides, such as 
virgin plant oils, the primary reaction is catalyzed by an alkaline pH and takes place in a stirred 
vessel at mild temperature and pressure conditions.   
 
Figure 1.4-8.  Overview of biodiesel conversion process 
 
 
 In the case of feedstocks containing more than a few percent free fatty acids (FFAs), such 
as rendered fats and waste greases, addition of base will result in the formation of soap, an 
undesirable process contaminate when present above trace levels.  To avoid this, these 
feedstocks first undergo an acid pre-treatment step to esterify the FFAs before proceeding to the 
base-catalyzed triglyceride transesterification reaction.  
 
Once the conversion is complete, the mixture is neutralized, washed, and co-products and 
unreacted substrates are recovered.  At that point the biodiesel is subjected to quality control 
testing and then released for sale.  Figure 1.4-9 shows a process flow diagram for a typical 
biodiesel production process that uses virgin plant oil as feedstock; processes using waste fats or 
greases would include a an acid esterification step upstream of the transesterification reactor 
shown here.  Plants that also produce other oleochemicals often have distillation equipment at 
the end of the process capable of purifying the methyl esters to a high degree or separating them 
by molecular weight.  These plants may use this equipment to produce a very high purity 
biodiesel product.  We estimate that less than 10% of current biodiesel production is distilled. 278 
 
 
 
+
transesterification
methyl esters
(biodiesel)
glycerin
triglyceride
 97 
Figure 1.4-9.  Schematic of typical biodiesel production from virgin plant oil 
 
 
 Some differences exist between large and small plants that are worth mentioning given 
the very wide range of plant capacities existing in this industry.  Larger plants (greater than 10 
million gallons per year) are more likely to employ continuous flow processes, which afford 
certain efficiencies of scale and steady-state operation.  On the other hand, small plants (less than 
one million gallons per year) are most likely to produce fuel batch-by-batch, which may give 
them more flexibility to change feedstock types or slow output on short notice.  Smaller plants 
are less likely to be able to afford an on-site laboratory or quality control specialist, which may 
cause them hardship as fuel quality standards tighten and/or are more stringently enforced.  
Third-party labs exist for this purpose, but significant per-test costs along with multi-day 
turnaround times due to shipping of samples are often prohibitive. 
 
 The biodiesel production process is relatively simple and mature, and there is sufficient 
existing U.S. capacity to produce all the biodiesel required to comply with the biomass-based 
diesel standard in this rulemaking.  Thus, we do not expect large changes in the process 
technology used to make biodiesel going into the future.  That said, it is worth noting some 
potential changes as existing plants strive to comply with changing fuel quality standards, or as 
new plants are occasionally built to take advantage of specific market niches.   
 
Trans-
esterification
Reactor
Acid
Vegetable
Oils
Methanol
Catalyst (Base)
Acidulation
Separator
Acidulation
Glycerin Stripper
Column
Methanol Rectification
Column
Glycerin
Product
Methanol /
Water
Biodiesel
Wash Tank
Crude
Biodiesel
To Methanol
Storage
Glycerin
Methanol
Water
Water
Separator
Gray
Water
Biodiesel /
Methanol
Stripper
Biodiesel
Methanol / Water
Filter
Biodiesel
ProductFilter
 98 
One such change may be an increase in distillation of biodiesel.  EPA requires biodiesel 
to meet the ASTM D-6751 specification for B100 in order to be legally blended into diesel fuel 
for use in vehicles.  Earlier this year, ASTM amended this specification to require a cold filter 
plugging test, which effectively mandates very low levels of FFAs and partially-converted 
triglycerides in the finished biodiesel.  There are a variety of process parameters a biodiesel 
producer can adjust to reduce the levels of these compounds in the finished fuel, but one very 
effective way to ensure a high purity product is through distillation.  At this time it is unclear to 
what extent distillation will be relied upon for compliance with the amended biodiesel 
specification.  An increase in distillation would increase per-gallon energy inputs to the process 
significantly, which will make the biodiesel more costly and result in higher GHG emissions. 
 
Another potential change is a shift to use of heterogeneous (i.e., solid phase) catalysts for 
transesterification rather than the alkaline solutions used in most plants now (where aqueous 
NaOH or KOH are blended with the feedstock oil).  This is expected to reduce the 
neutralizing/washing/separating steps required downstream of the reactor, potentially resulting in 
a higher purity product and decreasing process energy use to some extent. 
 
Some industry forecasts suggest animal fats and waste greases will make up an increasing 
share of biodiesel feedstocks due to their lower costs and lower upstream GHG impacts.  This 
change will cause more plants to use the acid pre-treatment, which increases process complexity 
and per-gallon energy use.   
 
 Renewable Diesel  
 
 The renewable diesel production process converts vegetable oils and animal fats into 
diesel fuel using thermal depolymerization, which is similar to hydrotreating used in petroleum 
refining to remove sulfur.  The process uses hydrogen and catalyst to remove oxygen from the 
triglyceride molecules in the feedstocks oils via a decarboxylation and hydro-oxygenation 
reaction, yielding some light petroleum products and water as byproducts.  The reactions also 
saturate the olefin bonds in the feedstock oils, converting them to paraffins.  All of these 
reactions consume significant amounts of hydrogen.  The extent of these reactions depends on 
the process conditions, as some of the carbon backbone of the oils can be cracked to naphtha and 
lighter products with higher severity.  For our analysis though, we assume no such cracking and 
predict high selectivity to diesel-range material with a small amount of propane and water as by-
products.  Figure 1.4-10 shows a flow diagram of the primary steps of renewable diesel 
production. 
 
 99 
Figure 1.4-10.  Process flow diagram of primary steps in renewable diesel production 
 
 
Renewable diesel will be produced either at a stand-alone facility or within the 
boundaries of an existing petroleum refinery.  For the stand-alone facility, feedstock is brought in 
and finished fuel is transported out to market.  This type of facility may be co-located with a 
rendering facility to minimize feedstock transportation and storage costs.  For production within 
the boundaries of a refinery, the feed material may either be processed in a segregated unit (new 
or revamped), or co-processed with petroleum in an existing unit.  In any case, the feedstock will 
require pre-treatment in a unit that removes contaminates such as sulfur, nitrogen, and other 
compounds that may poison hydrotreating catalysts. 
 
Since December, 2007, ConocoPhilips has been producing a small amount (300-500 
bbl/day) of renewable diesel at their Borger, Texas, refinery from beef tallow generated by 
Tyson Foods, Inc. in Amarillo, Texas.279  In 2007, Dynamic Fuels, LLC., was formed by 
Syntroleum Corp. and Tyson Foods, Inc., to produce liquid renewable fuels.  This fall Dynamic 
Fuels has announced ground-breaking for a 75 million gallon per year plant (5,000 bbl/day) in 
Geismar, Louisiana, that will use Tyson meat processing fats as feedstock to Syntroleum’s Bio-
Synfining process.  Start-up is scheduled for 2010, with the primary product being high-quality 
diesel fuel that will be fungible within the existing petroleum supply system. 280  This facility 
plans to utilize supplies of hydrogen available in the industrial park where it will be located, as 
well as rail and shipping infrastructure already in place nearby. 281 
 
 Syntroleum Corp was founded in 1984 and holds a number of patents in gas-to-liquids 
and biomass-to-liquids conversion processes.  One of these technologies they call Synfining, a 
process for upgrading Fischer-Tropsch paraffins to compounds with properties more favorable 
S, N, 
metal 
removal
Mixed grease 
feedstock
Hydrogen
Heat in
Flash 
separator
Heat out
Liquid fuel for 
blending or further 
separation
Water, light 
hydrocarbons
Hydrotreating 
reactor
 100 
for diesel fuel.  They have further adapted this process to use a variety of fats and oils as 
feedstocks, calling it Bio-Synfining.  It is this process that will be used in the Geismar facility. 
 
 Looking internationally, the Finnish company Neste Oil began operating a 3,200 bbl/day 
process in Finland in 2007 to convert vegetable oils into renewable diesel.  This company has 
plans to construct similar facilities in Singapore and the Netherlands by 2010, and eventually 
plans to bring on-line plants that will convert biomass to liquid fuels using gasification.282 
 
 Since thermochemical production of hydrocarbon fuels from fats and biomass is a 
relatively new endeavor to conduct on a commercial scale, we expect continued innovation and 
fine-tuning of the technology as these processes evolve from their roots in Fischer-Tropsch and 
petroleum hydrotreating processes.  (This discussion ties in with cellulosic diesel in section 
1.4.3.2.) 
 101 
1.5 Biofuel Industry Characterization & Projected Growth 
 
 In this section we will discuss the current state of the biofuel industry and how 
production might grow in the future under the proposed RFS2 program.  The bulk of the 
discussion will focus on ethanol production, but we will also provide insight on biodiesel, 
renewable diesel, and the evolving cellulosic diesel industry.  We will start by discussing current 
corn ethanol production and how we expect the industry to continue to expand under the RFS2 
program as well as employ more advanced processing technologies.  From there we will discuss 
the availability of imported ethanol from Brazil and Caribbean Basin Initiative (CBI) countries to 
help meet the Advanced Biofuel Standard.  Following this discussion, we will characterize the 
present state of the cellulosic ethanol industry and talk about the likelihood of near-term 
commercialization based on industry plans and technological breakthroughs aided by State and 
Federal grants, tax incentives, and loan guarantee programs.  And furthermore, why we believe 
the industry is on track for meeting the 2010 Cellulosic Biofuel Standard set by EISA.  We will 
end the cellulosic ethanol discussion by forecasting where potential plants could be located in the 
U.S. based on feedstock availability.  This information, along with projected corn ethanol plant 
locations and imported ethanol locations, will be used as an input into the distribution analysis 
(discussed later in Section 1.6) and the emissions and AQ modeling (discussed in Chapter 3).  
Finally, we will conclude our industry characterization section by discussing the present state of 
the biomass-based diesel industry and how we expect biodiesel production to grow in the future 
and renewable diesel production to emerge.  For a more in-depth discussion of the corn ethanol, 
imported ethanol, cellulosic ethanol/diesel, biodiesel, and renewable diesel processing 
technologies, refer to Section 1.4 of the DRIA.   
 
1.5.1 Corn Ethanol  
 
 The majority of domestic biofuel production currently comes from plants processing corn 
and other similarly-processed grains in the Midwest.  However, there are a handful of plants 
located outside the corn belt and a few plants processing simple sugars from food or beverage 
waste.  In this subsection, we will talk about the present state of the corn ethanol industry and 
how we expect things to change in the future under the proposed RFS2 program.   
 
1.5.1.1 Historic/Current Production 
 
 The United States is currently the largest ethanol producer in the world.  In 2007, the U.S. 
produced an estimated 6.5 billion gallons of fuel ethanol for domestic consumption, the majority 
of which came from domestically-grown corn.283  Although the U.S. ethanol industry has been in 
existence since the 1970s, it has rapidly expanded over the past five years due to the phase-out of 
methyl tertiary butyl ether (MTBE), elevated crude oil prices, state mandates and tax incentives, 
the introduction of the Federal Volume Ethanol Excise Tax Credit (VEETC)W, and the 
                                                 
W
 On October 22, 2004, President Bush signed into law H.R. 4520, the American Jobs Creation Act of 2004 (JOBS 
Bill), which created the Volumetric Ethanol Excise Tax Credit (VEETC). The $0.51/gal VEETC for ethanol blender 
replaced the former fuel excise tax exemption, blender’s credit, and pure ethanol fuel credit.  However, the recently-
enacted Farm Bill has modified the alcohol credit so that corn ethanol gets a reduced credit of $0.45/gal.  The 2008 
Farm Bill also gives cellulosic biofuel a credit of $1.01/gal.  Both credits appear to be valid through the end of 2012.   
 102 
implementation of the existing RFS1 program.X As shown in Figure 1.5-1, U.S. ethanol 
production has more than quadrupled over the past decade. 
 
Figure 1.5-1. 
Historical Growth in U.S. Corn/Starch Ethanol Production284 
1.4 1.5
1.6 1.8
2.1
2.8
3.4
3.9
4.9
6.5
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
Year
Co
rn
/s
ta
rc
h 
et
ha
no
l p
ro
du
ct
io
n
 (B
ga
l)
 
 
 And the growth in ethanol production continues.  At the time of our May 1, 2008 corn 
ethanol plant assessment, there were 158 fuel ethanol plants operating in the U.S. with a 
combined production capacity of 9.2 billion gallons per year.Y  The majority of today’s ethanol 
(nearly 89 percent by volume) is produced exclusively from corn.  Another 11 percent comes 
from a blend of corn and/or similarly processed grains (milo, wheat, or barley) and less than half 
a percent is produced from cheese whey, waste beverages, and sugars/starches combined.  A 
summary of U.S. ethanol production by feedstock is presented in Table 1.5-1.  
 
                                                 
X
 On May 1, 2007, EPA published a final rule (72 FR 23900) implementing the Renewable Fuel Standard (RFS) 
required by the Energy Policy Act of 2005.  The RFS requires that 4.0 billion gallons of renewable fuel be blended 
into gasoline/diesel by 2006, growing to 7.5 billion gallons by 2012. 
Y
 The May 1, 2008 ethanol production capacity baseline was generated based on a variety of data sources including: 
Renewable Fuels Association (RFA) Ethanol Biorefinery Locations (updated April 4, 2008); Ethanol Producer 
Magazine (EPM) Current plant list (last modified on April 14, 2008), and ethanol producer websites.  The baseline 
does not include ethanol plants whose primary business is industrial or food-grade ethanol production.  Where 
applicable, current ethanol plant production levels have been used to represent plant capacity, as nameplate 
capacities are often underestimated. The baseline does not include U.S. plants that are currently idled or plants that 
may be located in the Virgin Islands or U.S. territories.   
 
 103 
Table 1.5-1. 
Current Corn/Starch Ethanol Production Capacity by Feedstock 
Plant Feedstock
(Primary Listed First)
Capacity
MGY
% of
Capacity
No. of
Plants
% of
Plants
Corna 8,141 88.8% 131 82.9%
Corn, Milob 704 7.7% 14 8.9%
Corn, Wheat 130 1.4% 1 0.6%
Corn, Wheat, Milo 115 1.3% 2 1.3%
Milo 3 0.0% 1 0.6%
Wheat, Milo 50 0.5% 1 0.6%
Cheese Whey 8 0.1% 2 1.3%
Waste Beveragesc 13 0.1% 4 2.5%
Waste Sugars & Starchesd 7 0.1% 2 1.3%
Total 9,169 100% 158 100%
aIncludes one facility processing seed corn and two facilities that have received funding from DOE 
to either expand their existing plant to incorporate cellulosic feedstocks or build a pilot plant at this 
location.
bIncludes one facility processing small amounts of molasses in addition to corn and milo.
cIncludes two facilities processing brewery waste.
dIncludes one facility processing potato waste that intends to add corn in the future.  
 
 
 As shown in Table 1.5-1, of the 158 operating plants, there are a total of 150 plants 
processing corn and/or other similarly processed grains.  Of these facilities, 140 utilize dry-
milling technologies and the remaining 10 plants rely on wet-milling processes.  Dry mill ethanol 
plants grind the entire kernel and generally produce only one primary co-product: distillers’ 
grains with solubles (DGS).  The co-product is sold wet (WDGS) or dried (DDGS) to the 
agricultural market as animal feed.  However, there are a growing number of dry mill ethanol 
plants pursuing front-end corn fractionation or back-end corn oil extraction to produce fuel-grade 
corn oil for the biodiesel industry. There are also additional plants pursuing cold starch 
fermentation and other energy-saving processing technologies.  For more on the dry-milling and 
wet-milling processes as well as the advanced technologies being pursued by the corn ethanol 
industry, refer to Section 1.4.1.   
 
 In contrast to traditional dry mill plants, wet mill facilities separate the kernel prior to 
processing into its component parts (germ, fiber, protein, and starch) and produce other co-
products (usually gluten feed, gluten meal, and food-grade corn oil) in addition to DGS.  Wet 
mill plants are generally more costly to build but are larger in size on average.  As such, 13 
percent of the current grain ethanol production comes from the 10 wet mill facilities listed in 
Table 1.5-2. 
 
 104 
Table 1.5-2. 
Existing Wet Mill Corn Ethanol Plants 
Ethanol Plant/Company Location
Capacity
MGY
% of Tot
Capacity
Archer Daniels Midlanda Cedar Rapids, IA 250 2.7%
Archer Daniels Midlanda Clinton, IA 190 2.1%
Archer Daniels Midlanda Columbus, NE 95 1.0%
Archer Daniels Midlanda Decatur, IL 290 3.2%
Archer Daniels Midlanda Marshall, MN 40 0.4%
Aventine Renewable Energy Pekin, IL 100 1.1%
Cargill, Inc. Eddyville, IA 35 0.4%
Cargill, Inc. Blair, NE 85 0.9%
Grain Processing Corp Muscatine, IA 20 0.2%
Tate & Lyle Loudon, TN 66 0.7%
Total 1,171 12.8%
aEstimated plant capacities.
 
 
 The remaining eight ethanol plants process cheese whey, waste beverages or 
sugars/starches and operate differently than their grain-based counterparts.  These relatively 
small facilities do not require milling and operate a simpler enzymatic fermentation process.   
 
 Ethanol production is a relatively resource-intensive process that requires the use of 
water, electricity, and steam.  Steam needed to heat the process is generally produced onsite or 
by other dedicated boilers.  The ethanol industry relies primarily on natural gas.  Of today’s 158 
ethanol production facilities, 134 burn natural gasZ (exclusively), three burn a combination of 
natural gas and biomass, one burns a combination of natural gas, landfill syngas and wood, while 
one burns a combination of natural gas and syrup from the process.  In addition, 18 plants burn 
coal as their primary fuel and one burns a combination of coal and biomass.  Our research 
suggests that 24 plants utilize cogeneration or combined heat and power (CHP) technology, 
although others may exist.  CHP is a mechanism for improving plant energy efficiency.  For 
more on this technology, refer to Section 1.4.1.3. A summary of the energy sources and CHP 
technology utilized by today’s ethanol plants is found in Table 1.5-3.  
  
                                                 
Z
 Facilities were assumed to burn natural gas if the plant boiler fuel was unspecified or unavailable on the public 
domain. 
 105 
Table 1.5-3.  
Current Corn/Starch Ethanol Production Capacity by Energy Source 
Plant Energy Source
(Primary Listed First)
Capacity
MGY
% of
Capacity
No. of
Plants
% of
Plants
CHP
Tech.
Coala 1,720 18.8% 18 11.4% 8
Coal, Biomass 50 0.5% 1 0.6% 0
Natural Gasb 7,141 77.9% 134 84.8% 15
Natural Gas, Biomassc 113 1.2% 3 1.9% 1
Natural Gas, Landfill Syngas, Wood 100 1.1% 1 0.6% 0
Natural Gas, Syrup 46 0.5% 1 0.6% 0
Total 9,169 100.0% 158 100.0% 24
aIncludes four plants that are permitted to burn biomass, tires, petroleum coke, and wood waste in addition to 
coal and one facility that intends to transition to biomass in the future.
bIncludes one facility that intends to burn thin stillage biogas, five facilities that intend to transition to coal, and 
one facility that intends to switch to biomass in the future.  
cIncludes one facility processing bran in addition to natural gas.
 
 
 Since the majority of ethanol is made from corn, it is no surprise that most of the plants 
are located in the Midwest near the Corn Belt.  Of today’s 158 ethanol production facilities, 140 
are located in the 15 states comprising PADD 2.  For a map of the Petroleum Administration for 
Defense Districts or PADDs, refer to Figure 1.5-2. 
 
Figure 1.5-2. 
Petroleum Administration for Defense Districts 
 
 
 
 As a region, PADD 2 accounts for 94 percent (or 8.6 billion gallons) of today’s estimated 
ethanol production capacity, as shown in Table 1.5-4.  
 106 
Table 1.5-4. 
Current Corn/Starch Ethanol Production Capacity by PADD 
PADD
Capacity
MGY
% of
Capacity
No. of
Plants
% of
Plants
PADD 1 50 0.5% 2 1.3%
PADD 2 8,619 94.0% 140 88.6%
PADD 3 170 1.9% 3 1.9%
PADD 4 160 1.7% 7 4.4%
PADD 5 171 1.9% 6 3.8%
Total 9,169 100.0% 158 100.0%
 
 
Leading the Midwest in ethanol production are Iowa, Nebraska, Illinois, South Dakota 
and Minnesota.  Together, these five states’ 93 ethanol plants account for 67 percent of the 
nation’s ethanol production capacity.  However, although the majority of ethanol production 
comes from PADD 2, there are a growing number of plants situated outside the traditional corn 
belt.  In addition to the 16 states comprising PADD 2 (which all have operational ethanol plants), 
ethanol plants are currently located in Arizona, California, Colorado, Georgia, Idaho, New 
Mexico, New York, Oregon, and Wyoming.  Some of these facilities ship in feedstocks (namely 
corn) from the Midwest, others rely on locally grown/produced feedstocks, while others rely on a 
combination of the two.  For a map of ethanol plant locations by plant size, refer to Figure 1.5-3.  
A summary of ethanol production capacity by state is presented in Table 1.5-5. 
 
 107 
Figure 1.5-3. 
Current Corn/Starch Ethanol Plant Locations 
 
 
 108 
Table 1.5-5. 
Current Corn/Starch Ethanol Production Capacity by State 
State
Capacity
MGY
% of
Capacity
No. of
Plants
% of
Plants
Iowa 2,282 24.9% 30 19.0%
Nebraska 1,278 13.9% 22 13.9%
Illinois 941 10.3% 9 5.7%
South Dakota 892 9.7% 14 8.9%
Minnesota 749 8.2% 18 11.4%
Indiana 540 5.9% 7 4.4%
Wisconsin 479 5.2% 8 5.1%
Kansas 464 5.1% 12 7.6%
Ohio 345 3.8% 4 2.5%
Michigan 214 2.3% 4 2.5%
Missouri 202 2.2% 5 3.2%
Colorado 146 1.6% 5 3.2%
Texas 140 1.5% 2 1.3%
North Dakota 125 1.4% 3 1.9%
California 81 0.9% 4 2.5%
Tennessee 66 0.7% 1 0.6%
New York 50 0.5% 1 0.6%
Arizona 50 0.5% 1 0.6%
Kentucky 40 0.4% 2 1.3%
Oregon 40 0.4% 1 0.6%
New Mexico 30 0.3% 1 0.6%
Wyoming 9 0.1% 1 0.6%
Idaho 5 0.1% 1 0.6%
Oklahoma 2 0.0% 1 0.6%
Georgia 0 0.0% 1 0.6%
Total 9,169 100.0% 158 100.0%
 
 
 
 The U.S. ethanol industry is currently comprised of a mixture of company-owned plants 
and locally-owned farmer cooperatives (co-ops).  The majority of today’s ethanol production 
facilities are company-owned, and on average these plants are larger in size than farmer-owned 
co-ops.  Accordingly, company-owned plants account for more than 75 percent of today’s 
ethanol production capacity.285  Furthermore, almost 40 percent of the total domestic product 
comes from 41 plants owned by just three different companies – POET Biorefining, Archer 
Daniels Midland (ADM), and Verasun Energy (refer to Figure 1.5-4 below).  
 
 109 
Figure 1.5-4. 
Current Corn/Starch Ethanol Production Capacity by Company 
Other
4,762 MGY POET Biorefining
1,261 MGY
Archer Daniels Midland
1,100 MGY
VeraSun Energy
1,090 MGY
The Andersons Ethanol
315 MGY
Hawkeye Renewables
230 MGY
Abengoa Bioenergy
205 MGY
Aventine Renewable 
Energy
207 MGY
 
 
 
1.5.1.2 Projected Growth Under RFS2 
 
 As highlighted above, 9.2 billion gallons of ethanol plant capacity was online as of May 
1, 2008.  So even if no additional capacity was added, U.S. ethanol production would grow from 
2007 to 2008, provided facilities continue to operate at or above today’s production levels.  
However, we don’t expect growth in corn ethanol production to cease in the near future.   
 
 According to our industry assessment, there were 59 ethanol plants under construction or 
expanding as of May 1, 2008 with a combined production capacity of 5.2 billion gallons.AA  
These projects were at various phases of construction from conducting land stabilization work, to 
constructing tanks and installing ancillary equipment, to completing start-up activities.  
However, over the past few months, unfavorable market conditions (high corn prices and low 
ethanol market values) have driven a number of producers to delay construction or scrap plans 
altogether.  But we believe that implementation of the RFS2 program will help revitalize ethanol 
production and stimulate much-needed infrastructure improvements.  As such, we believe that 
our May 1, 2008 industry characterization is still very representative of what future growth may 
look like under RFS2.   
 
                                                 
AA
 Based on Renewable Fuels Association (RFA), Ethanol Biorefinery Locations – Under Construction/Expansions 
(updated April 4, 2008); Ethanol Producer Magazine (EPM), Under Construction plant list (last modified on April 
14, 2008), ethanol producer websites, and follow-up correspondence with ethanol producers.  It is worth noting that 
for our industry assessment, “under construction” implies that more than just a ground breaking ceremony has taken 
place.  To determine whether a facility “commenced construction” by December 19, 2007 and thus will be 
grandfathered under the proposed RFS2, we will rely on the Expanded registration Process (refer to Section III.C of 
the Preamble).     
 110 
 Once these 59 projects are complete, there will be 212 ethanol plants operating in the 
U.S. with a combined estimated production capacity of about 14.4 billion gallons per year.  As 
shown in Table 1.5-6, most of the near-term corn ethanol growth is expected to come from plants 
located in PADD 2.  
  
Table 1.5-6. 
Corn Ethanol Construction Projects by PADD 
Online as of 
May 1, 2008
Under 
Construction 
or Expanding
After 
Construction
PADD 1 50 214 264
PADD 2 8,619 4,409 13,028
PADD 3 170 215 385
PADD 4 160 50 210
PADD 5 171 328 499
Total 9,169 5,216 14,385
Ethanol Production Capacity (MGY)
PADD
 
 
 While theoretically it only takes 12-18 months to build an ethanol plantBB, the rate at 
which future plants come online will be dictated by market conditions and RFS2 requirements.  
Today’s proposed program will create a growing demand for corn ethanol reaching 15 billion 
gallons by 2022.  However, it is possible that market conditions could drive demand even higher.  
Whether the nation will produce more ethanol that the 15 billion gallons of the RFS2 standard 
that can be met with conventional biofuels is uncertain and will be determined by feedstock 
availability/pricing, crude oil pricing, and the relative ethanol/gasoline price relationship.  For 
analysis purposes, we assumed that corn ethanol production would not exceed the conventional 
biofuel volumes in the RFS2 standard.  So the plants currently under construction today would 
gradually come online along with a handful of other promising projects until 15 billion gallons of 
production capacity was met.  While there’s no way of telling exactly which plans will come to 
fruition, we considered projects that appeared to be at advanced stages of planning at the time of 
our assessment.  We selected 4 new construction and 5 expansion projects that had secured 
environmental permits, funding/financing, engineering and construction contracts and/or were 
affiliated with larger parent companies with a perceived advantage obtaining capital or labor 
resources. 
 
 Once all the aforementioned projects are complete, we project that there will be 216 
corn/starch ethanol plants operating in the U.S. with a combined production capacity of about 15 
billion gallons per year.  Much like today’s ethanol production facilities, the overwhelming 
majority of projected plant capacity (95 percent by volume) is expected to come from corn-fed 
plants.  The remaining ethanol production is forecasted to come from plants processing a blend 
of corn and milo.  A summary of the forecasted ethanol production by feedstock in 2022 under 
the RFS2 program is found in Table 1.5-7.     
                                                 
BB
 For more information on our estimated plant build rates, refer to Section 1.2.5. 
 111 
 
Table 1.5-7. 
Projected RFS2 Ethanol Production Capacity by Feedstock  
Capacity
MGY
No. of
Plants
Capacity
MGY
No. of
Plants
Corna 5,526 54 13,666 185
Corn, Milob 303 4 1,007 18
Corn, Wheat 0 0 130 1
Corn, Wheat, Milo 0 0 115 2
Milo 0 0 3 1
Wheat, Milo 0 0 50 1
Cheese Whey 0 0 8 2
Waste Beveragesc 0 0 13 4
Waste Sugars & Starchesd 0 0 7 2
Total 5,829 58 14,998 216
aIncludes one facility processing seed corn and two facilities that have received funding from DOE 
to either expand their existing plant to incorporate cellulosic feedstocks or build a pilot plant at this 
location.
bIncludes one facility processing small amounts of molasses in addition to corn and milo.
cIncludes two facilities processing brewery waste.
dIncludes one facility processing potato waste that intends to add corn in the future.  
Total 2022 Est.New Plants/Exp.
Plant Feedstock
(Primary Listed First)
 
 
 Based on industry plans as of May 1, 2008, the majority of new corn/grain ethanol 
production capacity (82 percent by volume) is predicted to come from new or expanded plants 
burning natural gas.  Additionally, one new plant is expected to burn a combination of natural 
gas and syrup (from the process) and an expansion at an existing facility burning natural gas and 
biomass.  The industry is also forecasting four new coal-fired ethanol plants and an expansion at 
an existing coal-fired plant.  Finally, there are expected to be three new plants burning alternative 
fuels – one relying on manure biogas, one burning biomass, and one burning a combination of 
biomass and thin stillage from the process.CC  Of the 58 new corn/grain ethanol plants, our 
research indicates that nine would utilize cogeneration, bringing the total number of CHP 
facilities to 33.  A summary of the forecasted ethanol plant energy sources in 2022 under the 
RFS2 program is found in Table 1.5-8.   
 
                                                 
CC
 Thin stillage is a process liquid with 5–10 percent solids taken out of the distillers grains via centrifuge. 
 112 
Table 1.5-8. 
Projected Near-Term Corn/Starch Ethanol Production Capacity by Energy Source  
Capacity
MGY
No. of
Plants
Capacity
MGY
No. of
Plants
CHP
Tech.
Biomass 88 1 88 1 0
Coala 740 4 2,460 22 12
Coal, Biomass 0 0 50 1 0
Manure Biogas 115 1 115 1 0
Natural Gasb 4,776 50 11,917 184 19
Natural Gas, Biomassc 40 0 153 3 1
Natural Gas, Landfill Syngas, Wood 0 0 100 1 0
Natural Gas, Syrup 50 1 96 2 0
Thin Stillage Biogas, Biomass 20 1 20 1 1
Total 5,829 58 14,998 216 33
aIncludes four existing plants and two under construction facilities that are permitted to burn biomass, tires, petroleum coke, 
and wood waste in addition to coal.  Also includes one facility that intends to transition to biomass in the future.
bIncludes one facility that intends to burn thin stillage biogas, six facilities that intend to transition to coal, and one facility 
that intends to switch to biomass in the future.  
cIncludes one facility processing bran in addition to natural gas.
New Plants/Exp. Total 2022 Est.
Plant Energy Source
(Primary Listed First)
 
 
 The information above is based on short-term industry production plans at the time of our 
May 1, 2008 plant assessment.  However, we anticipate even more growth in advanced ethanol 
production technologies in the future under the proposed RFS2 program.  We project that fuel 
prices will drive a large number of corn ethanol plants to transition from conventional boiler 
fuels to advanced biomass-based feedstocks.  We also believe that fossil fuel/electricity prices 
will drive a number of ethanol producers to pursue CHP technology.  For more on our projected 
2022 utilization of these technologies under the RFS2 program, refer to section 1.5.1.3.  For an 
estimate of the ethanol production capacity that will likely be grandfathered under this rule, refer 
to section 1.5.1.4.      
 
 Under the RFS2 program, the majority of new ethanol production is expected to originate 
from PADD 2, close to where the corn is grown.  However, there are a growing number of 
“destination” ethanol plants being built outside the Midwest in response to state production 
subsidies, E10/E85 retail pump incentives, ethanol usage as well as fuel oxygenate requirements.  
A summary of the forecasted ethanol production by PADD in 2022 under RFS2 can be found in 
Table 1.5-9.     
 
 113 
Table 1.5-9. 
Projected RFS2 Corn/Starch Ethanol Production Capacity by PADD  
 
Capacity
MGY
No. of
Plants
Capacity
MGY
No. of
Plants
PADD 1 214 2 264 4
PADD 2 5,002 47 13,620 187
PADD 3 215 2 385 5
PADD 4 70 2 230 9
PADD 5 328 5 499 11
Total 5,829 58 14,998 216
New Plants/Exp.
PADD
Total 2022 Est.
 
 
 We project that Iowa, Nebraska, and Illinois will continue to dominate ethanol production 
with a collective production capacity of about 7.5 billion gallons by 2022.  Minnesota and 
Indiana are projected to be the fourth and fifth largest producers displacing South Dakota 
(today’s fourth largest producer according to Table 1.5-5).  Ethanol production is expected to 
grow in other Midwest states and there are also a growing number of plants that are being built 
outside the Corn Belt.  By 2022, we estimated that more than half of the United States will have 
corn/starch ethanol production.  A map of forecasted corn ethanol plant locations under RFS2 by 
plant size, refer to Figure 1.5-5.  A summary of ethanol production capacity by state is presented 
in Table 1.5-10. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 114 
 
Figure 1.5-5. 
Projected RFS2 Corn/Starch Ethanol Plant Locations 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 115 
Table 1.5-10. 
Projected RFS2 Corn/Starch Ethanol Production Capacity by State 
Capacity
MGY
No. of
Plants
Capacity
MGY
No. of
Plants
Iowa 1,573 13 3,854 43
Nebraska 959 7 2,237 29
Illinois 465 4 1,406 13
Minnesota 440 4 1,189 22
Indiana 470 5 1,010 12
South Dakota 100 1 992 15
Kansas 203 4 667 16
Wisconsin 70 1 549 9
Ohio 185 3 530 7
Texas 215 2 355 4
North Dakota 210 2 335 5
Michigan 107 1 321 5
Missouri 60 1 262 6
California 160 3 241 7
Tennessee 160 1 226 2
New York 114 1 164 2
Oregon 113 1 153 2
Colorado 0 0 146 5
Georgia 100 1 100 2
Idaho 70 2 75 3
Washington 55 1 55 1
Arizona 0 0 50 1
Kentucky 0 0 40 2
New Mexico 0 0 30 1
Wyoming 0 0 9 1
Oklahoma 0 0 2 1
Total 5,829 58 14,998 216
New Plants/Exp. Total 2022 Est.
State
 
 
 The majority of future ethanol plants are expected to be company-owned.  Of the 58 new 
plants we are forecasting by 2022 under the proposed RFS2 program, 52 are expected to be 
owned by corporations.  Furthermore, 31 are predicted to be owned or affiliated with parent 
companies already producing ethanol in the U.S. today.  Archer Daniels Midland, POET 
Biorefining and Verasun Energy are expected to continue to lead U.S. corn ethanol production, 
each with an estimated 1.6-1.7 billion gallons of production capacity by 2022. 
 
1.5.1.3 Forecasted Growth in Advanced Processing Technologies 
 
 116 
 While we can get a good idea of what the ethanol industry will look like in the near term 
by looking at currently existing ethanol plants and those under construction, further analysis is 
needed to forecast what the ethanol industry will look like in 2022.  Significant changes in the 
primary fuel source and overall energy efficiency of ethanol production plants are likely to 
occur.  The high price of natural gas has many ethanol plants considering alternative fuel 
sources.  Greater biofuel availability and potential low life cycle green house gas emissions 
incentives may further encourage ethanol producers to transition from fossil fuels to biomass 
based fuels.  As ethanol plants become more efficient and require less energy, their ability to use 
biofuels increases.  Two of the biggest drawbacks to using biofuels currently are handling and 
storage costs.  Due to the lower density of biofuels, as compared to coal, a larger area is required 
to store biomass with an equivalent heating value of coal.  Handling costs are also increased as a 
larger volume of fuel must be moved.  These negative impacts would be less significant in an 
ethanol plant using less energy.  Lower overall energy use would also allow waste products and 
locally produced biofuels to make up a larger portion of the total fuel supply, reducing the 
purchase and transportation costs of the biofuels.  It is likely that plants currently using natural 
gas would transition to using biogas and those using coal would transition to using solid biomass 
due to their ability to make these transitions without investing in new boiler equipment.  The 
same factors, cost and lower life cycle green house gas emissions, are expected to increase the 
number of ethanol producers using combined heat and power (CHP) technology.  Projections for 
the primary feedstock and use of CHP technology from 2020 to 2030 are summarized in Table 
1.5-11 below. 
 
Table 1.5-11.DD 
Projected Primary Fuel Sources and CHP Usage 
  2020 2022 2025 2030 
Natural Gas Boiler 54% 49% 42% 31% 
Natural Gas CHP 11% 12% 13% 15% 
Coal Boiler 0% 0% 0% 0% 
Coal CHP 4% 4% 4% 4% 
Biomass Boiler 10% 11% 12% 15% 
Biomass CHP 9% 10% 12% 15% 
Biogas Boiler 12% 14% 16% 20% 
 
 The energy efficiency of ethanol plants are also expected to change significantly.  New 
technologies are expected to both increase the efficiency of units currently used in ethanol 
production, as well as provide energy saving alternatives to conventional production practices.  
Increasing energy efficiency is a priority in many ethanol plants as is can dramatically increase 
profitability by reducing energy costs, the second highest cost of ethanol production behind raw 
materials.  Several groups are currently working on technologies that could impact the ethanol 
industry.  The Department of Energy’s (DOE) Super Boiler program is expected to produce 
boilers with an efficiency of 94% by 2020.  The National Electrical Manufacturers Association’s 
(NEMA) premium efficiency motors are expected to be adopted more widely in the coming 
years.  Electricity generation efficiency is also expected to increase, both on site at plants with 
                                                 
DD
 Data based on “An Analysis of the Projected Energy Use of Future Dry Mill Corn Ethanol Plants (2010-2030)”; 
Steffen Mueller, University of Illinois at Chicago Energy Resource Center, October 10, 2007,  Available online at: 
http://www.chpcentermw.org/pdfs/2007CornEethanolEnergySys.pdf 
 117 
CHP technology, and at central power plants supplying electricity to ethanol plants through the 
national grid.  The projected energy savings from the energy efficiency improvements to units 
used in conventional ethanol plants in 2022 relative to 2007 is 32.1%.  The projected energy 
savings from 2015 to 2030 are summarized in Table 1.5-12 below. 
 
Table 1.5-12.EE 
Projected Energy Savings from Conventional Production Equipment 
  2007 2015 2020 2022 2025 2030 
Boiler, Efficiency 82.0% 86.0% 90.0% 91.6% 94.0% 94.0% 
   Energy Savings Relative to 2007 - 1.2% 8.9% 10.5% 12.8% 12.8% 
Motor, Efficiency 90.0% 92.0% 93.0% 93.8% 95.0% 95.0% 
   Energy Savings Relative to 2007 - 2.2% 3.2% 4.0% 5.3% 5.3% 
10 MW Industrial Turbine, Efficiency 31.0% 33.0% 34.0% 34.0% 34.0% 34.0% 
   Energy Savings Relative to 2007 - 6.1% 8.8% 8.8% 8.8% 8.8% 
Central Power Plant, Efficiency 30.5% 32.5% 33.5% 33.5% 33.5% 33.5% 
   Energy Savings Relative to 2007 - 6.1% 8.8% 8.8% 8.8% 8.8% 
Total Energy Savings Relative to 2007 - 15.6% 29.7% 32.1% 35.7% 35.7% 
 
 The same factors that drive ethanol producers to increase the energy efficiency of their 
equipment may also move them to consider energy saving changes to the ethanol production 
process.  Several process changes, including raw starch hydrolysis, corn fractionation, corn oil 
extraction, and membrane separation, are likely to be adopted to varying degrees.  The degree to 
which they are adopted will depend on many factors, including technology availability, capital 
cost of implementation, energy cost savings, and co-product revenue generation.  A description 
of each of these technologies, including the challenges and benefits of their implementation, can 
be found in Section 1.4.1.3.  The projected impact of the implementation of these technologies 
on ethanol production energy usage is to decrease the thermal energy usage by 12% and to 
increase the electrical energy usage by 3.8%.  These numbers are based on a plant that is drying 
100% of its distillers grains and solubles (DGS).  Plants that dry less than 100% of their DGS 
would be likely to realize smaller benefits from these technologies.  The projected penetration of 
these technologies, and the associated energy use impact, is summarized in Table 1.5-13 below. 
 
                                                 
EE
 Data based on “An Analysis of the Projected Energy Use of Future Dry Mill Corn Ethanol Plants (2010-2030)”; 
Steffen Mueller, University of Illinois at Chicago Energy Resource Center, October 10, 2007,   
 118 
Table 1.5-13.FF 
Projected Energy Savings from Process Changes 
Percent of all Plants Adopting Process 
Process Improvement 2020 2022 2025 2030 
Raw Starch Hydrolysis 20% 22% 25% 30% 
Corn Fractionation 18% 20% 24% 30% 
Corn Oil Extraction 20% 22% 25% 30% 
Membrane Separation 3% 5% 5% 5% 
Energy Reduction from Base Process (Thermal) 
Raw Starch Hydrolysis 16% 16% 17% 17% 
Corn Fractionation 31% 31% 31% 32% 
Corn Oil Extraction 4% 4% 5% 5% 
Membrane Separation 29% 29% 29% 29% 
Weighted Average Savings (Thermal) 10.45% 12.05% 14.39% 17.65% 
Energy Reduction from Base Process (Electrical) 
Raw Starch Hydrolysis 0% 0% 0% 0% 
Corn Fractionation -9% -9% -8% -8% 
Corn Oil Extraction -9% -9% -8% -8% 
Membrane Separation 0% 0% 0% 0% 
Weighted Average Savings (Electrical) -3.42% -3.78% -3.92% -4.80% 
 
The combined effect of the energy efficiency improvements and the production process 
changes are expected to reduce the energy required to produce a gallon of ethanol significantly.  
We project a thermal energy use reduction of 42.1% and an electrical energy use reduction of 
25.8% by 2022.  Based on the USDA’s 2007 estimated energy requirements of 38,717 BTU 
thermal energy/gallon ethanol and 3,242 BTU electrical energy/gallon ethanol for a dry mill 
ethanol plant fueled by natural gas drying 100% of its DDGS, we project that a similar plant in 
2022 would have energy requirements of 22,435 BTU thermal energy/gallon ethanol and 2,406 
BTU electrical energy/gallon ethanol. 
 
1.5.1.4 Projected Grandfathered Corn Ethanol Volume 
 
 As explained in the Section III.B.3 of the Preamble, renewable fuel produced from new 
facilities which commenced construction after December 19, 2007 must achieve at least a 20% 
reduction in lifecycle greenhouse gas emissions compared to baseline lifecycle greenhouse gas 
emissions in order to generate RINs under the proposed RFS2 program.GG  However, facilities 
that commenced construction before December 19, 2007 are exempt or “grandfathered” from the 
20% GHG reduction requirement.  In addition, facilities that commenced construction in 2008 or 
2009 are grandfathered if they burn natural gas, biomass, or any combination thereof. 
 
 The ethanol plants / production volumes that are grandfathered under the RFS2 rule will 
be determined based on information received during the Expanded Registration Process (refer to 
                                                 
FF
 Data based on “An Analysis of the Projected Energy Use of Future Dry Mill Corn Ethanol Plants (2010-2030)”; 
Steffen Mueller, University of Illinois at Chicago Energy Resource Center, October 10, 2007,  with the exception of 
Membrane Separation data based on conversation with Leland Vane, EPA 
GG
 In accordance with Section 211(o)(2)(A)(i) of the Clean Air Act as amended by EISA.   
 
 119 
section III.C of the preamble).  However, for the NPRM we thought it would be a useful exercise 
to estimate the volume of corn ethanol that might be grandfathered under this rule.   
 
 To do so, we stated with our assessment of ethanol plants that were operational or under 
construction as of May 1, 2008 (refer to Table 1.5-6) and grouped the total plant capacities by 
energy source, or more specifically, those relying on natural gas and/or biomass versus those 
burning coal.  We concluded that of the 14.4 billion gallons of total production capacity, 11.9 
billion gallons were attributed to plants burning natural gas, biomass, or a combination thereof. 
and the remaining 2.5 billion gallons were attributed plants burning coal.   
 
 As illustrated in Figure 1.5-6, we concluded that all the natural gas and/or biomass-fired 
plants would be grandfathered or “deemed complaint” under the proposed grandfathering 
provisions due to the fact that they commenced construction by 2008/2009 (refer to proposed 
regulation §80.1403).   
 
 120 
Figure 1.5-6. 
Estimate of Grandfathered Volume of Corn Ethanol Under RFS2 
(Based on May 1, 2008 Plant Assessment) 
 
 
 As for the coal-fired plants, we had to do additional analysis.  At the time of our May 1, 
2008 plant assessment there were three coal-fired ethanol plants under expansion and two new 
plants under construction. These facilities, summarized below in Table 1.5-14, amounted to 740 
million gallons of production capacity.  However, according to company-provided construction 
timelines/information, all these projects appear to have commenced construction prior to the 
December 19, 2007 cut-off date provided in EISA.  As such, we estimate that all the coal-fired 
plant capacity as well as the natural gas and/or biomass-fired plant capacity that was operational 
or under construction as of May 1, 2008 (14.4 billion gallons) would be grandfathered under this 
rule. The volume of corn ethanol that is grandfathered under the proposed RFS2 rule could be 
 121 
even higher if, as expected, subsequent growth comes from natural gas and/or biomass-fired 
plants that commence construction by 2008/2009.   
 
Table 1.5-14. 
Coal-Fired Plant Capacity Under Construction as of May 2008 
Ethanol Plant/Company Location
Capacity
MGY
Est Op 
Datea
Project
Typeb
Archer Daniels Midland Cedar Rapids, IA 275 Jul-08 Exp
Archer Daniels Midland Columbus, NE 275 Jul-08 Exp
Southwest Iowa Renewable Energy Council Bluffs, IA 110 Dec-08 New
E Caruso Ethanolc Goodland, KS 20 Jul-08 New
Tate & Lyle Loudon, TN 60 May-08 Exp
740
aEstimated operation date based on May 1, 2008 plant assessment.  Note: Some of this production capacity is 
now operational.
bExp = Expansion of existing ethanol plant.  New = New construction project.
cPart of Goodland Energy Center.
Total Additional Coal-Fired Plant Capacity
 
 
1.5.2 Imported Ethanol  
 
1.5.2.1 Historic/Current Imports and Exports 
 
 In order to assess the potential for U.S. imported ethanol, we examined the chief 
countries that are currently producing or consuming relatively large volumes of ethanol.  In 
particular, we chose to focus on Brazil, the European Union (EU), Japan, India, and China to 
determine whether each country will likely be an importer or exporter of ethanol in the future.   
The following sections first describe the ethanol demands of each of these countries due to 
enacted or proposed mandates and goals as well as their ability to supply those demands with 
domestically produced ethanol.  We conclude the analysis by examining the most likely 
pathways for imported ethanol, namely through the Caribbean Basin Initiative (CBI) and directly 
from Brazil.   
 
1.5.2.1.1 Brazil 
 
Much of the potential of imported ethanol will depend on the ability for Brazil to supply 
ethanol to the United States and other countries.  This is because Brazil has been a top producer 
and is the top exporter of ethanol in the world.  In fact, many countries are interested in Brazilian 
produced sugarcane ethanol because it is currently the least costly method for producing ethanol.  
No other nation is seen as being able to supply any reasonably large amount of ethanol, and as 
such, it is important to devote much of the import potential discussion to Brazil. 
 
Brazil has been steadily increasing its exports of ethanol, with total exports escalating 
from under 100 million gallons in 2001 to over 900 million gallons in 2006.  As seen in Figure 
1.5-7, Brazil exports ethanol to many different countries around the globe.  Prior to 2006, the 
majority of Brazilian ethanol exports flowed to the EU and Caribbean due to favorable 
 122 
economics.  In 2006, the majority of Brazilian ethanol exports (52%) went to the U.S as a result 
of the withdrawal of MTBE from the U.S. fuel pool and an increased price of ethanol. As 
countries create their own biofuels mandates and goals, they will also be looking to other 
countries such as Brazil to supply large amounts of biofuels.  Countries may essentially be 
“competing” against one another for Brazilian ethanol in the future to meet their mandates and 
goals. 
 
Figure 1.5-7.  Brazil Ethanol Exports286 (Includes all types of ethanol). 
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006
M
ill
io
n
 
G
al
lo
n
s
Others
South Korea
U.S.
Nigeria
Mexico
India
Caribbean
Japan
EU
 
Brazil currently produces both hydrous and anhydrous ethanol.  Hydrous ethanol has 
96% ethanol and 4% water in its composition, whereas anhydrous ethanol is made up of 99.5% 
ethanol and 0.5% water.287  In 2006, total ethanol consumption made up 17.2% (9.9% hydrous 
and 7.3% anhydrous) of the vehicle fuel pool with the rest being: 27.2% Gasoline A (pure 
gasoline before blending with ethanol), 3.2% vehicular natural gas (VNG), 3.3% B2 (diesel 
blended with 2% biodiesel), and 48.9% Diesel.288  Of light duty vehicles only, ethanol accounts 
for 36.1% of the total fuel pool in Brazil. 
 
While hydrous ethanol is used directly in Otto-cycle motors (100%), anhydrous ethanol is 
mixed with pure gasoline at 20-25% by volume.  Production of anhydrous ethanol to be mixed 
with gasoline has fallen since the 2005/2006 harvest, on account of the smaller share of cars 
running exclusively on gasoline.  This was especially due to the success of flex vehicles with 
Brazilian customers.289  In fact, sales of flex-fuel vehicles (FFVs) in Brazil, those that can use 
any mixture of gasoline and ethanol from 0 to 100%, have grown dramatically, with domestic 
FFV sales representing 80% of 1.8 million light vehicles sold (includes imports).290  Hydrous 
ethanol production, on the other hand, has grown almost constantly in recent years.  However, in 
the 2006/2007 crop year, growth in hydrous ethanol was much larger, with hydrous ethanol 
 123 
accounting for 55% of ethanol production in Brazil.  Figure 1.5-8 shows the historical production 
of hydrous and anhydrous ethanol in Brazil.  
 
 
Figure 1.5-8. 
Historical Ethanol Production of Hydrous and Anhydrous Ethanol in Brazil.291  
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
3,000
19
97
19
98
19
99
20
00
20
01
20
02
20
03
20
04
20
05
20
06
M
ill
io
n
 G
al
lo
n
s
Hydrous Ethanol
Anhydrous Ethanol
 
In contrast to Brazil, ethanol consumed in the U.S. must first be converted to anhydrous 
ethanol before its use in conventional or FFV vehicles.  This differs from Brazil because 
Brazilian FFVs can use hydrous ethanol, or E100 (100% ethanol), whereas U.S. FFVs can only 
use up to E85 (85% ethanol and 15% gasoline by volume).  As a result, if hydrous ethanol is 
exported from Brazil, it must be dehydrated somewhere else before it is used in the U.S.  This is 
the case for the majority of ethanol exported from Brazil to the Caribbean, where it is dehydrated 
and often re-exported to the U.S. for consumption. 
 
In terms of future ethanol production, however, there has been much speculation about 
Brazil’s ability to increase production.  Sugarcane analyst Datagro recently stated that Brazil’s 
ethanol fuel production would have to grow by approximately 800 million gallons a year through 
2025 to keep up with demand at home and abroad.292  Estimates of future ethanol production in 
Brazil range greatly.  See Figure 1.5-9.  Brazil’s government has adopted plans to meet global 
demand by tripling production by 2020.293  This would mean a total capacity of approximately 
12.7 billion gallons, to be achieved through a combination of efficiency gains, greenfield 
projects, and infrastructure expansions.  Estimates for the investment required tend to range from 
$2 billion to $4 billion a year.  Other estimates indicate that based on current projects the 
required investment in capacity expansion is $3-4 billion annually.294  If global demand were to 
 124 
increase much more than Brazil is planning, then capacity would need to expand even further 
and thus greater investment dollars would be required.   
 
 
Figure 1.5-9.  Estimated Brazilian Ethanol Production Volumes295 
0
5,000
10,000
15,000
20,000
25,000
2000 2010 2020 2030 2040
M
ill
io
n 
G
al
lo
n
s
FAPRI 2007
Agricultural Outlook
OECD-FAO
Agricultural Outlook
Bioenergia (2007)
Rothkopf (2006)
EPE (2007)
Unica
 
 
To meet the growing demand, the Brazilian sugar and ethanol industry is already rapidly 
expanding and numerous mills have been planned.  This includes over 90 new plants (354 
existing plants in 2007/2008) that will be set up in the next five years, allowing the expansion of 
processing from 383 to 560 million tonnes of sugarcane by 2010/2011.296,297  Brazil’s state-
owned development bank BNDES said the country is set to invest $13.1 billion between 2007 
and 2011 in 89 of these new sugar and ethanol mills.298 Some estimate even more, where 
investments in sugarcane processing factories are expected to top $23 billion over the next four 
years.299 Recent investments also include a project by Odebrecht, a Brazilian engineering 
company that will invest $2.6 billion dollars over the next decade to build 12-15 plants with a 
combined capacity to crush at least 30-40 Mt/year of sugarcane and produce ~ 400 million 
gallons per year of ethanol.300  Even U.S. ethanol producer ADM is preparing to enter the sugar-
cane business in Brazil. A recent quote by ADM’s senior vice president of strategy, Steve Mills, 
said that sugar cane ethanol is now “a key component” of ADM’s short-term strategy and, 
“We’re devoting a lot of time and energy to this area.  We’re not talking about something 10 
years down the road.  It’s on the front burner.”301  To put these estimates of production capacity 
expansion into perspective, 383 million tonnes of sugar cane yielded 26.2 million tonnes of raw 
sugar and approximately 4.2 billion gallons of ethanol in 2005.  If we assume the same split 
between sugar and ethanol then by 2010 we could expect an additional ~2 billion gallons of 
ethanol produced from Brazil each year from now until 2010/2011. 
 125 
 
In addition to expanding sugarcane production and ethanol production plant capacity, 
Brazil will need to improve its current ethanol distribution infrastructure.  Brazil’s transport 
system is predominantly road-based.302  Railroad infrastructure and use of a waterway system is 
lacking, as well as very low availability of multi-mode terminals.  Logistics currently represent 
22% of the export expenses and is one of the areas where costs need to be reduced in order for 
Brazilian ethanol to become more competitive abroad.303   
 
One way of dealing with this lack of infrastructure is to invest in enlarging the pipeline 
network.  Petrobras, Brazil’s largest petroleum refiner is planning to build a pipeline to transport 
ethanol destined for export from the states of Sao Paulo, Minas Gerais, Mato Grosso, Mato 
Grosso do Sul, Goias, and Parana.  The pipeline is anticipated to go online in October 2010, with 
$232 million invested in the project.  By 2012 Petrobras will spend more than $1.6 billion to 
improve logistics infrastructure to transport Brazilian production.  By 2011, Petrobras has the 
goal of exporting 920 million gallons per year.304  Recent updates indicate a perhaps more 
optimistic timeframe for completion, stating that Petrobras will complete the first of two ethanol 
pipelines in 2009.305 One of the pipelines will run from Goias state in Brazil’s center-west to 
Petrobras’s Paulinia refinery in Sao Paulo State.  The project is called PMCC Projetos de 
Transporte de Alcool.  The line is expected to have the capacity to ship 3.2 million gallons of 
ethanol annually.306   
 
Other competitors include the joint venture from Cosan, Copersucar, and Crystalsev 
which will make initial investments of $11.5 million apiece to install an ethanol-only pipeline 
between the oil refinery in Paulinia, to an ethanol offloading terminal on the state’s coast.  In 
addition, at least three major private equity groups (Infinity, Clean Energy Brazil, and Brenco) 
plan to invest $1 billion in a 683 mile long ethanol pipeline expected to be completed by 2011 
with a capacity to deliver 1.1 million gallons of ethanol a year.  In total, it is estimated that Brazil 
will need to invest $1 billion each year for the next 15 years in infrastructure to keep pace with 
capacity expansion and export demand.307 
 
Another area that requires investment is in R&D and education.  Currently, Brazil 
produces only 0.08 engineers for every 1000 people, compared to 0.2 in the US, 0.33 in the EU, 
and 0.8 in Korea.308  In addition, there are deficiencies in basic education in Brazil’s north and 
northeast.  Since certain types of education require a long lead time (e.g. scientific training) 
Brazil will need to continue to invest in training and professional development for the sector’s 
labor pool to meet the growing demand in the biofuels industry. 
 
Before ethanol can be exported to other countries, Brazil’s own domestic fuel 
consumption should be met.  Brazil currently has an ethanol mandate of 25% (as of July 1, 
2007).309  The Brazilian ethanol to gasoline mix is set by the Brazilian government, which has 
the flexibility to adjust the ethanol mandate of 20%-25% by volume ethanol to gas ratio.  Ethanol 
currently represents nearly 30% of the light vehicle fuel market in Brazil.310  Approximately 80% 
of new vehicles sold in Brazil in 2006 were flex fuel (1.6 million vehicles).  The current increase 
in domestic consumption of ethanol in Brazil is partially due to the success of the flex-fueled 
vehicle.   
 
 126 
At some point in the future, Brazil’s light vehicle fleet will likely become saturated with 
FFVs in preference to gasoline.   As such, the rate in domestic demand for ethanol is expected to 
begin to slow.311 Thus, as domestic demand begins to level off, some experts believe that there is 
a significant possibility that exports will become more relevant in market share terms.  Figure 
1.5-10 shows various estimates for future Brazilian ethanol domestic consumption. 
   
Figure 1.5-10. Estimated Brazilian Ethanol Consumption Volumes 312 
0
5,000
10,000
15,000
20,000
25,000
2000 2010 2020 2030 2040
M
ill
io
n
 G
al
lo
ns
Canaplan, Director
Carvalho
FAPRI 2007
Agricultural Outlook
EPE (2007)
Unica
 
 
After domestic consumption is met, the rest of the ethanol can be available for exports to 
other countries.  Potential worldwide exports basically equal the total production minus the total 
consumption. Given the available data, only three sources estimated both production and 
consumption for some of the years during 2010-2022.  As such, these values were used to 
compute reasonable export volumes for Brazil as seen in Figure 1.5-11. Estimates from EPE and 
Unica indicate that as much as 3.8-4.2 billion gallons could be exported by Brazil in the 
2020/2022 timeframe.  Longer timeframe estimates from sugarcane analyst Datagro project 
international ethanol sales to grow to 6.6 billion gallons by 2025.313 
 
 127 
Figure 1.5-11. Estimated Brazilian Export Volumes 
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
3,000
3,500
4,000
2010 2012 2014 2016 2018 2020 2022
M
ill
io
n
 G
al
lo
ns EPE (2007)
Unica
FAPRI 2007
Agricultural Outlook
 
1.5.2.1.2 The European Union (EU) 
 
Although the EU market has largely focused on biodiesel, ethanol has increasingly 
become important.  Fuel ethanol demands are increasing due to the introduction of mandatory 
blending targets.  In 2001 an EU Directive established that by 2005 biofuels should cover 2% of 
the total fuel consumption (energy basis), while the target for 2010 was set at 5.75%.  However, 
in recent years the average biofuel contribution has been much less (i.e. 0.5%, 0.6% and 1% in 
2003, 2004, and 2005, respectively).314   
 
The EU is currently considering a binding target requiring 10% biofuel use for transport 
by 2020, although the target has recently come under criticism due to concerns over 
deforestation and food security problems.315  The International Energy Outlook (IEO) 2007 
forecasts OECD European countries will consume 159 billion gasoline gallons equivalent (gge) 
of transport fuel in 2010, growing to 167 gge by 2030.316  Assuming a split of nearly 70% fuel 
volume consumed as diesel and 30% consumed as gasoline (current use), a 10% by energy 
requirement would require roughly 7.3 billion gallons of ethanol in 2022.HH,317  However, this 
may be a slight overestimate of gasoline use since the overall gasoline consumption in the EU is 
declining as a result of the increasing popularity of more economic diesel-powered cars.318 Other 
sources indicate smaller gasoline consumption volumes are possible by the 2020/2022 timeframe 
which when translated equals 5.2-5.4 billion gallons of ethanol assuming a 10% energy 
requirement.319,320 
                                                 
HH
 Assuming energy contents 115,000 Btu/gal for gasoline and 77,930 Btu/gal for denatured ethanol and 164 gge in 
2022 
 128 
 
However, many believe that even 10% is unrealistic and are calling for a lower 
percentage for biofuels.  Most recently, the EU Energy Committee has passed draft legislation 
that if approved is expected to forbid the 27 EU countries from importing ethanol produced with 
excessive use of natural resources such as water or stimulates forest devastation.321 As a result, 
Brazilian stakeholders are monitoring such potential modifications in EU biofuels policy as it 
will affect the potential demand for ethanol from the EU.   
 
Fuel ethanol production in the EU has been much lower than this, with less than 1 billion 
gallons produced historically (468 million gallons in 2007).322  Germany, Spain, France, Poland, 
and Sweden represent almost 90% of the production in 2007.  According to the “World Biofuels: 
FAPRI 2007 Agricultural Outlook”, ethanol production in the EU is expected to grow to 1.5 
billion gallons by 2016.  Taking this into account, the EU would need to import approximately 4-
6 billion gallons of ethanol in order to meet the 10% volume requirement if only traditional crops 
are used.  It should be noted, however, that the EU production estimates in the FAPRI 
Agricultural Outlook does not reflect the EC directive volume requirement since the targets were 
announced after the report was issued. This could spur greater production in the EU and reduce 
the amount needed from ethanol exporters such as Brazil. 
 
As of May 1, 2008, the installed capacity of the EU ethanol industry is 1.07 billion 
gallons, while a further 0.93 billion gallons are under construction and another 3 billion gallons 
has been announced. 323,324  Totaling these capacity estimates, the EU would have 5 billion 
gallons ethanol capacity. While not all the announced projects in the EU will be completed, this 
gives an estimate of how fast and large ethanol production in the EU could grow.  If we assumed 
that EU could produce this volume by 2022, as much as 2 billion gallons would need to be 
imported from other countries assuming a 7.3 billion gallon demand due to the 10% mandate.  It 
appears likely from the above analysis that the EU will continue to be a net importer of biofuels 
under most future scenarios. 
 
Due to constraints in ethanol production from current available technologies and 
feedstocks, the EU is continuing its development of second generation biofuels based on 
cellulosic materials.  The majority of attention has been in Sweden, and to a lesser extent, the 
UK, Spain, and Netherlands.  If ethanol from cellulosics proves feasible and commercial-scale 
production is realized in the future, additional ethanol supplies from such feedstocks may help 
lessen the amount needed from imports. 
 
1.5.2.1.3 Japan 
 
Until recently, Japan did not produce much ethanol and imported the majority of their 
consumption.325 Now the government is showing signs of encouraging biofuels production by 
promoting (not mandating) a 3% blend of ethanol in gasoline. At the very least, a non-mandatory 
3% blend will create a demand of 106-132 million gallons of ethanol. 326  This is similar to 
Japan’s Agency for Natural Resources and Energy target to replace 132.1 million gallons of 
transportation fuel by 2010, using ethanol and biodiesel.327   
 
 129 
With the passage of legislation calling for a 3% ethanol mandate in gasoline blend, 
Brazilian ethanol companies are hopeful that trade will increase substantially with Japan (this 
may even reach over 1.5 billion gallons annually if a 10% ethanol blend was implemented 
nationwide in Japan, approximately 500 million gallons with E3 blends).328 While in the future 
use of greater than E3 blends in Japan may be unlikely, the Japanese government has mandated 
that all gasoline powered vehicles run on E-10 blends by 2030 and will also enact legislation to 
require all new vehicles to be E-10 compatible by 2012. 329,330 
 
The prospect for large domestic production of ethanol in Japan appears to be quite small 
due to limitations on feedstock.  The Agriculture Ministry states that Japan has enough feedstock 
to produce 26.4 million gallons per year, however, the Ministry of Environment (MOE) expects 
Japan to meet only 10% of the 132.1 million gallon target (or 13.2 million gallons) with domestic 
ethanol production.331  The Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries (MAFF), on the other hand, 
predicts that Japan could reasonably expect to supply approximately 95 million gallons. Even 
with these higher domestic production estimates, Japan would still be a net importer of fuel 
ethanol if the biofuels target is met.  The potential estimated demand for imported ethanol ranges 
from 37 million gallons to 1572 million gallons depending on the type of mandate assumed and 
the differences in the estimates of domestic ethanol production. 
 
Table 1.5-15 details new plants that are under construction. The total capacity is much 
lower than the 132.1 million gallons of ethanol goal and further supports the argument that Japan 
will likely be heavily dependent on imports.  
 
Table 1.5-15.  Upcoming/Recent Plants in Japan332 
Plant Capacity Feedstock Year 
3 from Agriculture 
Ministry 
~4 million 
gallons/year 
Local crops: rice, low-quality 
wheat, sugarbeet, sugarcane 
 
Hokkaido 
Prefectural Union of 
Agricultural 
Cooperatives 
3.96 million 
gallons/year; 
start producing 
3961 gal/year 
Sugar beets that aren’t 
targeted for domestic sugar 
and substandard wheat 
unusable for food 
2007-
construction 
2009- 
production 
Nippon Steel Plant 104.89 gallons 
daily (38,285 
gallons/year) 
Food waste from: 
supermarkets, restaurants, 
schools, hospitals. (10 tons 
annually) 
April 2007-
operational 
Mitsui Engineering 
& Shipbuilding Co. 
 Agricultural wastes: felled 
oil palm trunks, empty fruit 
bunches, fibrous fruit wastes, 
kernel shells 
2010: trial 
operations if 
ag. waste is 
successful 
 
Up until now, Japan has seen Brazil as the only possible reliable supplier of ethanol.  In 
early 2005, Japan and Brazil signed an agreement for a bilateral biofuels program to export 
Brazilian ethanol and biodiesel to Japan. Japan’s investment will be used to install new ethanol 
facilities, increase acreage of sugarcane production, and modernize the infrastructure necessary 
for the transportation of ethanol.  
 
 130 
One such partnership is between Brazilian oil company (Petrobras) and trading house 
Mitsui & Co., with financial support from Japan Bank for International Cooperation are in the 
process of analyzing 40 projects evaluated at $8 billion for building 40 new processing plants 
which produce alcohol and sugar from sugar cane.  According to Paulo Roberto Costa, head of 
Petrobras’ supply division, “Our target is to produce ethanol to be exported only to Japan.”  
Within two to three months (perhaps at the end of 2007) Petrobras will sign a pioneer contract to 
produce a total of 1 billion liters (264 million gallons) of alcohol annually at five processing 
plants in the states of Mato Grosso, Goias, and Minas Gerais.  Each of the five processing plants 
will produce approximately 50 million gallons per year within the next 2 ½ years, and the whole 
production will be exported to Japan.  In order to help convince Japan that Petrobras has 
adequate ethanol supplies it has noted that their processing facilities will not be able to produce 
sugar, only alcohol.333   With this amount (264 million gallons) slated for Japan only, other 
countries will have to either develop their own contracts with Brazil to ensure a stable supply or 
risk receiving the leftover supply. 
 
Petrobras also recently bought a 90 percent stake in Exxon Mobil’s Okinawa oil refinery 
that may serve as a staging point for Brazilian ethanol exports to Japan and the rest of Asia.  This 
may help mitigate one of the main problems for Petrobras and other major exporters, a lack of 
offloading infrastructure.334     
 
Another challenge is the distribution of ethanol in Japan.  As ethanol in blends of E5 or 
higher have shown to be corrosive to aluminum and rubber car parts, Japan is looking into using 
ETBE blends of 7% and even 20-25% instead of ethanol.335 The Petroleum Association of Japan 
has announced that gasoline containing ETBE blends of 7% will be available for general public 
consumption by 2010.  As ETBE is produced using ethanol as a feedstock, this could create a 
domestic ethanol demand of 90-100 million gallons.336 
 
1.5.2.1.4 India 
 
India has the potential to increase its ethanol production due to its long agricultural 
tradition. Unfortunately it is still in the very young stages of raising its biofuel industry, which 
leaves some analysts doubting this program’s stability.337  
 
Currently, India imports more than 70% of its energy needs. In addition to not being able 
to sustain its own current energy demands, the UN is predicting that India will become the most 
populated country by 2030 (surpassing China), and it will be consuming about a third of the 
world’s energy by 2050.   
 
The amount of ethanol blended into gasoline in India has fluctuated in recent years.  In 
October 2004, ethanol blending in gasoline for example, had to be halted because of a lower 
sugar output due to a drought, which increased prices. However, production started back up in 
late 2005 when a fuller sugarcane molasses crop became available. Then in September 2006 the 
government announced the second phase of the EBP program that mandates 5% blending ethanol 
with gasoline in 20 states and eight union territories.  The mandate was effective starting in 
November 2006 and would have required about 145 million gallons to be used.  However, the 
 131 
program only started with 10 states and was not implemented in other states due to high state 
taxes, excise duties and levies.   
 
A recent USDA Attaché report estimated that only 66 million gallons of ethanol will be 
blended with gasoline in 2006/07, compared with the original target of 145 million gallons.  The 
government plans to extend the ethanol blend ratio to 10% in a third stage once the program is 
extended to all target states. Some local sources report plans to introduce E-10 mandates in 
several cane-producing states such as Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, and Maharashtra. 338 
 
India has about 300 distillers with a production capacity of about 845 million gallons.  
Due to the government’s ethanol policy, over 110 distilleries have modified their plants to 
include an ethanol production line, with a total production capacity of 343 million gallons per 
year, enough to meet the estimated demand for E-5.  For an E-10 mandate, however, the current 
ethanol production capacity would need to be enhanced.   
 
As of May 2006, India’s largest sugar and ethanol manufacturing company (Bajaj 
Hindusthan) is trying to acquire ethanol production plants in other countries with large sugarcane 
outputs (i.e. Brazil—but no concrete plans have been made). This way, the company can increase 
its production from 30.86 million gallons to 77.15 million gallons.  Yet after several months of 
courting mill owners in Brazil, the company has not been able to come to any concrete 
agreements.339   
 
Some oil companies are instead pushing for imports of ethanol.  However, as of today, 
there is still an import duty of 198.96% on the cif value for denatured and 59.08% for 
undenatured ethanol.340  The c.i.f. (cost, insurance, and freight) value represents the landed value 
of the merchandise at the first port of arrival in a given country.  In comparison to the U.S. which 
has a tariff of 54 cents per gallon (with 45 cents per gallon offset by the ethanol subsidy) and a 
smaller ad valorem tax of 2.5% for denatured ethanol, import duties in India are much higher. 
 
The analysis of India’s biofuels developments appears to indicate that it will be self-
sustaining if E5 is mandated (as noted by the sugar industry).  However, as India stives to meet 
its E10 goal, it may need to rely on imports from other countries.  As noted above, India’s own 
domestic production may grow from its current production of 66 million gallons of ethanol, with 
production capacity expanding to 343 million gallons per year. At E5 and E10 mandates, 
approximately 145 million gallons and 290 million gallons per year of ethanol, respectively, is 
required.  Therefore, depending on the amount of ethanol that India chooses to mandate, India 
could either be an importer of 230 million gallons of ethanol or be able to meet its goals with 
domestically produced ethanol. 
  
1.5.2.1.5 China 
 
Currently, China is the world’s third largest ethanol producer, producing about one 
billion gallons of ethanol for all purposes.341   Approximately 80% of fuel ethanol currently made 
in China is from corn.342  Less than 20 percent of China’s corn crop is used for the industrial 
sector, and only 44.5 percent of that is put towards fuel ethanol.343 The amount of fuel ethanol 
 132 
produced is approximately 400 million gallons, assuming approximately 3 million tons of corn 
was used as feedstock in 2006 (an ethanol yield about 132 gallons per ton of corn).344  
 
China began mandating fuel ethanol blended into gasoline since June 2002. 345  In 2004, 
the Chinese government introduced an ethanol mandate of 10% ethanol blended in gasoline 
(E10) in several provinces (Helongjiang, Jilin, Liaoning, Henan, and Anhui).  This mandate was 
further expanded to 27 cities in the provinces of Shandong, Jiangsu, Hebei, and Hubei in 2006.  
To keep up with fuel demand, a National Plan calls for fuel ethanol to rise from approximately 
330 million gallons of ethanol per year to 660 million gallons by 2010 and 3.3 billion gallons by 
2020.II,346 
 
However, there have been recent concerns in China about the security of their food 
supply and the inflationary impact of biofuels which use grains as feedstock.  With a population 
of 1.3 billion people, corn growers have to meet the demand for food (which might increase 
about 0.22 million tons) while also providing feedstock for fuel.  In addition, they supply 
livestock feed for which demand is estimated to rise to roughly 100 million metric tons for 
2007.347   
 
In response to these food and feed demands for corn according to the National 
Development and Reform Commission (NDRC), China has stopped approvals for industrial corn 
processing for three years (until 2010) and has suspended approved projects which have not yet 
started construction.348  Over the next three years, corn consumption by the deep-processing 
sector (i.e. transformation of corn into industrial products like ethanol) will be restricted to 26 
percent of China's total corn consumption.   
 
The National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC) stated in their 11th Five 
Year Plan (2006-2010) that the production of approximately 2 billion gallons of grain-based 
ethanol will not threaten the country’s grain security. Currently, there are four fuel ethanol plants 
operating in the country which have a production capacity of approximately 300 million gallons 
(since 2005): Jilin Fuel Alcohol Company Ltd, Anhui Fengyuan Petrochemical Ltd, Henan 
Tianguan Group and the Heilongjiang Huarun Jinyu Ltd (China Resources).349,350 These plants 
were established after 2000 to address a surplus of grains in China at the time.  Plans for ethanol 
plant expansions could reach up to approximately 550 million gallons of ethanol by 2007.  These 
companies, as well as announced expansions are listed in the following Table 1.5-16.  
 
Table 1.5-16. Current and Future Fuel Ethanol Production in China351 
Province Company Name Feedstock 2005 Production (Gal) 2007 Production (Gal)
Heilongjiang China Resources Alcohol Co. Corn 33,423,025 33,423,025
Jilin Jilin Fuel Ethanol Co. Corn 100,269,074 200,538,149
Henan Henan Tian Guan Fuel-Ethanol Co. Wheat 66,846,050 66,846,050
Anhui Anhui BBCA Biochemical Co. Corn 106,953,679 106,953,679
Guangxi China Resources Alcohol Co. Cassava 0 36,765,327
Hebei China Resources Alcohol Co. Sweet potato, corn, etc. 0 76,872,957
Hubei Tian Guan Fuel-Ethanol Co. Grains 0 33,423,025
Total 307,491,828 554,822,211
 
                                                 
II
 Assuming a conversion of 1 million tonnes of ethanol equals 330 million gallons.  
 133 
As seen in the above table, several distilleries have been looking into alternative 
feedstocks.352 Examples of alternative feedstocks include sorghum, wheat, cassava, and sweet 
potato.  These crops, however, are grown in much smaller quantities as compared to corn, and if 
China ethanol production expands from cassava, for example, China will have to rely on 
imported cassava. 353 China may soon become a major importer of ethanol, especially if the E10 
blend is extended across the country.  With a nationwide E10 blend in 2020, biofuels demand 
would be approximately 7.6 billion gallons of ethanol.354 Even if the National Plan which calls 
for China’s domestic fuel ethanol production to reach 3.3 billion gallons by 2020355 is met, a 
nationwide E10 blend would result in a supply shortfall of about 4.3 billion gallons of ethanol.  
Another study, the “World Biofuels: FAPRI 2007 Agricultural Outlook” also indicates that 
China would be a net importer of ethanol in the future (out to 2016), where domestic production 
only reaches approximately 1 billion gallons.  In addition, if only food crops are assumed to be 
used to produce ethanol, China is estimated to only produce 0.6 billion gallons. 356  Assuming a 
possible E10 mandate nationwide and the projections for domestically produced ethanol, China 
would need to import approximately 4.3-7.0 billion gallons of ethanol per year.  
1.5.2.1.6 Other Countries 
 
Although Brazil is the largest exporter of ethanol, there may still be other countries that 
could provide additional ethanol to the U.S.  In fact, trace amounts of ethanol entered the U.S. 
market from Argentina, Canada, Netherlands, and Pakistan in 2006.357  The North American 
Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) is similar to the Caribbean Basin Initiative (CBI) in that it 
welcomes tariff-free ethanol imports from Canada and Mexico. 
 
 In addition, there may also be other countries that are beginning biofuels programs and 
could demand smaller volumes of ethanol in the future.  We provide a list of the potential 
mandates and goals for other countries below in Table 1.5-17. This list is not meant to be all-
inclusive, but rather to give idea of the biofuel outlook in other countries.   
 
 134 
Table 1.5-17 
Potential Mandates and Goals for Various Countries358,359,360,361,362,363 
Argentina Argentine President Nestor Kirchner signed a law in February 2007 implementing tax breaks 
and fuel-content mandates for biofuels.  The Biofuels Act includes tax breaks for companies 
investing in the biofuels sector and mandates 5% ethanol in gasoline by 2010. The Secretary 
for Agriculture estimates that the country would need 200 million liters per year of ethanol 
(528,000 gallons) to satisfy the E5 requirements.
Australia The Australian government has set a biofuels target of 93 Mgal by 2010 according to the 
'Biofuels for Cleaner Transport' 2001 election policy.  This target was never mandated in 
legislative form.
Queensland- In early August 2006 a mandate for a minimum of 5% ethanol from December 
31, 2010.
New South Wales (NSW)- Beginning in September 2007, fuel supplied to wholesalers in 
New South Wales will be required to contain 2% ethanol.  Proponents of ethanol in the 
region want to increase the mandate to 4% in 2009 and 10% in 2010.
Australian Capital Territory (ACT)- The ACT does not plan to mandate ethanol.  Generally 
this territory follows the policies of NSW because most of their fuel supplies are sourced 
from NSW.
Victoria- Biofuels target of 5% of fuel market by 2010 (106 Mgal), this includes biodiesel.
South Australia- No plans to mandate or set a target for biofuels use.
Northern Territory- No plans to mandate or set a target for biofuels known.
Western Australia- No plans to mandate or set a target for biofuels known.
Tasmania- The alternative fuels policy is currently based on CNG use. 
No plans to mandate or set a target for biofuels known.
Canada On June 26, 2008, the Canadian Senate passed Bill C-33, which will require the use of 5% 
renewable content in gasoline by 2010. Canada's Government General Michaelle Jean 
signed the bill after it was passed in the senate, making it official.
Saskatchewan- Enacted in October 2006 a 7.5% ethanol mandate in gasoline 
(approximately 131 Mgal)
Ontario- Enacted in January 2007 a 5% ethanol mandate in gasoline
British Columbia- Bill C-16 to pass soon, 5% ethanol by 2010 to support federal plan
Alberta- Has not set its own standard as it prefers a national approach
Manitoba- As of Jan. 1, 2008, 8.5% in gasoline (approximately 130 Mgal).  This percentage 
will start at 5% and increase to 8.5% in 2008 and subsequent years
Quebec- 5% ethanol in gasoline by 2012, expects source to be met with cellulosic ethanol 
production
Nova Scotia- No goals for biofuels
New Brunswick- No goals for biofuels
Newfoundland Labrador, PEI- Interest on the East Coast, but nothing as of May 2008
North West Territories, Yukon, Nunavut- No goals for biofuels 
Columbia In September 2001, the Colombian Government issued Law 693, which made it mandatory 
to use 10% ethanol blends in gasoline in cities with populations larger than 500,000 
inhabitants by the year 2008. The law went into effect in September 2005.  Ethanol 
production, however, could not cover the entire country's demand, and thus the government 
established a phase-in period throughout the country for mandatory ethanol use. 
Mexico There is currently no specific bio-fuels promotion program operation in Mexico.  On April 26, 
2007, the Mexican congress approved the Law for Promotion & Development of Biofuels 
(LPBD).  The law, though lacking in any actual mandates, sets the state for further legislative 
actions on biofuels development and use.
   
 
 135 
1.5.2.1.7 Summary of Potential Import/Export Demands 
 
For the main countries we have analyzed from above, there appears to be a large potential 
demand from the EU, Japan, India, and China for imported ethanol. See Table 1.5-18 for a 
summary of potential import demand by 2020/2022.  Total import potential demand from all 
these countries would range from approximately 5-15 billion gallons.  If these countries decide 
to meet their mandated ethanol blends or enact new mandates, this could greatly increase the 
amount that each country would demand from other countries, primarily from Brazil.  As shown 
in Section 1.5.2.1.1, Brazil is only expected to export 3.8-4.2 billion gallons by 2022.  This is 
significantly below the volume we estimated that could be potentially demanded by other 
countries in the future.  Therefore, it is likely that unless Brazil increases production much more 
than its government projects, the EU, Japan, India, and China will not be able to meet their stated 
goals.  This also indicates that the U.S. will likely compete with other foreign countries for 
exports from Brazil.  This analysis, however, only considers non-cellulosic biofuel potential.  If 
cellulosic biofuel production develops in these countries, it is entirely possible that the biofuel 
demands could be lower due to greater supplies.    
 
Table 1.5-18.  Potential Import Demand:  
EU, Japan, India, and China by 2020/2022 (billion gallons).JJ 
Country EU Japan India China Total
Potential Domestic Production 
(non-cellulosic) 1.5-5.0 0-0.1 0.1-0.3 0.6-3.3
Potential Domestic Consumption
Petrobras Contract n/a 0.3 n/a n/a
E3 n/a 0.5 n/a n/a
E5 n/a n/a 0.1 n/a
E10 (or 10% by energy for EU) 5.2-7.3 1.6 0.3 7.6
7% ETBE n/a 0.1 n/a n/a
Potential Import Demand 0.2-5.8 0.1-1.6 0-0.2 4.3-7.0 4.6-14.6
 
 
1.5.2.1.8 Potential for U.S. Ethanol Exports 
 
Ethanol exports in the U.S. have averaged only approximately 100 million gallons per 
year since 2000, mostly to Canada, Mexico, and the E.U.  See Figure 1.5-12.  There is a trend 
over the past five years of exporting larger quantities to fewer countries, with declining volumes 
to Asia and increasing volumes to the E.U. and India.  Based on this historical data, it does not 
seem likely that volume of ethanol exports will change drastically in the future.   
 
                                                 
JJ
 Ranges are calculated assuming the potential values for production and consumption  
 136 
Figure 1.5-12. 
U.S. Ethanol Exports (includes hydrous, dehydrated, and denatured volumes).364 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005
M
ill
io
n 
G
al
lo
n
s
Others
Mexico
India
Canada
Japan
EU
 
 
1.5.2.2 Projected Growth Under RFS2 
 
As long as imported ethanol is cost-competitive with gasoline, there will continue be a 
demand for it.  As our analysis from above shows, Brazil is the only country that will likely be 
able to provide a significant volume of ethanol to the U.S.  Accordingly, Brazil will ship ethanol 
to countries via the most cost-effective way.   
 
The pathway Brazil chooses to ship ethanol will likely depend on the tariffs and taxes put 
in place by other nations.  Specifically, the U.S. places a 54 cent tariff on all imported ethanol (as 
well as a 2.5 percent ad valorem tax for un-denatured ethanol and a 1.9 percent tax for denatured 
ethanol).  A key reason for establishing a tariff was to offset a tax incentive for ethanol-blended 
gasoline, which is set at 45 cents per gallon of pure ethanol.KK  This analysis assumes that both 
the tax subsidy and the tariff will continue in the future.   
 
The tariff can be avoided by first shipping ethanol to countries under the Caribbean Basin 
Initiative (CBI) and then to the U.S.  Historically, the majority of CBI ethanol to the U.S. comes 
from dehydrating ethanol from Brazil.  Legislation and agreements since the 1980s have waived 
or significantly reduced the tariff on imports from Canada, Mexico, and those nations covered 
under the CBI.  There are currently twenty-four countries that can benefit from the CBI program.  
These countries are: Antigua and Barbuda, Aruba, Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, British Virgin 
                                                 
KK
 Prior to the 2008 Farm Bill, the tax incentive was set at 54 cents per gallon  
 137 
Islands, Costa Rica, Dominica, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, 
Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Montserrat, Netherlands Antilles, Nicaragua, Panama, St. Kitts and 
Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, and Trinidad and Tobago.365 
 
Under the Caribbean Basin Economic Recovery Act (CBERA), which created the CBI, 
countries in Central America and the Caribbean have had duty-free access to the United States 
since 1989 for ethanol produced from regional feedstocks.  Although most analysts believe there 
is sufficient land available for sugar cane production in some CBI nations, there has been 
insufficient economic potential to spur sugar cane planting for ethanol production.366  Ethanol 
derived from non-regional feedstocks has been limited to 7 percent of total U.S. ethanol 
consumption (based on figures from the previous year).  There are also country-specific 
allocations for El Salvador (5.2 million gallons in first year (2006) and an annual increase of 1.3 
million gallons per year, not to exceed 10% of CBI quota) and Costa Rica (31 million gallons 
annually) established by the U.S. Free Trade Agreement with Central America and the 
Dominican Republic (CAFTA-DR).367  Thus far, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Jamaica, Trinidad and 
Tobago, and the U.S. Virgin Islands (since 2007) are the only countries that have ever exported 
ethanol to the U.S. under the CBI quota. 
 
Historically, the CBI nations have had little ethanol production capacity of their own but 
have supplemented it by importing hydrous Brazilian ethanol where it is further dehydrated 
before being re-exported to the U.S. duty-free.  CBI countries have also relied on surplus wine 
alcohol from France, Italy, Spain and other Mediterranean countries in the past.368  According to 
the United States International Trade Commission, the majority of fuel ethanol imports to the 
United States came through CBI countries between 1996 and 2003.  Although CBI ethanol 
imports to the U.S. in 2006 totaled over 170 million gallons, imports to the U.S. from Brazil 
totaled 3 times that amount, or approximately 430 million gallons.  This most recent data 
indicates that in 2006 it was economical to import significant quantities of ethanol directly from 
other nations due to the withdrawal of MTBE and high oil prices.  However, it is not clear on 
how much of this volume the tariff was paid, as there have been other means for importers to 
avoid the tariff. 
 
In the past, companies have also imported ethanol from Brazil through a duty 
drawback.369  The drawback is a loophole in the tax rules which allowed companies to import 
ethanol and then receive a rebate on taxes paid on the ethanol when jet fuel is sold for export 
within three years.  The drawback considered ethanol and jet fuel as similar commodities 
(finished petroleum derivatives).370,371 Most recently, however, Senate Representative Charles 
Grassley from Iowa included a provision into the 2008 Farm bill that ended such refunds.  The 
provision states that “any duty paid under subheading 9901.00.50 of the Harmonized Tariff 
Schedule of the United States on imports of ethyl alcohol or a mixture of ethyl alcohol may not 
be refunded if the exported article upon which a drawback claim is based does not contain ethyl 
alcohol or a mixture of ethyl alcohol.”372  The provision is effective on or after October 1, 2008 
and companies have until October 1, 2010 to apply for a duty drawback on prior transactions.    
   
CBI countries have not yet exceeded the tariff rate quotas (TRQs) for ethanol imports. 
The TRQ has been limited to 7 percent of total U.S. ethanol consumption (based on figures from 
the previous year).  The fill rate, or % of the TRQ used, has ranged from 22-77 percent between 
 138 
1990 and 2007.  See Figure 1.5-13.  Thus, there is still considerable room for growth in CBI 
imported ethanol.   
 
Figure 1.5-13. U.S. Fuel Ethanol CBERA TRQ, 1990-2008 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
19
90
19
92
19
94
19
96
19
98
20
00
20
02
20
04
20
06
20
08
M
ill
io
n 
G
al
lo
n
s
TRQ Used TRQ Available
 
*TRQ Used data for 2008 is not yet available. 
 
In October 2003, the California Energy Commission (CEC) reported four active CBI 
ethanol dehydration plants, two in Jamaica, one in Costa Rica, and one in El Salvador.  At the 
time, CEC concluded that reprocessing capacity was the limiting factor on CBI imports, with a 
total of 90 million gallons per year.373  Since then, several companies have expanded plants or 
announced new plants as described below:   
 
• Jamaica- In 2005, Petrojam Ethanol Limited (PEL), upgraded and expanded their ethanol 
dehydration plant in Jamaica to a capacity of 40 million US gallons.  Currently, the 
production of anhydrous (fuel grade) ethanol at the plant is based on a marketing 
agreement with the Brazilian company, Coimex Trading, where the feedstock - hydrous 
ethanol is supplied from Brazil.374,375 Jamaica Broilers Group (JBG) launched fuel 
ethanol production at its 60 million gallon dehydration plant this year.  The first shipment 
of 5.5 million gallons of ethanol , which arrived in June 2007, will be converted to 
anhydrous ethanol for export to the U.S. JBG has a deal with Bauche Energy for the 
supply of 50 million gallons of hydrous ethanol out of Brazil for the first year of 
operation.376  Jamaica Ethanol Processing Ltd, which is ED & F Man’s subsidiary on the 
island, has a small plant that dehydrates ethanol from Brazil at a capacity of 55 million 
gallons. 
 139 
• Costa Rica- LAICA (cane co-op) has a plant currently dehydrating ethanol at 38 million 
gallons.377 
• El Salvador and Panama- In 2004, it was reported that Cargill and Chevron Texaco had 
announced plans to construct new dehydration plants in El Salvador and Panama.  These 
plants could produce 60 million gallons per year and between 50 and 100 million gallons 
per year, respectively.378 Plants currently in operation include Gasohol de El Salvador 
(Liza/Vitol) at 100 million gallons per year and ARFS (CASA/Cargill/Crystalsev) at 60 
million gallons per year.379 
• Trinidad- EthylChem Inc. has reported plans to build an ethanol dehydration operation at 
the Petrotrin Refinery in Point-a-Pierre, a southern port city in Trinidad.   The plant will 
dehydrate ethanol at a capacity of 100 million gallons per year and is expected to be 
complete between March and April of 2007.380 The cost to build the plant is estimated at 
$20 million.381  It is probable, however, that not all the ethanol would be exclusively for 
U.S. consumption.  According to Ron White, the executive director of Ethylchem, "While 
EthylChem intends to export the fuel to the United States the company is examining the 
possibility of shipping the product to other markets in the world".382 Another company, 
Angostura Ltd., started processing ethanol in 2005.383  The plant has an overall capacity 
of 100 million gallons per year, with 50 million gallons per year in the first phase.384  
• Others- An idled ethanol plant in Haiti has attracted some investors and there are also 
projects in the works in Guyana, the Dominican Republic and Aruba. The U.S. Virgin 
Islands has one plant dehydrating ethanol at 100 million gallons per year capacity 
(Geonet).385 A new ethanol dehydration plant is proposed to be built at the Bulk Terminal 
Facility near Spring Garden Highway in Barbados, with construction expected to 
commence by the end of 2008.386  There is a proposal to build a US$36 million ethanol 
plant near Bridgetown, Barbados.  The plant is expected to produce about 132 million 
gallons by refining ethanol imported from Brazil.387 
 
In total, current fuel ethanol plant capacity for dehydration in the Caribbean is 500 
million gallons per year.  Plans to expand total approximately 200 million gallons per year.388  
This means that there could be 700 million gallons per year of fuel ethanol capacity in the next 
few years. 
  
Some stakeholders, however, have expressed concern that the CBI countries are not as 
stable for investment.  Both Brazilian ethanol and European wine alcohol are susceptible to 
factors including availability, price fluctuations, trade regulations, currency movements and 
freight rates.  Availability of European surplus wine alcohol has diminished since the World 
Trade Organization (WTO) placed limitations on export subsidies and has found new markets in 
Spain and Sweden.389 CBI countries also need to compete for Brazilian ethanol.  For example, 
Angostura’s ethanol subsidiary, Trinidad Bulk Traders Ltd., wasn’t profitable in 2006 because it 
could not get enough fuel from Brazil.390  
 
There are other prohibitive factors to CBI ethanol production that exist. For instance, 
many of the CBI countries have no oil, natural gas or coal.  Permitting is often a huge challenge 
and fresh water is typically scarce.391   
 
 140 
In addition, increasing significantly beyond the 7% limit may be challenging.  Few 
Caribbean countries are in any position to produce ethanol from domestic feedstocks such as 
sugar cane.  Currently, all three plants exist in Central America (CATSA in Costa Rica, Pantleon 
Group in Guatemala, and Pellas Group in Nicaragua).  Capacity for each plant is approximately 
10 million gallons per year.  The majority of this domestic fuel ethanol is shipped to the EU for 
fuel use rather than US due to higher opportunity prices and similar tariff free treatment.392   In 
addition, the governments of Trinidad, St. Kitts and Barbados have already decided the sugar 
sectors of their islands are not worth further investment.  Rum distillers such as Trinidad’s 
Angostura and Jamaica’s Appleton Ltd. have also had to import molasses from Fiji for their 
spirits.393 Thus, it may take years before Caribbean countries are able to domestically produce 
large volumes of ethanol.  As noted above, however, as dehydration capacity gets close to the US 
CBI quota, processors will need to consider blending indigenous ethanol. 
 
As a result of the economic benefit of shipping ethanol through CBI nations, we 
anticipate that the majority of the TRQ will be met in the future.  If we assume that 90 percent of 
the TRQ is met and that total domestic ethanol (corn and cellulosic ethanol) consumed in the 
prior year was 28.5 Bgal, then approximately 1.8 Bgal of ethanol could enter the U.S. through 
CBI countries.LL  Brazilian ethanol exports not entering the CBI will compete on the open 
market with the rest of the world demanding some portion of direct Brazilian ethanol. We 
calculated the amount of direct Brazilian ethanol exported in 2022 to the U.S. as the total 
imported ethanol required to meet the Act subtracted by imported ethanol from CBI countries 
(e.g. 3.14 Bgal of imported ethanol is required to meet EISA in 2022, while 1.8 Bgal can enter 
CBI due to the TRQ limit, thus leaving 1.34 Bgal needed directly from Brazil).  The total 
imported ethanol required by the Act was projected for each year based on the required volumes 
needed to meet the advanced biofuel standard after accounting for the volumes from cellulosic 
biofuel, biodiesel, and renewable diesel.  See Table 1.5-19.   
 
Table 1.5-19. Projected Contribution of Ethanol from CBI Countries and  
Direct Brazilian exports in 2022 (billion gallons) 
Ethanol 
From CBI 
Countries 
Ethanol 
Directly 
From Brazil 
Total 
Imported 
Ethanol 
1.80 1.34 3.14 
 
 The amount of Brazilian ethanol available for direct shipment to the U.S. will be 
dependent on the biofuels mandates and goals set by other foreign countries (i.e., the EU, Japan, 
India, and China).  Our estimates show that there could be a potential demand for imported 
ethanol of 4.6-14.6 billion gallons by 2020/2022 from these countries as noted in Section 
1.5.2.1.7.  This is due to the fact that some countries are unable to produce large volumes of 
ethanol because of e.g. land constraints or low production capacity.   Therefore, unless Brazil 
increases production much more than its government projects there may be a limited supply for 
imported ethanol to satisfy all foreign country mandates and goals.  
  
1.5.2.2.1 Origin of Projected Imports  
                                                 
LL
 Total Domestic Ethanol is based on the amount needed to meet EISA (i.e. for 2021: 15 Bgal Corn Ethanol, 13.5 
Bgal Cellulosic Ethanol; for 2022: 15 Bgal Corn Ethanol, 16 Bgal Cellulosic Ethanol). 
 141 
  
 A summary of our projections of the breakdown of ethanol imports that would come 
directly from the Brazil versus that which would come through the CBI countries is contained in 
Table 1.5-19.  To estimate the future breakdown of ethanol imports from CBI countries by 
country of origin, we evaluated historical ethanol import data from the International Trade 
Commission (ITC) and trends regarding potential growth in such imports.  Table 1.5-20 contains 
2005-2007 data from the ITC on ethanol imports from CBI countries.394  Table 1.5-21 contains 
January – March 2008 data from the ITC on ethanol imports from CBI countries.395 
 
Table 1.5-20.  Ethanol Imports from CBI Countries 2005-2007 
2005 2006 2007  
% of CBI 
imports 
Volume 
(Million 
Gallons) 
% of CBI 
imports 
Volume 
(Million 
Gallons) 
% of CBI 
imports 
Volume 
(Million 
Gallons) 
Costa Rica 32% 33.4 22% 35.9 17% 39.3 
El Salvador 23% 23.7 23% 38.5 32% 73.3 
Jamaica 35% 36.3 40% 66.8 33% 75.2 
Trinidad 
and Tobago 
10% 10 15% 24.8 19% 42.7 
Source: International Trade Commission 
 
Table 1.5-21: Ethanol Imports from CBI Countries, January through March 2008 
January February March  
% of CBI 
imports 
Volume 
(Million 
Gallons) 
% of CBI 
imports 
Volume 
(Million 
Gallons) 
% of CBI 
imports 
Volume 
(Million 
Gallons) 
Costa Rica 26% 5.4 27% 5.4 0 0 
El Salvador 13% 2.6 0 0 23% 4.6 
Jamaica 19% 4.0 32% 6.4 39% 7.9 
Trinidad 
and Tobago 
20% 4.1 21% 4.2 29% 6 
Virgin 
Islands 
22% 4.6 21% 4.2 9% 1.9 
Source: International Trade Commission 
 
 Based on our review of the January through March 2008 data, we assumed that ethanol 
exports from the Virgin Islands would continue to grow to equal those of Trinidad and Tobago in 
2022.  By accommodating this assumption into our review of 2005 though 2007 historical 
ethanol import data, we arrived at our projections regarding the future breakdown of ethanol 
imports from CBI countries which is contained in Table 1.5-22.  
 
 142 
Table 1.5-22. 
Projected Future Breakdown of  
Ethanol Imports from CBI Countries 
 % of Total Ethanol Imports from 
CBI Countries 
Costa Rica 20% 
El Salvador 20% 
Jamaica 30% 
Trinidad and Tobago 15% 
Virgin Islands 15% 
 
1.5.2.2.2 Destination of Projected Imports  
 
 For our distribution and air quality analyses, we had to make a determination as to where 
the projected imported ethanol would likely enter the United States.  As mentioned above, we 
started by looking at historical ethanol import data and made assumptions as to which countries 
would likely contribute to the CBI ethanol volumes in Table 1.5-19, and to what extent (see 
Table 1.5-22).    
 
From there, we looked at 2006-2007 import data and estimated the general destination of 
Brazilian ethanol and the five contributing CBI countries’ domestic imports.396  Based on these 
countries’ geographic locations and import histories, we estimated that in 2022 82  percent of the 
ethanol would be imported to the East and Gulf Coasts and the remaining 18 percent would go to 
the West Coast and Hawaii.  The destination of imports from Brazil and the CBI countries in 
2022 is detailed in Table 1.5-23. 
 
Table 1.5-23. 
2022 Projected Destination of Ethanol Imports from Brazil  
and CBI Countries Based on 2006-2007 Import Data 
Destination of Ethanol Imports (% of imported volume) Origin 
West Coast Hawaii East & Gulf Coasts 
Costa Rica 83% 35% 47% 
El Salvador 18% 9% 88% 
Jamaica 3% 0% 17% 
Trinidad & Tobago 0% 32% 68% 
Virgin Islands 3% 9% 88% 
Brazil (direct) 7% 0% 93% 
Total  11% 7% 82% 
 Source:  Energy Information Administration historical gasoline and ethanol import data: 
http://www.eia.doe.gov/oil_gas/petroleum/data_publications/company_level_imports/cli_historical.html 
 
To estimate the 2022 ethanol import locations on a finer level, we looked at coastal ports 
that had received ethanol or finished gasoline imports in 2006.  We chose to include ports which 
imported finished gasoline (in addition to ethanol) because we believe finished gasoline will be 
one of the first petroleum products to be replaced under the proposed RFS2 rule.  And 
presumably, these ports cities already have existing gasoline storage tanks that could be 
 143 
retrofitted to accommodate fuel ethanol.  All together, we arrived at 28 potential ports in 16 
coastal states that could receive ethanol imports in 2022 (refer to Figure 1.5-14 below).MM   
 
To determine how much ethanol would arrive at each port location, we started by 
examining each receiving state’s imported ethanol consumption potential.  To do this, we 
considered each state’s maximum ethanol consumption potential (based on projected gasoline 
energy demand) and deducted the projected 2022 corn and cellulosic ethanol production 
(detailed in Sections 1.5.1.2 and 1.5.3.4, respectively).  While we are not concluding that each 
state would necessarily consume all the ethanol it produces, we believe this serves as an 
appropriate assumption in determining each port state’s relative imported ethanol consumption 
potential.  Once we determined the amount of imported ethanol that each state would receive in 
2022 under RFS2, for states with multiple ethanol ports, we allocated the ethanol among port 
locations based on each port county’s relative energy demand  - using projected 2022 vehicle 
miles traveled (VMT) from EPA’s MOVES model 2022 VMT.  A summary of the projected 
ethanol imports volumes by port location is found in Figure 1.5-14.   
 
                                                 
MM
 We are considering adding Hampton Roads, VA and Baltimore, MD to the list of future ethanol import locations 
and may adjust our analysis for the final rule accordingly. 
 144 
Figure 1.5-14. 
Projected RFS2 Ethanol Import Locations and Volumes (Million Gallons)NN 
 
1.5.3 Cellulosic Ethanol 
 
 In this subsection, we will focus on the state of the cellulosic ethanol industry since it is 
the cellulosic biofuel we assumed for upstream production and downstream consumption 
analyses (refer to Sections 3.2 and 3.3, respectively).  However, cellulosic diesel could also 
count towards meeting the 16 billion gallon cellulosic biofuel standard in 2022.  We are 
becoming aware of more and more companies pursuing plans to produce diesel through Fischer-
Tropsch gasification of biomass.  We are also aware of companies researching thermal as well as 
thermochemical depolymerization of biomass to produce synthetic diesel fuel.  We plan on doing 
a more robust assessment of these companies and technologies for the final rulemaking.  In the 
meantime, limited discussion of potential cellulosic diesel producers is provided in this 
subsection and additional discussion on the conversion technologies is provided in section 1.4.3.     
 
1.5.3.1 Current Production/Plans 
 
                                                 
NN
 We are considering adding Hampton Roads, VA and Baltimore, MD to the list of future ethanol import locations 
and may adjust our analysis for the final rule accordingly. 
 145 
Presently, all commercial-level ethanol produced in the U.S. comes from plants 
processing corn and other grains or starches.  However, cellulosic feedstocks have the potential 
to greatly expand domestic ethanol production, both volumetrically and geographically.  Before 
the fuel can be economically produced at commercial levels in today’s marketplace, technical 
and logistical barriers must be overcome.  In addition to today’s RFS2 program which sets 
aggressive goals for all ethanol production, the Department of Energy (DOE) and other federal 
and state agencies are helping to spur industry growth. 
 
 The cellulosic ethanol industry is essentially in its infancy.  No commercial-scale plants 
are currently operating in the U.S.  However, numerous state and federal agencies, national 
laboratories, universities, and private companies are working towards making cellulosic ethanol 
commercially viable.  These organizations are pursuing second-generation conversion 
technologies and experimenting with a variety of feedstocks.  Some researchers are focusing on 
corn residues as a feedstock, e.g., corn stover, cobs, and/or DDGS fiber.  Some are focusing on 
other agricultural residues such as sugarcane bagasse, and rice and wheat straw.  Others are 
looking at waste products such as forestry residues, citrus residues, pulp or paper mill waste, 
municipal solid waste (MSW), and construction and demolition (C&D) debris.  Additionally, 
dedicated energy crops such as switchgrass, poplar trees, and energy cane are being investigated.   
 
 The majority of the groups pursuing cellulosic ethanol production are currently 
conducting laboratory research or experimenting with pilot-level production.  Based on a 
September 2008 assessment of information available on the public domain, there are presently 19 
pilot-level (or smaller) cellulosic ethanol plants operating in the United States.OO  Most of these 
facilities operate intermittently and produce an insignificant volume of ethanol.  A list of these 
facilities and their locations, feedstocks, ethanol production capacities (if available), estimated 
operation dates, and technologies is provided in Table 1.5-24.  The date listed in the table 
indicates when cellulosic ethanol production first commenced.    
                                                 
OO
 The September 15, 2008 cellulosic ethanol industry assessment was based on researching plants referenced in 
HART’s Ethanol & Biodiesel News (through September 2, 2008 issue), plants included on the Cellulosic Ethanol 
Site (http://www.thecesite.com/), and plants reference on state or other government websites.   
Table 1.5-24. 
Operational Pilot- and Demonstration-Scale Cellulosic Ethanol 
Plants
Company/Org. Name Location Feedstocks
Prod Cap 
(MGY)
Abengoa Bioenergy Corp.b York, NE Wheat straw, corn stover, energy crops 0.02
AE Biofuelsb Butte, MT Switchgrass, straw, corn stover N/A
Arkenol Technology Center Orange, MT Biomass N/A
Auburn University / Masada Resources Groupc Auburn, AL Wood waste N/A
Bioengineering Resources, Inc. Fayetteville, AK MSW, wood waste, coal 0.04
BPI & Universal Entech Phoenix, AZ Waste paper from MSW 0.01
Chemrec & Weyerhaeuser New Bern, NC Paper mill waste N/A
ClearFuels Technology / HNEI Kauai, HI Sugarcane bagasse N/A
Coskata Warrenville, IL Reformed natural gas N/A
DOE National Renewable Energy Laboratory Golden, CO Corn stover, other biomass N/A
Novozymes Franklinton, NC Corn stover N/A
Pan Gen Global (formerly Colusa Biomass) Colusa County, CA Rice straw & hulls N/A
Pearson Technologies Inc. Aberdeen, MS Wood waste, rice straw N/A
POET Research Centera Scotland, SD Corn cobs & fiber N/A
PureVision Technology, Inc. Fort Lupton, CO Corn stover, wood, sugarcane bagasse N/A
Range Fuels Broomfield, CO Wood waste N/A
USDA Citrus & Subtropical Products Laboratory Winter Haven, FL Citrus residues N/A
Verenium Corp. Jennings, LA Sugarcane bagasse 0.05
Western Biomass Energy, LLC. Upton, WY Wood waste (softwood) 1.50
1.6 MGYTotal Existing Production Capacity
aBio = biochemical cellulosic ethanol technology, Therm = thermochemical cellulosic ethanol technology.
bCellulosic pilot plant is collocated with a corn ethanol plant.
cIn December of 2007, Masada donated the Tennessee Valley Authority's biomass pilot plant facilities and equipment in Muscle Shoals, AL to Au
Auburn, AL.
 
 147 
 
 As shown in Table 1.5-24, today’s cellulosic ethanol plants are run by a combination of 
academic, government, and private organizations.  Some of the privately-owned companies are 
existing corn ethanol producers, but the majority are start-up companies entering the ethanol 
industry for the first time.   
 
 To date, the majority of cellulosic ethanol research has focused on the biochemical 
conversion technology, i.e., the use of acids and/or enzymes to break down cellulosic materials 
into fermentable sugars.  However, there are a growing number of companies investigating 
thermochemical conversion which involves gasification or pyrolysis of biomass material into a 
synthesis gas for fermentation or catalysis.  Cellulosic ethanol (a gasoline replacement) as well 
as cellulosic diesel (a diesel fuel replacement) can be made from thermochemical conversion 
processes.  Many companies are also researching the potential of co-firing biomass to produce 
plant energy (in addition to biofuels).  For more on the biochemical and thermochemical 
conversion technologies, refer to Section 1.4.3 
 
 In addition to the aforementioned existing facilities, eight cellulosic ethanol facilities are 
presently under construction in the United States.  Like the existing plants, most of these are 
pilot- or demonstration-scale facilities that are still working towards proving their conversion 
technologies.  However, Range Fuels, a company that received DOE funding to build one of the 
first commercial-scale cellulosic ethanol plants in the U.S., is currently building a 40 million 
gallon per year plant in Soperton, GA (at this time, the company is just working on the initial 20 
million gallon per year phase).  In addition, Verenium Corp., another company that received 
funding from DOE, is building a 1.5 million gallons per year demonstration plant in Jennings, 
LA.PP  The cellulosic ethanol plants under construction as well as their feedstocks, capacities, 
and estimated start-up dates are listed in Table 1.5-25. 
 
 As shown in Tables 1.5-24 and 1.5-25, unlike corn ethanol production, which is primarily 
located in the Midwest near the Corn Belt, cellulosic ethanol production is spread throughout the 
country. The geographic distribution of plants is due to the wide variety and availability of 
cellulosic feedstocks.  Corn stover is found primarily in the Midwest, while the Pacific 
Northwest, the Northeast, and the Southeast all have forestry residues. Some southern states have 
access to sugarcane bagasse and citrus waste while MSW and C&D debris are available in highly 
populated areas throughout the country.  For more information on cellulosic feedstock 
availability, refer to Section 1.1.1.     
 
                                                 
PP
 For a summary of all the DOE-funded biofuel projects, refer to Table 1.5-26. 
Table 1.5-25. 
Small-Scale Cellulosic Ethanol Plants Currently Under Construction 
Company/Plant Name Location Feedstocks
Prod Cap 
(MGY)
Est. Op.
Date
Cornell University BRL Ithaca, NY Perennial grasses, woody biomass N/A 2009
Coskata Madison, PA MSW, natural gas, woodchips, bagasse, switchgrass 0.04 2009
Gulf Coast Energy Livingston, AL MSW sorted wood waste 0.35 2008
Mascoma Corporation Rome, NY Mill waste, wood chips, switch grass, corn stover  0.50 2008
POET Project Bellb Scotland, SD Corn cobs & fiber 0.02 2008
PureVision Technology, Inc. Fort Lupton, CO Corn stover, wood, sugarcane bagasse N/A 2008
Range Fuels Soperton, GA Wood waste, switchgrass 20.00 2009
Verenium Corp. Jennings, LA Sugarcane bagasse, wood, energycane 1.50 2009
22 MGY
aBio = biochemical cellulosic ethanol technology, Therm = thermochemical cellulosic ethanol technology.
bCellulosic demonstration facility will collocated with the company's pilot plant and corn ethanol plant.
Total Under Construction Production Capacity
  
   
 
 
 149 
 Increased public interest, government support, technological advancement, and the 
recently-enacted 2007 Energy Independence and Security Act (EISA) have helped spur many 
plans for new cellulosic biofuel plants.  Although more and more plants are being announced, 
most are limited in size and contingent upon technology breakthroughs and efficiency 
improvements at the pilot and demonstration level.  Additionally, because cellulosic biofuel 
production has not yet been proven on the commercial level, financing of these projects has 
primarily been through venture capital and similar funding mechanisms, as opposed to 
conventional bank loans. 
 
Consequently, recently-announced Department of Energy (DOE) grant and loan 
guarantee programs may serve as a significant asset to the cellulosic biofuel industry in this area.  
In February 2007, DOE announced that it would invest up to $385 million in six commercial-
scale ethanol projects over the next four years.  Since the announcement, two of the companies 
have forfeited their funding.  Iogen has decided to locate its first commercial-scale plant in 
Canada and Alico has discontinued plans to build an ethanol plant all together.  The four 
remaining “pioneer” plants (including Range Fuels) hold promise and could very well be some 
of the first plants to demonstrate the commercial-scale viability of cellulosic biofuel production.  
However, there is still more to be learned at the pilot level.  Although technologies needed to 
convert cellulosic feedstocks into ethanol (and diesel) are becoming more and more understood, 
there are still a number of efficiency improvements that need to occur before cellulosic biofuel 
production can compete in today’s marketplace.   
 
In May 2007, DOE announced that it would provide up to $200 million to help fund 
small-scale cellulosic biorefineries experimenting with novel processing technologies that could 
later be expanded to commercial production facilities.  Four recipients were announced in 
January 2008 and three more were announced in April 2008.  Three months later, DOE 
announced that it would provide $40 million more to help fund two additional small-scale plants.  
Of the nine total small-scale plants, seven are pursuing cellulosic ethanol production (including 
Verenium Corp.) and two are planning on producing cellulosic diesel.   
 
The Department of Energy has also introduced a Loan Guarantee Program to help reduce 
risk and spur investment in projects that employ new, clean energy technologies.  In October 
2007, DOE issued final regulations and invited 16 project sponsors who submitted pre-
applications to submit full applications for loan guarantees.  Of those who were invited to 
participate, five were pursuing cellulosic biofuel production.  However, only three of the 
companies appear to still be eligible.QQ  Of the three remaining companies, two are pursuing 
cellulosic ethanol production (and are also DOE grant recipients) and one is pursuing cellulosic 
diesel production.  For a list of the cellulosic biofuel plants receiving DOE grants and/or loan 
guarantees, refer to Table 1.5-26.  
                                                 
QQ
 Two of the companies have since forfeited their loan guarantee status.  Iogen has decided to locate its first 
commercial-scale plant in Canada and Alico has discontinued plans to build an ethanol plant all together.  POET 
refers to the former Voyager Ethanol plant location. 
 Table 1.5-26. 
Cellulosic Biofuel Plants Receiving DOE FundingRR 
Company/Plant Name Location Feedstocks
Prod Cap 
(MGY)
Cellulosic
Biofuel
E
Abengoa Bioenergy Corp.c Hugoton, KS Corn stover, wheat straw, milo stubble, switchgrass 11.4 Ethanol
BlueFire Mecca, LLC. El Sobrante, CA Woodchips, grass cuttings, and other yard waste 17.0 Ethanol
Choren U.S.A. TBD (Southeast U.S.) Agricultural residues, forestry biomass, biogenic waste TBD Diesel
Ecofin / Alltech Springfield, KY Corn cobs 1.3 Ethanol
Flambeau River Biofuels Park Falls, WI Forestry residues 6.0 Diesel
ICM Inc.c St. Joseph, MO Corn fiber/stover, sorghum, switchgrass 1.5 Ethanol
Lignol Innovations Grand Junction, CO Woody biomass, agricultural residues 2.5 Ethanol
Mascoma Corporation TBDd Switchgrass, hardwood chips 2.0 Ethanol
New Page Corporatione Wisconsin Rapids, WI Woody biomass, mill residues 5.5 Diesel
Pacific Ethanolc Boardman , OR Wheat straw, wood chips, corn stover 2.7 Ethanol
POET Project Libertyc Emmetsburg, IA Corn cobs & fiber 25.0 Ethanol
Range Fuelsf Soperton, GA Wood waste, switchgrass 40.0 Ethanol
RSE Pulp & Chemical Old Town, ME Woody biomass 2.2 Ethanol
Verenium Corp.f Jennings, LA Sugarcane bagasse, wood, energycane 1.5 Ethanol
119 MGY
aBio = biochemical cellulosic ethanol technology, Therm = thermochemical cellulosic ethanol technology, FT = Fischer-Tropsch biomass-to-liquids diesel te
bAmount of DOE grant.  "LG" denotes the company is eligible for a DOE loan guarantee.
cCellulosic ethanol plant will be collocated with a corn ethanol plant.
dMascoma's demonstration-level plant was originally announced for Vonore, TN but the location has since been rescinded.  New location to be announced.  T
their DOE funding for the replacement project or apply the funding towards their pilot plant that's currently under construction in Rome, NY.
eProject formerly owned by Stora Enso.
fCurrently under construction.  For the Range Fuels plant, the first 20 MGY of production capacity is currently under construction.
gEstimated DOE funding.
Total DOE-Funded Plant Capacity
 151 
 In addition to the aforementioned companies receiving DOE funding, numerous 
privately-funded companies have announced plans to build cellulosic biofuel plants in the U.S.  
These projects vary in scope and status.  The facilities range in size from pilot and 
demonstration-level plants (similar to those currently operational or under construction), to small 
commercial plants (similar to the four commercial-scale plants receiving DOE funding), to large 
commercial plants (similar in size to an average corn ethanol plant).  These facilities are at 
various states of planning from conducting feasibility studies, to securing funding/financing, to 
acquiring construction permits, to securing E&C contractors.  Some of the projects (“planned” 
plants) are further along in the planning stage while others are in the very early stages of 
planning (“proposed” plants).  There are also several companies with even less definitive 
cellulosic biofuel production plans.  We will continue to track these companies and plan to 
provide more information on these projects in the final rulemaking.  All in all, while it is 
uncertain which (if any) of these production plans will come to fruition, we believe the success 
of such projects will be greatly improved by the impending success of the DOE-funded projects.   
 
 A summary of the “planned” cellulosic ethanol plants that we are aware of based on our 
September 2008 industry assessment is provided in Table 1.5-27.  This list does not include the 
DOE-funded biofuel projects (outlined in Table 1.5-26), but all of these projects are considered 
to be in the more advanced stages of planning.  A summary of the “proposed” plants is found in 
Table 1.5-28.   
 
 Cellulosic diesel appears to be a little behind cellulosic ethanol production in terms of 
development.  Although converting biomass into diesel (and other petroleum products) via 
Fischer-Tropsch synthesis has been proven at the pilot/demonstration level, there are not nearly 
as many the companies pursuing plans to commercialize the technology at this time.  Besides 
Choren, Flambeau River Biofuels, and New Page Corporation (the three cellulosic diesel 
companies receiving DOE support and outlined in Table 1.5-26), we are only aware of a few 
other companies (e.g., Cello-Energy and Virent) with plans to produce cellulosic diesel in the 
near future in the United States.  For more on these companies’ proposed technologies and 
commercialization plans, refer to plants are discussed in more detail in Section 1.4.3 of the 
DRIA. 
 
 Table 1.5-27. 
Planned Cellulosic Ethanol Plants 
Company/Plant Name Location Feedstocks
Prod
(MG
BlueFire Ethanol, Inc. (BFRE) Lancaster, CA Woodchips, grass, and other organic waste from MSW 3
ClearFuels Technology / Gay & Robinson Kauai, HI Sugarcane bagasse, cane trash, wood waste 1
DuPont Dansico Cellulosic Ethanol Vonore, TN Corn cobs then switchgrass 0
Fulcrum Bioenergy / Sierra BioFuels Storey County, NV Post-recycled organic waste from MSW 10
Pan Gen Global (formerly Colusa Biomass) Colusa County, CA Rice straw & hulls 12
PureVision Technology, Inc.b TBD (Midwest U.S.) Corn stover, wood, sugarcane bagasse 0
Raven Biofuels TBD (Washington) Wood waste 11
39 M
aBio = biochemical cellulosic ethanol technology, Therm = thermochemical cellulosic ethanol technology.
bCellulosic ethanol plant will be collocated with a corn ethanol plant. 
Total Planned Plant Capacity
 
 
Table 1.5-28. Proposed Cellulosic Ethanol Plants 
Company/Plant Name Location Feedstocks
Prod Cap 
(MGY)a
Est. Op.
Date
C
T
AEE Distilleries New Milford, CT Forest residues, sawdust and yard wastes 24.0 TBD U
Agresti Biofuels - Central Appalachian Ethanol PlantPike County, KY MSW 20.0 2011
Agresti Biofuels - Indiana Ethanol Power LLC Lake County, IN MSW 20.0 2010
Central Minnesota Ethanol Co-op (CMEC)c Little Falls, MN Woodchips 10.0 2010
Chemrec & NewPage Corporation Escanaba, MI Paper mill waste 13.0 TBD T
Citrus Energy (JV w/ FPL Energy) Clewiston, FL Citrus residues 4.0 TBD
CleanTech Biofuels / Hatzen Research Golden, CO MSW, corn stover, ag residues, switch grass 0.0 TBD
Coskata TBD (Southeast U.S.) Woody biomass 50.0 2011 T
Florida Crystals Corp. Okeelanta, FL Sugarcane bagasse 1.5 TBD
Genahol Lake County, IN MSW 35.0 TBD T
Gulf Coast Energy Livingston, AL Wood waste 35.0 TBD T
Gulf Coast Energy Mossy Head, FL Wood waste 35.0 TBD T
Gulf Coast Energy Jasper, TN Wood waste 35.0 TBD T
LOSONOCO TBD (Florida) Sweet sorghum juice, leaves and stalks 10.0 2012 T
Mascoma Corporation Chippewa County, MI Wood fiber 40.0 2012
New Age Energy / Liquafaction Moses Lake, WA Wheat straw, corn stover, sorghum 40.0 TBD
New Planet Energy (former Alico project) TBD (Southern Florida) Wood and agricultural residues 13.9 TBD T
Orion Ethanol / Dimmitt Ethanolc Dimmitt, TX Corn Stover 10.0 TBD U
Pencor Masada OxyNol Middletown, NY MSW 9.0 TBD
PureVision Technology, Inc.c TBD (Midwest U.S.) Corn stover, wood, sugarcane bagasse 1.0 2011
PureVision Technology, Inc.c TBD (Midwest U.S.) Corn stover, wood, sugarcane bagasse 10.0 2012
Range Fuelse Soperton, GA Wood waste, switchgrass 60.0 TBD Th
Southeast Renewable Fuels LLC Clewiston, FL Sweet sorghum 20.0 2010 U
U.S. EnviroFuels, LLC - Highlands Envirofuels Highland County, FL Sorghum 20.0 TBD
U.S. EnviroFuels, LLC - Port Sutton Envirofuels Port Sutton, FL Sorghum 20.0 TBD
Verenium Corp. TBD (Southeast U.S.) Sugarcane bagasse, wood, energycane 30.0 TBD
Xethanol / Southeast Biofuels Auburndale, FL Citrus residues 8.0 TBD
Xethanolc Blairstown, IA Corn stover, swithgrass, biomass 40.0 TBD
ZeaChem Boardman, OR Wood chips, saw dust, logging debris 1.5 TBD
616 MGY
aBolded production capacities indicate that these plants are being designed wit future expansion in mind.
bBio = biochemical cellulosic ethanol technology, Therm = thermochemical cellulosic ethanol technology, Unkn = cellulosic conversion technology is unknown/unspecified.
cCellulosic ethanol plant will be collocated with a corn ethanol plant.
dINew Planet Energy has reportedly licensed the BRI technology and plans to develop a cellulosic ethanol plant at a location separate from the Alico property.  
eRange intends for the Soperton, GA plant to eventually be 100 MGY.  The first 20 MGY is currently under construction and expected to come online by 2009, the second 20 MGY is
planned (and under the scope of the DOE funding) and expected to come online by 2011, and the remaining 60 MGY will be built some time after that.
Total Proposed Plant Capacity
 154 
1.5.3.2 Federal/State Production Incentives  
 
In addition to helping fund a series of small-scale cellulosic biofuel plants, the 
Department of Energy, in part with the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) is also helping 
to fund critical research to help make cellulosic ethanol production more commercially viable.  
In March 2007, DOE awarded $23 million in grants to four companies and one university to 
develop more efficient microbes for ethanol refining.  In June 2007, DOE and USDA awarded 
$8.3 million to 10 universities, laboratories, and research centers to conduct genomics research 
on woody plant tissue for bioenergy.  Later that same month, DOE announced its plan to spend 
$375 million to build three bioenergy research centers dedicated to accelerating research and 
development of cellulosic ethanol and other biofuels.  The centers, which will each focus on 
different feedstocks and biological research challenges, will be located in Oak Ridge, TN, 
Madison, WI, and Berkeley, CA.  In December 2007, DOE awarded $7.7 million to one 
company, one university, and two research centers to demonstrate the thermochemical 
conversion process of turning grasses, stover, and other cellulosic materials into biofuel. In 
February 2008, DOE awarded another $33.8 million to three companies and one research center 
to support the development of commercially-viable enzymes to support cellulose hydrolysis, a 
critical step in the biochemical breakdown of cellulosic feedstocks.  Finally, in March 2008, 
DOE and USDA awarded $18 million to 18 universities and research institutes to conduct 
research and development of biomass-based products, biofuels, bioenergy, and related processes.  
  
 
 In addition to Federal support from DOE and USDA, numerous states are offering grants 
and tax incentives to help encourage biofuel production.  The majority of efforts are centered on 
expanding ethanol production, and more recently, cellulosic ethanol production.45  According to 
a July 2008 assessment of DOE’s Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy (EERE) website46, 
33 states currently offer some form of ethanol production incentive.  The incentives can be 
classified into three general categories: support for ethanol production facilities, support for 
technology research and development, and support for feedstock suppliers.  As shown in Table 
1.5-29, 30 states offer ethanol producers support, 19 states offer R&D companies support, and 
four states offer feedstock suppliers support.   
 
                                                 
45
 For more on state-level biodiesel production incentives, refer to Section 1.5.4 of the DRIA. 
46
 http://www.eere.energy.gov/afdc/ethanol/incentives_laws.html 
 155 
Table 1.5-29. 
State Ethanol Production Incentives 
Grant Tax Credit Grant Tax Credit Grant Tax Credit
Arkansas X X
California X X
Colorado X
Connecticut X
Florida X X X X
Georgia X
Hawaii X X X
Illinois X X
Indiana X X
Iowa X X X
Kansas X X
Kentucky X X
Maine X
Maryland X X
Michigan X
Minnesota X
Mississippi X
Missouri X
Montana X X
New Mexico X X
New York X X
North Carolina X X X
North Dakota X X X
Oklahoma X
Oregon X X X
Pennsylvania X X
South Carolina X X
South Dakota X
Texas X
Vermont X X
Virginia X
Washington X X X
Wyoming X
State
FeedstocksR&DEthanol Production
 
 
 
The grant and tax credit programs offered to ethanol producers are similar for most of the 
states that have them.  The grants provide funds to help companies cover expenses associated 
with opening a production facility.  These expenses can include land acquisition, site permitting, 
and plant construction.  They typically require the grant amount to be matched by the producers’ 
own funding.  The tax credits are given to facilities after they start production and are based on 
the number of gallons of ethanol produced at each facility.  The incentives offered to R&D 
companies have similar stipulations as the production incentives.  However, the grants are less 
likely to require the organization doing the research to provide matching funds.  States that offer 
tax breaks to biofuel R&D companies tend to either give tax credits based on the company’s 
 156 
research expenses, or give property tax breaks to the lab facilities.  Feedstock support is 
generally in the form of grants given to feedstock processing and/or grain handling facilities or 
tax credits issued to feedstock producers and distributors. 
 
Out of the 33 states offering ethanol production incentives (shown in Table 1.5-29), only 
Kansas, Maryland, and South Carolina offer specific incentives towards cellulosic ethanol 
production or research.  Kansas offers revenue bonds through the Kansas Development Finance 
Authority to help fund construction or expansion of a cellulosic ethanol plant.  Additionally, 
these newly-built or expanded facilities are exempt from state property tax for 10 years.  
Maryland offers a credit towards state income tax for 10 percent of cellulosic ethanol research 
and development expenses.  They also have a $0.20 per gallon production credit for cellulosic 
ethanol.  South Carolina gives a $0.30 per gallon production credit to cellulosic ethanol 
producers that meet certain requirements.   
 
In addition to the production incentives described above, a group of states in the Midwest 
have joined together to pursue ethanol and other biofuel production and usage goals as part of the 
Midwest Energy Security and Climate Stewardship Platform.  Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Michigan, 
Minnesota, North Dakota, Ohio, South Dakota, and Wisconsin have all committed to these goals 
which emphasize energy independence through the growth of cellulosic ethanol production and 
availability of E85.  The Platform goals are to produce cellulosic ethanol on a commercial level 
by 2012 and to have E85 offered at one-third of refueling stations by 2025.  They also want to 
reduce the energy intensity of ethanol production and supply 50 percent of their transportation 
fuel needs by regionally produced biofuels by 2025. 
 
Finally, the passage of the Food, Conservation, and Energy Act of 2008 (also known as 
the “2008 Farm Bill”) is also projected to spur cellulosic ethanol production and use.  The 
recently-enacted Farm Bill modified the existing $0.51 per gallon alcohol blender credit to give 
preference to ethanol and other biofuels produced from cellulosic feedstocks.  Starting in 2009, 
corn ethanol will receive a reduced tax credit of $0.45/gal while cellulosic biofuel will earn a 
credit of $1.01/gal.47  Both credits appear to be valid through the end of 2012. 
 
1.5.3.3 Meeting the Proposed 2010 Cellulosic Biofuel Standard  
 
 As described in section III.E.b of the preamble, not only does this notice of proposed 
rulemaking (NPRM) lay out the proposed biofuel standards through 2022, it sets the biofuel 
standards applicable in 2010.  In accordance with EISA and the regulations set forth in this 
NPRM, the nation is required to blend 100 million gallons of cellulosic biofuel into U.S. 
transportation fuels by 2010.  We believe our nation’s vehicles and distribution infrastructure are 
more than capable of accommodating this volume of cellulosic biofuel.  Accordingly, we have 
focused our feasibility assessment on biofuel production feasibility.    
 
 Building off our September 2008 cellulosic biofuel industry characterization, we 
considered existing and under construction cellulosic ethanol plants with reported production 
volumes (refer to Tables 1.5-21 and 1.5-22), planned DOE-funded cellulosic biofuel projects 
                                                 
47
 The Food, Conservation, and Energy Act of 2008, Part II, Subparts A and B (Sections 15321 and 15331).   
 157 
with estimated start-up dates of 2010 or sooner (refer to Table 1.5-23) as well as planned and 
proposed cellulosic ethanol plants with 2010 start-up dates (refer to Tables 1.5-24 and 1.5-25).  
We also considered a 20 MGY cellulosic diesel plant that, according to Cello-Energy company 
representatives, is under construction in Bay Minette, AL (for more information on this project, 
refer to section 1.4.3).  All together, our analysis suggests that cellulosic biofuel production 
capacity could be more than 160 million gallons by 2010.  For a summary of the contributing 
plants (sorted by estimated operation date and current status), refer to Table 1.5-30 below.   
 
 It is possible that some of the plants highlighted below may experience construction 
delays and not come online as soon as currently projected.  It is also possible that a portion of the 
biofuel produced at these facilities may not meet the cellulosic biofuel definition based on the 
feedstocks and/or the fuel’s GHG reduction potential (refer to §80.1401).  However, on the 
contrary, it is possible that other cellulosic biofuel projects could be executed in this timeframe.  
For example, leading corn ethanol producer, Archer Daniels Midland (ADM) is currently 
investigating cellulosic ethanol production through a cooperative research agreement with 
Purdue University.  The ADM-Purdue project is focused on commercializing the use of highly-
efficient yeast to converts cellulosic materials into ethanol through fermentation.397  In addition, 
ADM is also collaborating with Deere & Company and Monsanto Company on research that 
explores economically-sustainable methods for the harvest, storage and transport of corn stover for 
the production of animal feed, process energy, and/or cellulosic biofuel.398  Depending on 
discoveries made during ADM’s research, it is possible that the lead corn ethanol producer could 
begin processing small amounts of corn stover and producing an appreciable volume of 
cellulosic biofuel at some of its existing U.S. ethanol plants in this timeframe.  Such projects (as 
well as other biofuel production plans not highlighted in this section) would make meeting the 
2010 cellulosic biofuel standard even more achievable.   
Table 1.5-30. 
Projected Cellulosic Biofuel Production Capacity in 2010 
Plant Name Location
Prod Cap 
(MGY)a
Cellulosic
Biofuel
Current
Status
Est. Op.
Date
Bioengineering Resources, Inc. (BRI) Fayetteville, AK 0.04 Ethanol Operational 1998
BPI & Universal Entech Phoenix, AZ 0.01 Ethanol Operational 2004
Verenium Corp. Jennings, LA 0.05 Ethanol Operational 2006
Abengoa Bioenergy Corporation York, NE 0.02 Ethanol Operational 2007
Western Biomass Energy, LLC. (WBE) Upton, WY 1.50 Ethanol Operational 2007
Gulf Coast Energy Livingston, AL 0.35 Ethanol Under Const. 2008
Mascoma Corporation Rome, NY 0.50 Ethanol Under Const. 2008
POET Project Bell Scotland, SD 0.02 Ethanol Under Const. 2008
Cello-Energy Bay Minette, AL 20.00 Diesel Under Const. 2008
Coskata Madison, PA 0.04 Ethanol Under Const. 2009
Pacific Ethanol Boardman, OR 2.70 Ethanol Planned-DOE 2009
Range Fuels Soperton, GA 20.00 Ethanol Planned-DOE 2009
Verenium Corp. Jennings, LA 1.50 Ethanol Planned-DOE 2009
BlueFire Ethanol, Inc. (BFRE) Lancaster, CA 3.20 Ethanol Planned 2009
DuPont Dansico Cellulosic Ethanol Vonore, TN 0.25 Ethanol Planned 2009
Pan Gen Global (formerly Colusa Biomass) Colusa County, CA 12.50 Ethanol Planned 2009
BlueFire Mecca, LLC. El Sobrante, CA 17.00 Ethanol Planned-DOE 2010
Ecofin / Alltech Springfield, KY 1.30 Ethanol Planned-DOE 2010
Flambeau River Biofuels Park Falls, WI 6.00 Diesel Planned-DOE 2010
Mascoma Corporation TBD 2.00 Ethanol Planned-DOE 2010
RSE Pulp & Chemical Old Town, ME 2.20 Ethanol Planned-DOE 2010
ClearFuels Technology / Gay & Robinson Kauai, HI 1.50 Ethanol Planned 2010
Fulcrum Bioenergy - Sierra BioFuels Storey County, NV 10.50 Ethanol Planned 2010
PureVision Technology, Inc. TBD (Midwest U.S.) 0.10 Ethanol Planned 2010
Raven Biofuels TBD (Washington) 11.00 Ethanol Planned 2010
Agresti Biofuels - Indiana Ethanol Power LLC Lake County, IN 20.00 Ethanol Proposed 2010
Central Minnesota Ethanol Co-op (CMEC) Little Falls, MN 10.00 Ethanol Proposed 2010
Southeast Renewable Fuels LLC Clewiston, FL 20.00 Ethanol Proposed 2010
164 MGY2010 Cellulosic Biofuel Production Capacity
 159 
1.5.3.4 Projected Cellulosic Feedstocks and Facilities Under RFS2 
 
 As noted in section 1.5.3.1, cellulosic ethanol production capacity needs to expand 
greatly in order to meet the cellulosic biofuel mandate of 16 billion gallons by 2022.  While 
current production plans provide an initial idea of the types of feedstocks and potential plant 
locations that are being considered by biofuel producers, future production will be highly 
dependent on acquiring relatively cost-effective feedstocks in sufficient quantities. 
 
    A wide variety of feedstocks can be used for cellulosic ethanol production, including: 
agricultural residues, forestry biomass, municipal solid waste, construction and demolition waste, 
and energy crops.  These feedstocks are much more difficult to convert into ethanol than 
traditional starch/corn crops or at least require new and different processes because of the more 
complex structure of cellulosic material. 
 
 At least initially, the focus will be on feedstocks that are readily available, already 
produced or collected for other reasons, and even waste biomass which currently incurs a 
disposal fee.  Consequently, initial volumes of cellulosic biofuels may benefit from low-cost 
feedstocks.  However, to reach 16 Bgal will likely require reliance on more expensive feedstock 
sources purposely grown and or harvested for conversion into cellulosic biofuel.   
 
 To determine the likely cellulosic feedstocks for production of 16 billion gallons 
cellulosic biofuel by 2022, we analyzed the data and results from various sources.  Sources 
include agricultural modeling from the Forestry Agriculture Sector Optimization Model 
(FASOM) to establish the most economical agriculture residues and energy crops (see section 
5.1 for more details on the FASOM), consultation with USDA-Forestry Sector experts for 
forestry biomass supply curves, and feedstock assessment estimates for urban waste.VV   
 
 An important assumption in our analysis projecting which feedstocks will be used for 
producing cellulosic ethanol is that an excess of feedstock would have to be available for 
producing the biofuel.  Banks are anticipated to require excess feedstock supply as a safety factor 
to ensure that the plant will have adequate feedstock available for the plant, despite any 
feedstock emergency, such as a fire, drought, infestation of pests etc.  For our analysis we 
assumed that twice the feedstock of MSW, C&D waste, and forest residue would have to be 
available to justify the building of a cellulosic ethanol plant.  For corn stover, we assumed 50 
percent more feedstock than necessary.  We used a lower safety factor for corn stover because it 
could be possible to remove a larger percentage of the corn stover in any year (usually only 50 
percent or less of corn stover is assumed to be sustainably removed in any one year).WW  
 
 Another assumption that we made is that if multiple feedstocks are available in an area, 
each would be used as feedstocks for a prospective cellulosic ethanol plant.  For example, a 
                                                 
VV
 It is important to note that our plant siting analysis for cellulosic ethanol facilities used the most current version 
of outputs from FASOM at the time, which was from April 2008.  Since then, FASOM has been updated to reflect 
better assumptions.  Therefore, the version used for the NPRM in Section 5.1 is slightly different than the one we 
used here.  We do not believe that the differences between the two versions are enough to have a major impact on 
the plant siting analysis. 
WW
 The FASOM results do not take into consideration these feedstock safety margins.  Safety margins were used, 
however, for the plant siting analysis described in this section. 
 160 
particular area might comprise a small or medium sized city, some forest and some agricultural 
land.  We would include the MSW and C&D wastes available from the city along with the corn 
stover and forest residue for projecting the feedstock that would be processed by the particular 
cellulosic ethanol plant. 
 
 Previously, Section 1.1 described the total potential availability of various cellulosic 
feedstocks.  Due to EISA, a substantial amount of the available feedstocks will need to be used 
for biofuels production.  This section discusses the estimated amounts from each feedstock type 
needed to meet the EISA requirement of 16 Bgal of cellulosic biofuel by 2022 and also explains 
our projections for the locations of potential cellulosic biofuel facilities based on feedstock 
availability.     
 
Urban Waste 
 
 Cellulosic feedstocks available at the lowest cost to the ethanol producer will likely be 
chosen first.  This suggests that urban waste which is already being gathered today and which 
incurs a fee for its disposal may be among the first to be used.  Urban wood wastes are used in a 
variety of ways. Most commonly, wastes are ground into mulch, dumped into land-fills, or 
incinerated with other municipal solid waste (MSW) or construction and demolition (C&D) 
debris.  Urban wood wastes include a variety of wood resources such as wood-based municipal 
solid waste (MSW) and wood debris from construction and demolition.   
 
 Urban waste (MSW wood, paper, and C&D debris) was estimated to be located near 
large population centers.  We estimated a total of 42 million dry tons of MSW (paper, wood, and 
yard trimmings) and C&D wood waste could be available nationwide for producing biofuels 
after factoring in the various assumptions on percent landfilled, percent moisture, percent 
contaminated, etc. as described in Section 1.1.2.3 on feedstock availability.  We further assumed 
that approximately 25 million dry tons (of the total 42 billion dry tons) would be used, however, 
since many areas of the U.S. (e.g. much of the Rocky Mountain States) would not have a 
cellulosic facility in close enough proximity. 
 
 We arrived at the 25 million dry tons with the following analyses.  First, using the MSW 
and C&D wood waste estimates by state we calculated the tons of MSW and C&D wood waste 
material generated per person per state.  We used the estimate of MSW and C&D wood waste 
material generated per person per state (i.e. tons/person) along with data on the population sizes 
of the largest cities within the state to allocate the total waste material in a state to specific cities.   
 
 Much of the materials are already being collected and may be available to a potential 
ethanol producer at negligible costs.  For instance, some additional sorting or size reduction may 
increase costs, however, tipping fees (fees for materials that are discarded at landfills) can also 
be avoided which would decrease the potential cost the feedstock.  Chapter 4 of this DRIA 
further discusses feedstock costs.  Assuming that the majority of this waste is of negligible cost 
to a potential ethanol producer, we calculated a minimum size for a cellulosic plant dedicated to 
MSW and C&D wood waste for various locations in the U.S.  Sizes ranged from 9-60 million 
gallons per year.  
 
 161 
 First we did not consider those cities, while small, may still be able to justify a cellulosic 
ethanol plant because some other source of biomass is also available that combined with the 
MSW and C&D wood waste can supply the cellulosic ethanol plant with sufficient feedstock.  
However, where non-MSW and C&D wood waste feedstocks are not available, we needed to 
estimate what the minimum plant size would be that would be competitive with other cellulosic 
ethanol plants.   
 
 We conducted this analysis early on before NREL provided us with the cost information 
for a biochemical cellulosic ethanol plant.  Instead we used a representation made by NREL in 
2007 for of a thermochemical ethanol plant.  Using that cellulosic plant model we estimated the 
production cost for a 100 million gallon per year thermochemical plant which processed a 
cellulosic feedstock.  We conducted this analysis in different parts of the country using different 
capital cost factors that account for how capital costs vary in different parts of the country.  The 
different regions were Petroleum Administration for Defense Districts (PADDs) for which we 
have plant installation costs.  In each part of the country, we estimated the cost of the ethanol 
produced processing the cellulosic feedstock assuming that the feedstock cost about $70 per dry 
ton.  Next, we set the feedstock costs to zero cost in our cost spreadsheet and determined at what 
plant size, when scaling the capital costs as the plant size became smaller, the resulting cellulosic 
production costs matched those of the non-MSW and C&D wood waste plants. See Table 1.5-31.  
 
Table 1.5-31 
Breakeven Plant Size for MSW and C&D Wood Waste Cellulosic Ethanol Plants 
 
 PADD 1 PADD 2 PADD 3 PADD 4 PADD 5 CA 
       
Ethanol Production 
Cost (c/gal) 
1.33 1.24 1.10 1.29 1.19 1.57 
Breakeven Plant 
Size (million 
gals/yr) 
28 19 9 23 15 60 
 
 
 We then identified the cities that had large enough MSW and C&D wood waste to justify 
a dedicated cellulosic facility.  By dedicated cellulosic facility, we mean that only MSW and 
C&D wood waste is used as a feedstock, as opposed to a facility that has multiple mixed 
feedstocks.  Nineteen facilities were identified to meet such criteria, as shown in Table 1.5-32. 
The total contribution from dedicated cellulosic MSW and C&D wood waste is approximately 
640 million gallons. 
 162 
Table 1.5-32. 
Projected Dedicated Cellulosic MSW and C&D  
Wood Waste Facilities by Location and Size for 2022   
  
State County City PADD Size of Facility (Mgal) 
1 Alabama Jefferson Birmington 3 11 
2 Arizona Maricopa Phoenix 5 20 
3 California Los Angeles Los Angeles 5 56 
4 California Riverside Riverside 5 24 
5 California San Francisco San Francisco 5 17 
6 Colorado Adams Denver 4 28 
7 Florida Miami Fort Lauderdale 1 31 
8 Georgia Cobb Atlanta 1 43 
9 Illinois Cook Chicago 2 79 
10 Michigan Oakland Detroit 2 33 
11 Nevada Clark Las Vegas 5 17 
12 New York New York City New York 1 72 
13 Oregon Clackamas Portland 4 15 
14 Pennsylvania Philadelphia Philadelphia 1 42 
15 Texas Dallas Dallas 3 52 
16 Texas Fort Bend Houston 3 49 
17 Texas Bexar San Antonio 3 16 
18 Texas Travis Austin 3 14 
19 Washington King Seattle 5 17 
  
  We did assume that in areas with other cellulosic feedstocks (forest and agricultural 
residue), that the MSW would be used even if the MSW could not justify the installation of a 
plant on its own.  MSW used in mixed feedstock plants is shown in Table 1.5-36.  Therefore, we 
have estimated that urban waste could help contribute to the production of approximately 2.2 
billion gallons of ethanol.XX  Subsequent to initiating our analysis, however, we concluded that 
the clearest reading of the renewable biomass definition in the statute may be to preclude the use 
of most MSW.  See Section III.B.1 of the Preamble for a discussion of renewable biomass.  
When the definition of renewable biomass is finalized, it could preclude the use of waste paper 
and C&D waste for use in producing cellulosic biofuel for use toward the RFS2 standard.  If this 
is the case, our FRM analysis will be adjusted to reflect this. 
 
Agricultural and Forestry Residues 
 
 The next category of feedstocks chosen will likely be those that are readily produced but 
have not yet been commercially collected.  This includes both agricultural and forestry residues.   
 
 Agricultural residues are expected to play an important role early on in the development 
of the cellulosic ethanol industry due to the fact that they are already being grown.  Agricultural 
crop residues are biomass that remains in the field after the harvest of agricultural crops.  The 
most common residue types include corn stover (the stalks, leaves, and/or cobs), straw from 
wheat, rice, barley, or oats, and bagasse from sugarcane.  The eight leading U.S. crops produce 
more than 500 million tons of residues each year, although only a fraction can be used for fuel 
                                                 
XX
 Assuming approximately 90 gal/dry ton ethanol conversion yield 
 163 
and or energy production due to sustainability and conservation constraints.399  Crop residues can 
be found all over the United States, but are primarily concentrated in the Midwest since corn 
stover accounts for half of all available agricultural residues. 
 
 Agricultural residues play an important role in maintaining and improving soil tilth, 
protecting the soil surface from water and wind erosion, and helping to maintain nutrient levels.  
Thus, collection and removal of agricultural residues must take into account concerns about the 
potential for increased erosion, reduced crop productivity, and depletion of soil carbon and 
nutrients.  Sustainable removal rates for agricultural residues have been estimated in various 
studies, many showing tremendous variability due to local differences in soil and erosion 
conditions, slope, and tillage practices.  These are described in more detail in Section 1.1. One of 
the most recent studies by top experts in the field showed that under current rotation and tillage 
practices, ~30% of stover (about 59 million metric tonnes) produced in the US could be 
collected, taking into consideration erosion, soil moisture concerns, and nutrient replacement 
costs.  The same study showed that if farmers chose to convert to no-till corn management and 
total stover production did not change, then ~50% of stover (100 million metric tonnes) could be 
collected without causing erosion to exceed the tolerable soil loss. 400 This study, however, did 
not consider possible soil carbon loss which other studies indicate may be a greater constraint to 
environmentally sustainable feedstock harvest than that needed to control water and wind 
erosion.401  Experts agree that additional studies are needed to further evaluate how soil carbon 
and other factors affect sustainable removal rates.  Despite unclear guidelines for sustainable 
removal rates due to the uncertainties explained above, our agricultural modeling analysis 
assumes that 0% of stover is removable for conventional tilled lands, 35% of stover is removable 
for conservation tilled lands, and 50% is removable for no-till lands.  Given the current 
understanding of sustainable removal rates, we believe that such assumptions are reasonably 
justified. 
 
 Our agricultural modeling (FASOM) suggests that corn stover will make up the majority 
of agricultural residues used by 2022 to meet the EISA cellulosic biofuel standard 
(approximately 83 million dry tons used or 7.8 billion gallons of cellulosic ethanol produced).YY  
Smaller contributions are expected to come from bagasse, which is a by-product from the 
production of sugarcane, (1.2 bgal ethanol) and sweet sorghum (0.1 bgal ethanol).  At the time of 
this proposal, FASOM was able to model agricultural residues but not forestry biomass as 
potential feedstocks.  As a result, we relied on USDA-Forest Service (FS) for information on the 
forestry sector.   
 
 Using the assumptions from FASOM on residue and ethanol yields, we determined if it is 
possible to site potential cellulosic plants based on the acres currently harvested.  We identified 
that there are enough harvested acres to produce 7.8 Bgal of ethanol from corn stover by 2022 
without having to rely on new lands.  Therefore, the siting of many of the cellulosic facilities will 
likely be located where corn is typically grown today.  See Table 1.5-33 for a summary of the 
states producing corn stover, and their projected volume contribution to meeting the EISA 
cellulosic requirement by 2022.  
 
  
                                                 
YY
 Assuming 94 gal/dry ton ethanol conversion yield for corn stover in 2022 
Table 1.5-33. 
Projected Ethanol Produced to Meet EISA in 2022 from Corn StoverZZ   
Total 
Harvested 
Acres
Total Residue 
Yield 
Total Residue 
Available 
Sustainably 
Removable Residue 
Yield 
Sustainably 
Removable 
Residue Available Residue Us
State (in 2022) (tons/acre) (Million tons) (tons/acre) (Million tons) (Million ton
Total 71,784,020 n/a 380 n/a 122 82
Illinois 12,994,100 5.43 71 1.62 21 15
Indiana 6,209,463 5.58 35 2.09 13 10
Iowa 14,482,313 5.47 79 1.59 23 17
Kansas 3,026,615 5.33 16 1.65 5 3
Kentucky 1,473,023 5.08 7 2.04 3 1
Michigan 2,238,321 4.30 10 1.79 4 3
Minnesota 7,509,658 5.37 40 1.60 12 8
Missouri 2,732,875 4.73 13 2.93 8 5
Nebraska 10,135,162 5.88 60 1.28 13 9
Ohio 3,712,612 4.91 18 1.89 7 5
South Dakota 4,268,425 4.01 17 1.41 6 4
Wisconsin 3,001,454 4.74 14 2.33 7 5
 165 
 Sugarcane, on the other hand, is grown mainly in Florida, Louisiana, and Texas, although 
plans are underway to also grow sugarcane in California as well.  See section 1.1.1.2 of this 
DRIA for more discussion on sugarcane ethanol produced in the U.S.  If all the sugarcane acres 
harvested today in the U.S. were used to produce ethanol from the bagasse, using the 
assumptions from FASOM on residue and ethanol yields, only approximately 700 million 
gallons could be produced, see Table 1.5-34.  FASOM, however, predicts that the production of 
1.2 billion gallons of ethanol could be economically feasible from sugarcane bagasse.  This 
means that between now and 2022, more sugarcane may be grown, allowing for more 
availability of bagasse in the future. 
 
Table 1.5-34. 
Projected Ethanol Produced to Meet EISA in 2022 from Sugarcane Bagasse 
 
State
Total Harvested 
Acres (in 2007)
Total Bagasse 
Yield 
(tons/acre)
Residue Used 
(Million tons)
Ethanol 
Produced 
(Million gallons)
Total 810,800 n/a 10 707
Florida 382,000 14.71 6 389
Louisiana 389,600 10.25 4 277
Texas 39,200 15.23 1 41
 
  
 Using FASOM, we analyzed the types of land likely to be supplanted by additional 
sugarcane acres in 2022 in the states of Florida, Louisiana, and Texas.  In Florida, sugarcane 
crops appear to replace mainly corn, soy, and hay acres.  In Louisiana, sugarcane crops appear to 
have replaced mainly corn, soy, wheat, sorghum, and hay acres.  In Texas, sugarcane crops 
appear to have replaced mainly soy and sorghum crops.  For these three states we gathered 
available data on corn, soy, wheat, and sorghum acres currently harvested by county (data on hay 
acres were unavailable and appeared to show small changes compared to corn and soy).402  We 
then identified the top counties (in terms of acres available) in close proximity to each other that 
could potentially be converted from corn to sugarcane crops, soy to sugarcane, wheat to 
sugarcane, etc in order to produce enough ethanol for half a billion gallons. 
 
 Sweet sorghum is predicted to be used to produce approximately 0.1 billion gallons of 
ethanol.  According to the National Agriculture and Statistics Service (NASS) of the Department 
of Agriculture, there is not current available data on sweet sorghum acres grown in the United 
States.  Therefore, we used FASOM to predict the types of crops that sweet sorghum is mainly 
replacing, which is corn and soybeans.  Similar to the analysis done for sugarcane, we identified 
the top counties (in terms of acres available) in close proximity to each other that could 
potentially be converted from corn to sweet sorghum crops and soy to sweet sorghum crops in 
order to produce enough ethanol for 0.1 billion gallons.   
 
 The U.S. has vast amounts of forest resources that could potentially provide feedstock for 
the production of cellulosic biofuel.  One of the major sources of woody biomass could come 
from logging residues.  The U.S. timber industry harvests over 235 million dry tons annually and 
produces large volumes of non-merchantable wood and residues during the process.403 Logging 
 166 
residues are produced in conventional harvest operations, forest management activities, and 
clearing operations.  In 2004, these operations generated approximately 67 million dry tons/year 
of forest residues that were left uncollected at harvest sites.404  Other feedstocks include those 
from other removal residues, thinnings from timberland, and primary mill residues.   
 
 Harvesting of forestry residue and other woody material can be conducted throughout the 
year.  Thus, unlike agricultural residue which must be moved to secondary storage, forest 
material could be “stored on the stump.”  Avoiding the need for secondary storage and the 
transportation costs for moving the feedstock there potentially provides a significant cost 
advantage for forest residue over agricultural residue.  This could allow forest residue to be 
transported from further distances away from the cellulosic plant compared to agricultural 
residue at the same feedstock price.  Section 1.1.2.2 further details some of challenges with using 
forestry biomass as a feedstock.  
 
 EISA does not allow forestry material from national forests and virgin forests that could 
be used to produce biofuels to count towards the renewable fuels requirement under EISA.  
Therefore, we required forestry residue estimates that excluded such material.  Most recently, the 
USDA-FS provided forestry biomass supply curves for various sources (i.e., logging residues, 
other removal residues, thinnings from timberland, etc.).  This information suggested that a total 
of 76 million dry tons of forest material could be available for producing biofuels (excluding 
forest biomass material contained in national forests as required under the Act).  See Section 
1.1.2.2 for more information on forest residue feedstock availability.  However, much of the 
forest material is in small pockets of forest which because of its regional low density, could not 
help to justify the establishment of a cellulosic ethanol plant.  After conducting our availability 
analysis, we estimated that approximately 44 million dry tons of forest material would be used, 
which would make up approximately one fourth, or 3.8 billion gallons, of the 16 billion gallons 
of cellulosic biofuel required to meet EISA. 
 
Dedicated Energy Crops 
 
 While urban waste, agricultural residues, and forest residues will likely be the first 
feedstocks used in the production of cellulosic biofuel, there may be limitations to their use due 
to land availability, sustainable removal rates, etc.  Energy crops which are not yet grown 
commercially but have the potential for high yields and a series of environmental benefits could 
help provide additional feedstocks in the future.  Dedicated energy crops are plant species grown 
specifically as renewable fuel feedstocks.  Various perennial plants have been researched as 
potential dedicated feedstocks.  These include switchgrass, mixed prairie grasses, hybrid poplar, 
miscanthus, and willow trees.   
 
 In addition to estimating the extent that agricultural residues might contribute to 
cellulosic ethanol production, FASOM also estimated the contribution that energy crops might 
provide.AAA  FASOM covers all cropland and pastureland in production in the 48 conterminous 
United States, however it does not contain all categories of grassland and rangeland captured in 
USDA’s Major Land Use data sets.  Therefore, it is possible there is land appropriate for 
                                                 
AAA
 Assuming 16 Bgal cellulosic biofuel total, 2.2 Bgal from Urban Waste, and 3.8 Bgal from Forestry Biomass; 10 
Bgal of cellulosic biofuel for ag residues and/or energy crops would be needed. 
 167 
growing dedicated energy crops that is not currently modeled in FASOM. Furthermore, we 
constrained FASOM to be consistent with the 2008 Farm Bill and assumed 32 million acres 
would stay in CRP.BBB  These constraints on land availability may contribute to the model 
choosing a substantial amount of agricultural residues mostly as corn stover and a relatively 
small portion of energy crops as being economically viable feedstocks. 
 
 Given the constraints outlined above, FASOM projects that 0.9 billion gallons of 
cellulosic ethanol from switchgrass is economically feasible by 2022.  The majority of 
switchgrass is projected to likely be grown in Oklahoma, where the majority of acres are 
replacing wheat and hay.  A smaller portion is expected to come from West Virginia and New 
Hampshire where hay is mainly replaced.  Similar to the analysis done for sugarcane and sweet 
sorghum, we identified the top counties (in terms of acres available) in close proximity to each 
other that could potentially be converted from wheat to switchgrass or hay to switchgrass in 
order to produce enough ethanol for 0.9 billion gallons. 
 
Summary of Cellulosic Feedstocks for 2022 
 
 Table 1.5-35 summarizes our internal estimate of cellulosic feedstocks and their 
corresponding volume contribution to 16 billion gallons cellulosic biofuel by 2022 for the 
purposes of our impacts assessment.  
 
Table 1.5-35. 
Cellulosic Feedstocks Assumed to Meet EISA in 2022  
Feedstock Volume (Bgal) 
Agricultural Residues 9.1 
Corn Stover 7.8 
BagasseCCC 1.2 
Sweet Sorghum 0.1 
Forestry Biomass 3.8 
Urban Waste 2.2 
Dedicated Energy Crops 
(Switchgrass) 
0.9 
Total 16.0 
    
Cellulosic Plant Siting 
 
 Future cellulosic biofuel plant siting was based on the types of feedstocks that would be 
most economical as shown in Table 1.5-35, above.  As cellulosic biofuel refineries will likely be 
located close to biomass resources in order to take advantage of lower transportation costs, 
we’ve assessed the potential areas in the U.S. that grow the various feedstocks chosen.  To do 
this, we used data on harvested acres by county for crops that are currently grown today, such as 
                                                 
BBB
 Beside the economic incentive of a farmer payment to keep land in CRP, local environmental interests may also 
fight to maintain CRP land for wildlife preservation.  Also, we did not know what portion of the CRP is wetlands 
which likely could not support harvesting equipment.  
CCC
 Bagasse is a byproduct of sugarcane crushing and not technically an agricultural residue. We have included it 
under this heading for simplification due to sugarcane being an agricultural feedstock.  
 168 
corn stover and sugarcane (for bagasse).405 In some cases, crops are not currently grown, but 
have the potential to replace other crops or pastureland (e.g. sweet sorghum and dedicated energy 
crops).  We used the output from our economic modeling (FASOM) to help us determine which 
types of land are likely to be replaced by newly grown crops.  For forestry biomass, USDA-
Forestry service provided supply curve data by county showing the available tons produced.  
Urban waste (MSW wood, paper, and C&D debris) was estimated to be located near large 
population centers. 
 
 Our analyses also take into account the locations of planned cellulosic facilities as well as 
any corn facilities or pulp and paper mills when we project where cellulosic plants are located 
into the future.  While not all planned cellulosic facilities will likely come to fruition, it was 
important to look at the locations of these facilities as their locations are likely to be chosen for 
good reasons (i.e. close to resources, infrastructure in place, etc.).  We analyzed current corn 
facilities and pulp and paper mill sites as well since they are likely to be close to their respective 
feedstocks (i.e. corn stover and wood residues) and could have many synergies with cellulosic 
biofuel production, such as shared steam and electricity production.  However, this does not 
mean that we have chosen to place cellulosic facilities at all the locations where there are current 
corn facilities and pulp and paper mills.  The locations are only used to help select areas that 
could be preferential towards building a cellulosic facility 
 
 Using feedstock availability data by county/city, we located potential cellulosic sites 
across the U.S. that could justify the construction of a cellulosic plant facility. Table 1.5-36 
shows the volume of cellulosic facilities by feedstock by state projected for 2022.  The total 
volumes given in Table 1.5-35 match the total volumes given in Table 1.5-36  within a couple 
hundred million gallons.  As these differences are relatively small, we believe the cellulosic 
facilities sited are a good estimate of potential locations.   
   
  
 169 
Table 1.5-36. 
Projected Cellulosic Ethanol Volumes by State (million gallons in 2022) 
State 
Total 
Volume Ag Volume 
Energy Crop 
Volume 
Urban Waste 
Volume 
Forestry 
Volume 
Alabama 532 0 0 140 392 
Arkansas 298 0 0 0 298 
California 450 0 0 221 229 
Colorado 28 0 0 28 0 
Florida 421 390 0 31 0 
Georgia 437 0 0 67 370 
Illinois 1,525 1,270 0 198 58 
Indiana 1,109 948 0 101 60 
Iowa 1,697 1,635 0 32 30 
Kansas 310 250 0 29 32 
Kentucky 70 70 0 0 0 
Louisiana 1,001 590 0 103 308 
Maine 191 0 0 2 189 
Michigan 505 283 0 171 51 
Minnesota 876 750 0 50 76 
Mississippi 214 0 0 22 192 
Missouri 654 504 0 78 72 
Montana 92 0 0 9 83 
Nebraska 956 851 0 31 75 
Nevada 17 0 0 17 0 
New Hampshire 171 0 35 29 107 
New York 72 0 0 72 0 
North Carolina 315 0 0 98 217 
Ohio 598 410 0 156 32 
Oklahoma 793 0 777 0 16 
Oregon 244 0 0 44 200 
Pennsylvania 42 0 0 42 0 
South Carolina 213 0 0 57 156 
South Dakota 434 350 0 6 78 
Tennessee 97 0 0 19 78 
Texas 576 300 0 131 145 
Virginia 197 0 0 95 102 
Washington 175 0 0 17 158 
West Virginia 149 0 101 0 48 
Wisconsin 581 432 0 43 106 
Total Volume 16,039 9,034 913 2,139 3,955 
 
 Each of the cellulosic plants was chosen to produce approximately 100 million gallons 
per year of ethanol.  In some cases we had to resort to lower volumes due to limited resources in 
a given area.  In other cases, we used greater than 100 million gallons per year because relatively 
close materials were available that would otherwise go unused.  In addition, we limited biomass 
transport distances to be approximately 100 miles each way or less (radius from proposed 
facility), as large transport distances are economically prohibitive.  We found that the majority of 
corn stover cellulosic facilities required smaller transport distances than the assumed 100 mile 
limit due to relatively close proximity to available feedstocks.  Forest residues, on the other hand, 
 170 
typically required greater distances as collectable material appeared to be sparser.  The following 
Table 1.5-37 lists the 180 cellulosic ethanol facilities that we project could be used to produce 16 
Bgal of cellulosic biofuel by 2022.  See Figure 1.5-15 for a visual representation of the locations 
of these facilities.  
 
Table 1.5-37. 
Projected Cellulosic Facilities 
(million gallons in 2022) 
County State 
Total Volume 
(million gallons/yr) 
Escambia                    Alabama 112 
Greene                       Alabama 108 
Morgan                       Alabama 96 
Russell                      Alabama 101 
Talledega                   Alabama 115 
Cleveland             Arkansas 99 
Howard                Arkansas 97 
Woodruff      Arkansas 102 
Butte California 94 
Orange California 133 
San Joaquin California 120 
Siskiyou California 102 
Adams Colorado 28 
Broward Florida 31 
Hendry Florida 90 
Palm Beach Florida 100 
Palm Beach Florida 100 
Palm Beach Florida 100 
Glynn                   Georgia 108 
Grady                    Georgia 130 
Richmond        Georgia 101 
Treutlen         Georgia 98 
 Bureau  Illinois 130 
 Carroll  Illinois 77 
 Champaign  Illinois 89 
 Coles  Illinois 77 
 De Witt  Illinois 100 
 Du Page  Illinois 128 
 Grundy  Illinois 77 
 Iroquois  Illinois 80 
 Knox  Illinois 89 
 Menard  Illinois 99 
 Montgomery  Illinois 78 
 Morgan  Illinois 67 
 Ogle  Illinois 95 
 Richland  Illinois 81 
 Shelby  Illinois 68 
 Tazewell  Illinois 107 
 Washington  Illinois 85 
 171 
 Benton  Indiana 92 
 Clinton  Indiana 80 
 Daviess  Indiana 93 
 De Kalb  Indiana 91 
 Fulton  Indiana 74 
 Jasper  Indiana 82 
 Jennings  Indiana 94 
 Madison  Indiana 78 
 Morgan  Indiana 100 
 Parke  Indiana 92 
 Union  Indiana 82 
 Vanderburgh  Indiana 74 
 Wells  Indiana 77 
Benton Iowa 69 
Buchanan Iowa 83 
Buena Vista Iowa 84 
Cerro Gordo Iowa 79 
Chickasaw Iowa 82 
Des Moines Iowa 87 
Dubuque Iowa 70 
Franklin Iowa 80 
Grundy Iowa 83 
Guthrie Iowa 85 
Ida Iowa 88 
Mahaska Iowa 80 
Muscatine Iowa 83 
O Brien Iowa 80 
Page Iowa 81 
Palo Alto Iowa 75 
Pottawattamie Iowa 84 
Sioux Iowa 72 
Story Iowa 89 
Union Iowa 76 
Webster Iowa 86 
Logan Kansas 75 
Nemaha Kansas 78 
Sedgwick Kansas 71 
Stevens Kansas 87 
Webster Kentucky 70 
Bienville                    Louisiana 115 
E. Baton Rouge          Louisiana 106 
E. Carroll                   Louisiana 103 
Jeff Davis                   Louisiana 87 
Allen Louisiana 50 
Avoyelles Louisiana 100 
Iberville Louisiana 90 
La Fourche Louisiana 50 
Lafayette Louisiana 100 
Pt. Coupe Louisiana 100 
St Landry Louisiana 100 
 172 
Penobscot                   Maine 100 
Piscataquis                 Maine 91 
Calhoun Michigan 109 
Ionia Michigan 117 
Tuscola Michigan 105 
Van Buren Michigan 89 
Wayne Michigan 85 
Chippewa Minnesota 92 
Dakota Minnesota 114 
Dodge Minnesota 86 
Faribault Minnesota 88 
Lyon Minnesota 84 
Martin Minnesota 95 
Rock Minnesota 73 
Sibley Minnesota 102 
Stearns Minnesota 68 
Stevens Minnesota 76 
Forrest             Mississippi 107 
Grenada                 Mississippi 107 
Audrain Missouri 86 
Chariton Missouri 74 
Clark Missouri 89 
Gentry Missouri 95 
New Madrid Missouri 84 
Ray Missouri 100 
St. Louis Missouri 125 
Sanders                      Montana 92 
 Boone  Nebraska 98 
 Custer  Nebraska 84 
 Harlan  Nebraska 78 
 Hitchcock  Nebraska 83 
 Holt  Nebraska 91 
 Lancaster  Nebraska 74 
 Lincoln  Nebraska 81 
 Nuckolls  Nebraska 76 
 Saunders  Nebraska 100 
 Wayne  Nebraska 96 
 York  Nebraska 94 
Clark Nevada 17 
Carroll                      New Hampshire 136 
Carroll                      New Hampshire 35 
West Chester New York 72 
Cumberland         North Carolina 110 
Forsyth                 North Carolina 104 
Martin    North Carolina 102 
Auglaize Ohio 80 
Clinton Ohio 100 
Franklin Ohio 77 
Logan Ohio 75 
Portage Ohio 98 
 173 
Richland Ohio 83 
Wood Ohio 85 
Craig Oklahoma 130 
Grady Oklahoma 108 
Hughes Oklahoma 91 
Kingfisher Oklahoma 110 
Lincoln Oklahoma 120 
Muskogee Oklahoma 118 
Osage Oklahoma 116 
Lane Oregon 126 
Yamhill Oregon 118 
Montgomery Pennsylvania 42 
Berkeley            South Carolina 105 
Spartanburg          South Carolina 108 
 Day  South Dakota 85 
 Edmunds  South Dakota 80 
 Kingsbury  South Dakota 98 
 Lake  South Dakota 83 
 Turner  South Dakota 89 
Monroe                       Tennessee 97 
Angelina                     Texas 114 
Bexar Texas 16 
Cameron Texas 100 
Dallas Texas 52 
Harris                       Texas 80 
Hidalgo Texas 100 
Travis Texas 14 
Willacy Texas 100 
Halifax         Virginia 98 
Prince George Virginia 99 
Chelan Washington 78 
Thurston Washington 97 
Harrison West Virginia 149 
 Calumet  Wisconsin 91 
 Dane  Wisconsin 76 
 Dunn  Wisconsin 63 
 Eau Claire  Wisconsin 65 
 Grant  Wisconsin 68 
 Jefferson  Wisconsin 94 
 Marquette  Wisconsin 65 
 Wood  Wisconsin 59 
 Total    16039 
 
 
 
 174 
Figure 1.5-15. Projected Cellulosic Facilities 
 
 
 It is important to note, however, that there are many more factors other than feedstock 
availability to consider when eventually siting a plant.  We have not taken into account, for 
example, water constraints, availability of permits, and sufficient personnel for specific 
locations.  As many of the corn stover facilities are projected to be located close to corn starch 
facilities, there is the potential for competition for clean water supplies.  Therefore, as more and 
more facilities draw on limited resources, it may become apparent that various locations are 
infeasible.  Nevertheless, our plant siting analysis provides a reasonable approximation for 
analysis purposes since it is not intended to predict precisely where actual plants will be located.  
Other work is currently being done that will help address some of these issues, but at the time of 
this proposal, was not yet available.406  
 
 As we are projecting the location of cellulosic plants in 2022, it is important to keep in 
mind the various uncertainties in the analysis. For example, future analyses could determine 
better recommendations for sustainable removal rates.  In the case where lower removal rates are 
recommended, agricultural residues may be more limited and could promote more growth in 
dedicated energy crops.  Given the information we have to date, we believe our projected 
locations for cellulosic facilities represent a reasonable forecast for estimating the impacts of this 
rule. 
 
1.5.4 Biodiesel & Renewable Diesel 
 
Biodiesel 
 
 The biodiesel industry differs significantly in profile from the ethanol industry, in that it 
is comprised of plants with a wide variety of sizes, ranging from less than one million gallons to 
more than 50 million gallons per year production capacity, using feedstock ranging from virgin 
soy oil to recycled cooking grease and rendered fats.  The industry capacity has expanded 
rapidly, going from a sparse network of small businesses selling locally to one with large 
companies selling internationally in less than a decade.  Approximately 176 plants reported being 
Forest Residue Plant
Ag. Residue Plant 
Switchgrass Plant 
MSW Plant 
Bagasse Plant
 175 
on-line for production in 2008, with a mean size of 13 million gallons per year and a median size 
of just 5 million gallons per year.  Figure 1.5-16 below shows historical aggregate capacity, sales 
volumes, and apparent capacity utilization rates. 
 
Figure 1.5-16.  Recent biodiesel industry capacity and production trends. 
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008
M
ill
io
n
 
G
a
llo
n
s
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
Ut
ili
za
tio
n
Capacity
Production
Utilization
a
 
a 2008 capacity figure is as of January; annual production figures were not available for 2008 at the time of this 
writing. 
 
 The average utilization capacity has stayed around 30% for the past few years due to 
continued expansion of on-line capacity despite apparently adequate existing capacity.  We can 
speculate that this is primarily because of the relatively low capital cost (typically 5-10% of 
operating cost) of these plants, which enables them to operate only part of the year or at reduced 
capacity, depending on feedstock prices or other market conditions.  Besides fuel, some of these 
plants also produce non-fuel oleochemicals for use in detergents, lubricants or other products, 
providing additional sources of revenue for part of the industry. 
 
 In order to conduct our emissions and distribution analyses, we needed to have an 
industry characterization at the time of the fully phased-in program, the year 2022.  This was not 
a simple task because of the unusual nature of the biodiesel industry.  We generally assumed that 
the demand for biodiesel would stabilize at approximately the level of the standard, which 
seemed reasonable given the relatively high cost for biodiesel feedstocks as well as the uncertain 
status of the current tax incentives.  We estimated how many plants would continue to produce 
biodiesel and where they might be located based on three factors: state incentives for production 
and sales, BQ-9000 certification, and capabilities for handling multiple feedstock types.  Plants 
with more of these advantages were expected to be more likely to survive over those that had 
fewer.  We projected that a number of very small plants processing waste greases/fats would 
continue to operate based on local market niches regardless of these criteria.  In an effort to be 
 176 
realistic in this forecast, other practical considerations were made, such as avoiding siting several 
plants in the same state (except in the Midwest).   
 
 We project that between now and 2022 plants will continue to compete and consolidate to 
make fewer plants of larger size.  During this period most plants will have added the pre-
treatment and feedstock segregation capacity to process any mix of feedstock types available in 
their area.  By the out-years of this analysis, we expect production capacity use factors to reach 
80-90% in nearly all fuel plants.  Multi-product plants will retain the capacity to produce 
biodiesel, but it is not expected to be their primary product due to higher margins for more 
specialized products like surfactants, lubricants, or renewable oleochemical feedstocks for re-
sale.  The map in Figure 1.5-17 represents what the industry might look like by 2022.  Table 1.5-
38 summarizes key parameters of the industry as it is currently and in the 2022 forecast. 
 
Figure 1.5-17.  Biodiesel industry forecast for 2022 
 
 
 
Table 1.5-38.  Summary of current biodiesel industry and forecast.407 
 2008 2022 
Total production capacity on-line (million gal/yr) 2,610 1,050 
Number of operating plants 176 35 
Median plant size (million gal/yr) 5 30 
Total biodiesel production (million gal) 600 810 
Average capacity factor 0.23 0.77 
 
13/15
105/123
0.8/1
0.4/0.5
35/85 41/60
113/158
56/60
9.2/22
75/80
13/30
17/20
38/45
NJ: 38/40
CT: 3.3/4
MA: 0.4/0.5
RI: 0.2/0.3
42/50
67/80
25/30
FL: 17/18
8.3/10
88/105
0.4/0.5
7.5/8
Biodiesel Production/Capacity 
(million gal/yr) in 2022
 177 
Renewable Diesel 
 
 Since December, 2007, ConocoPhillips has been producing a small amount (300-500 
bbl/day) of renewable diesel at their Borger, Texas, refinery from beef tallow generated by 
Tyson Foods, Inc. in Amarillo, Texas.408  In 2007, Dynamic Fuels, LLC., was formed by 
Syntroleum Corp. and Tyson Foods, Inc., to produce liquid renewable fuels.  This fall Dynamic 
Fuels has announced ground-breaking for a 75 million gallon per year plant (5,000 bbl/day) in 
Geismar, Louisiana, that will use Tyson meat processing fats as feedstock to Syntroleum’s Bio-
Synfining process.  Start-up is scheduled for 2010, with the primary product being high-quality 
diesel fuel that will be fungible within the existing petroleum supply system. 409   
 
 The earlier years of our industry projection are based primarily on feasibility and 
construction announcements by Dynamic Fuels, LLC, while the later years are based on the 
available supply of rendered fats and greases as feedstocks, assuming the continued expansion of 
fuel conversion facilities to utilize them.  We project a mix of stand-alone and refinery co-
located facilities.  Stand-alone facilities receive feedstocks, process them, and ship out finished 
products, and are generally self-sufficient in terms of material and energy.  Conversion facilities 
that are located within the boundaries of existing petroleum refineries can take advantage of 
utilities such as steam and hydrogen already available on-site, as well as hydrocarbon 
blendstocks, and tankage and pipeline, rail, and port terminals.  Material that is processed at 
existing refineries can either be co-processed in the same equipment trains with petroleum, or 
processed separately and blended just before leaving the facility.   
 
 The Geismar, Lousiana, facility plans to utilize supplies of hydrogen available in the 
industrial park where it will be located, as well as rail and shipping infrastructure already in 
place nearby.410  However, it is not co-located with existing petroleum production, and therefore 
would be considered a stand-alone facility in our analyses.  
 
 Based on public material released by Syntroleum earlier this year, it appears that a second 
plant of 150 million gallons per year capacity is also under consideration for construction, but 
location, timeline, and feedstock source are not known at this time. 411  Table 1.5-39 shows the 
industry forecast used in our analyses of renewable diesel production in 2022.  The Geismar, 
Lousiana, facility comprises part of the 125 million gallons per year in 2022 of new facility fuel 
shown in the table below, while the facility expansion values represent production we expect to 
come on-line at existing refineries in the future. 
 
Table 1.5-39.  Projected renewable diesel volumes (million gallons in 2022) 
 Expansion at existing refinery New stand-alone facility 
Co-processed with petroleum 188 - 
Not co-processed with petroleum 63 125 
  
 
 178 
1.6 Biofuel Distribution 
 
1.6.1 Biofuel Distribution Overview 
 
 The discussion in this section pertains to the distribution of biofuels within the U.S.  
Significant volumes of ethanol would be imported into the U.S. to meet the volume of ethanol 
that we project would be used to Satisfy the RFS2 standards.  The importation of ethanol into the 
U.S. under the RFS2 standards is discussed in Section 1.5.2 of this DRIA.   
 
The modes of distributing renewable fuels to the end user vary depending on constraints 
arising from their physical/chemical nature and their point of origination.  Some fuels are 
compatible with the existing fuel distribution system, while others currently require segregation 
from other fuels up to the point where they are blended with petroleum based fuels.  The location 
of renewable fuel production plants is also often dictated by the need to be close to the source of 
the feedstocks used rather than to fuel demand centers or to take advantage of the existing 
pipeline distribution system for petroleum products.412  Once blended with petroleum-based 
fuels, some biofuels (such as E10, B2, and B5) can be handled in the conventional fuel 
distribution downstream of the terminal (including retail) and used in conventional vehicles.DDD  
However, E85 must be used in flex-fuel vehicles and dispensed from retail equipment that has 
been manufactured to tolerate the high ethanol concentration.  Hence, the distribution of 
renewable fuels raises unique concerns and in many instances requires the addition of new 
transportation, storage, blending, and retail equipment. 
 
 Significant challenges must be faced in reconfiguring the distribution system to 
accommodate the large volumes of ethanol and to a lesser extent biodiesel that we project would 
be used to meet the proposed standards.  While some uncertainties remain, there is no barrier that 
appears insurmountable.  The response of the transportation system to date to the recent 
unprecedented increase in ethanol use is encouraging.  A recent U.S. Department of Agriculture 
(USDA) report concluded that logistical concerns have not hampered ethanol production growth 
to date, but that concerns may arise about the adequacy of transportation infrastructure as the 
growth in ethanol production continues.413 
 
 Considerations related to the distribution of ethanol, biodiesel, and renewable diesel are 
discussed in the following sections as well as the changes to each segment in the distribution 
system that would be needed to support the volumes of these biofuels that we project would be 
used to satisfy the RFS2 standards.  The costs associated with making the necessary changes to 
the fuel distribution infrastructure are discussed in Section 4.2 of this DRIA. 
 
 Considerable efforts are underway by individual companies in the fuel distribution 
system, consortiums of such companies, industry associations, independent study groups, and 
inter-agency governmental organizations to evaluate what steps might be necessary to facilitate 
the necessary upgrades to the distribution system to support compliance with the RFS2 
                                                 
DDD
 E10 is a mixture of 10% ethanol and 90% gasoline.  B2 is a mixture of 2% biodiesel and 98% petroleum-based 
diesel.  B5 is a mixture of 5% biodiesel and 95% petroleum-based diesel. 
 179 
standards.EEE  EPA will continue to participate in or monitor these efforts as appropriate to keep 
abreast of potential problems in the biofuel distribution system which might interfere with the 
use of the volumes of biofuels that we project will be needed to comply with the RFS2 standards. 
 
 To the extent that biofuels other than ethanol and biodiesel are produced in response to 
the RFS2 standards, the need for added segregation during distribution might be lessened.  For 
example, we expect renewable diesel fuel could be handled like a petroleum-based diesel blend 
stock in the distribution system.  Distillate fuel produced from cellulosic feedstocks could also 
likely be treated as petroleum-based diesel fuel blendstocks in the distribution system.  Likewise, 
bio-gasoline or bio-butanol could likely be treated as petroleum-based gasoline blendstocks.  The 
ability to treat such bio-based blendstocks in that same fashion as petroleum-based fuel 
blendstocks might enhance the possibility for transport by pipeline.  However, the location of the 
production plants for such biofuels relative to petroleum pipeline origination points would 
continue to be an issue limiting the usefulness of existing pipelines.FFF 
 
1.6.1.1 Overview of Ethanol Distribution 
 
 Denatured ethanol is shipped from production and import facilities to petroleum 
terminals where it is blended with gasoline.  Pipelines are the preferred method of shipping large 
volumes of petroleum products over long distances because of the relative low cost and 
reliability.  However, ethanol is not currently shipped by pipeline because it can cause stress 
corrosion cracking in pipeline walls and its affinity for water and solvency can result in product 
contamination concerns.  The location of ethanol production and demand centers also would tend 
to limit the extent to which existing petroleum pipelines could be used to ship ethanol.  Shipping 
ethanol in pipelines that carry distillate fuels as well as gasoline also presents unique difficulties 
in coping with the volumes of a distillate-ethanol mixture which would typically result.GGG  It is 
not possible to re-process this mixture in the way that diesel-gasoline mixtures resulting from 
pipeline shipment are currently handled.HHH  Substantial testing and analysis is currently 
underway to resolve these concerns so that ethanol may be shipped by pipeline either in a batch 
mode or blended with petroleum-based fuel.414  By the time of the publication of this proposal, 
results of these evaluations may be available regarding what actions are necessary by multi-
                                                 
EEE
 For example: 1) The “Biomass Research and Development Board”, an inter-governmental group, has formed a 
group that is focused on evaluating biofuels distribution infrastructure issues. 2) The National Commission on 
Energy Policy, an independent organization, has formed a Biofuels Infrastructure Task Force composed of industry 
experts to evaluate what steps need to be taken to support the distribution of the volumes of biofuels mandated under 
the Energy Information and security Act (EISA) on which the RFS2 standards are based.  
FFF
 The projected location of biofuel plants would not be affected by the choice of whether they are designed to 
produce ethanol, distillate fuel, bio-gasoline, or butanol.  Proximity to the feedstock would continue to be the 
predominate consideration.       
GGG
 Different grades of gasoline and diesel fuel are typically shipped in multi-product pipelines in batches that abut 
each other.  To the extent possible, products are sequenced in a way to allow the interface mixture between batches 
to be cut into one of the adjoining products.   In cases where diesel fuel abuts gasoline in the pipeline, the resulting 
mixture must typically reprocessed into its component parts by distillation for resale as gasoline and diesel fuel. 
HHH
 We believe that it may not currently possible to separate ethanol from a gasoline/diesel mixture sufficiently by 
distillation.  We believe that a significant amount of ethanol may remain in the gasoline and diesel fractions 
separated by distillation. Gasoline-ethanol mixtures can be blended into finished gasoline provided the applicable 
maximum allowed ethanol concentration is not exceeded.  However, diesel-ethanol mixtures can not be used as 
motor fuel.   
 180 
product pipelines to overcome safety and product contamination concerns associated with 
shipping 10% ethanol blends.  A short gasoline pipeline in Florida is also projected to be able 
ship ethanol in batch mode by early next year.415  Thus, there is the potential that existing 
petroleum pipelines in some areas of the county may play a role in the shipment of ethanol from 
the points of production/importation to petroleum terminals.   
 
 However, the location of ethanol plants in relation to existing pipeline origination points 
will continue to limit the role that can be played by pipelines in the shipment of ethanol.III  
Current corn/starch ethanol production facilities are primarily located in the Midwest far from 
the origination points of most existing product pipelines and the primary gasoline demand 
centers.JJJ  This is also projected to primarily be the case for future corn/starch ethanol plants.KKK  
While the projected future cellulosic ethanol plants are expected to be somewhat more dispersed 
throughout the country, we project that most will be located in the Midwest.LLL  Some imported 
ethanol could be brought into ports near the origination points of product pipelines in the gulf 
coast and the Northeast.  Nevertheless, the majority of ethanol will continue to be produced at 
locations distant from the origination points of product pipelines and gasoline demand centers.  
The gathering of ethanol from production facilities located in the Midwest and shipment by 
barge down the Mississippi for introduction to pipelines in the gulf coast is under consideration.  
However, the additional handling steps to bring the ethanol to the pipeline origin points in this 
manner would diminish the potential benefit of shipment by existing petroleum pipelines 
compared to direct shipment by rail. 
 
 Evaluations are also currently underway regarding the feasibility of constructing a new 
dedicated ethanol pipeline from the Midwest to the East coast.416   Under such an approach, 
ethanol would be gathered from a number of Midwest production facilities to provide sufficient 
volume to justify pipeline operation.  To the extent that ethanol production would be further 
concentrated in the Midwest due to the citing cellulosic ethanol plants there, this would tend to 
help justify the cost of installing a dedicated ethanol pipeline.  There are substantial issues that 
would need to be addressed before construction on such a pipeline could proceed, including 
those associated with securing new right of ways and establishing sufficient surety regarding the 
return on the several billion dollar investment. 
 
 Due to the uncertainties regarding the degree to which pipelines will be able to participate 
in the transportation of ethanol, we assumed that ethanol will continue to be transported by rail, 
barge, and truck to the terminal where it would be blended into gasoline.  There is substantial 
room for the distribution by these modes to be further optimized primarily through the increased 
shipment by unit train and installation of additional hub delivery terminals that can accept large 
volumes of ethanol for further distribution to satellite terminals.  To the extent that pipelines do 
eventually play a role in the distribution of ethanol, this could tend to the reduce distribution 
costs and improve reliability in supply. 
                                                 
III
 Some small petroleum product refineries are currently limited in their ability to ship products by pipeline because 
their relatively low volumes are not sufficient to justify connection to the pipeline distribution system.  
JJJ
 The location of current corn/starch ethanol production facilities is discussed in Section 1.5.1.1 of this DRIA.  
KKK
 The projected growth in corn/starch ethanol plants under the proposed RFS2 standards is discussed in Section 
1.5.1.2 of this DRIA.   
LLL
 The projected location of cellulosic ethanol plants is discussed in Section 1.5.3 of this DRIA. 
 181 
 
The United States Department of Agriculture estimated that in 2005, approximately 60% 
of ethanol was transported by rail, 30% was transported by tank truck, and 10% was transported 
by barge.417  When practicable, shipment by unit train is the preferred method of rail shipment 
rather than shipping on a manifest rail car basis.MMM  Manifest rail car shipment refers to the 
shipment of ethanol in rail tanks cars that are incorporated into trains which are composed of a 
variety of other commodities.  The use of unit trains, sometimes referred to as a virtual pipeline, 
substantially reduces shipping costs and improves reliability compared to manifest rail car 
shipment.  Unit trains are composed entirely of 70-100 ethanol tank cars, and are dedicated to 
shuttle back and forth to large hub terminals.NNN  Unit train receipt facilities can either be located 
at petroleum terminals (when there is sufficient room available) or at rail terminals.  When unit 
train facilities are located at rail facilities, ethanol is further shipped to petroleum terminals by 
tank truck or barge. 
 
Unit trains can be composed at a single ethanol production plant or if a group of plants 
are not large enough to support such service individually, can be formed at a central facility 
which gathers ethanol from a number of producers.  The Manly Terminal in Iowa, the first such 
ethanol gathering facility, accepts ethanol from a number of nearby ethanol production facilities 
for shipment by unit train.  Regional (Class 2) railroad companies are an important link bringing 
ethanol to gathering facilities for assembly into unit trains for long-distance shipment by larger 
(Class 1) railroads.    
 
Ethanol is sometimes carried by multiple modes before finally arriving at the terminal 
where it is blended into gasoline.  The practice of pumping ethanol directly from rail cars to 
tanks trucks for further delivery to petroleum terminals at rail terminals is an important means of 
bringing ethanol into developing markets.OOO  This practice delays the need to install substantial 
ethanol handling and storage facilities at rail receipt facilities.   However, we believe that it may 
not be a viable long term solution due to the logistical demands associated with ensuring the safe 
transfer of ethanol directly from rail cars to tank trucks.  We anticipate that once the ethanol 
distribution system is fully developed all ethanol shipped to rail terminals will be delivered into 
storage tanks prior to further distribution to petroleum terminals.  Similarly, the practice of 
sequential delivery of gasoline and ethanol into a tank truck at the terminal so that mixing to the 
finished fuel specification takes place within the tank truck during delivery is an important 
means of bringing ethanol to developing markets.PPP  This practice allows the blending of 
ethanol in markets prior to the installation of in-line ethanol blending equipment at petroleum 
terminals.  In-line blending refers to the practice of delivering a pre-blended ethanol/gasoline 
mixture into the tank truck.  Due to the improved efficiency of delivery and greater assurance of 
                                                 
 
NNN
 Hub ethanol receipt terminals can be located at large petroleum terminals or at rail terminals.  
OOO
 This practice is sometimes referred to as transloading. 
PPP
 This practice is sometimes referred to as splash blending.  The term splash blending can also refer to blending 
ethanol with a gasoline blendstock that is not formulated in anticipation of the addition of ethanol.  Matched 
blending refers to the practice of blending ethanol with a specially formulated gasoline blendstock that in itself can 
not typically be sold as finished gasoline.   
 182 
achieving the target blend ratio and a properly mixed final blend that accompanies in-line 
blending, we anticipate that all terminals will eventually install in-line blending equipment.QQQ 
 
 As is the case for conventional gasoline, delivery of ethanol blends to retailers and fleets 
operators is accomplished by tank truck.  Typically no changes are needed to dispense E10 at 
retail and fleet facilities.  However, some retail facilities in parts of the country that have not 
used E10 in the past are projected to need to prepare their systems for E10 service primarily by 
removing water from their storage tanks.  E10 can be used in conventional engines.  E85 requires 
specially certified retail dispensing hardware and can only be used in flexible fuel vehicles. 
 
1.6.1.2 Overview of Biodiesel Distribution 
 
 Biodiesel is currently transported from production plants to petroleum terminals by tank 
truck, manifest rail car, and by barge where it is blended with petroleum-based diesel fuel.  
Unblended biodiesel must be transported and stored in insulated/heated containers in colder 
climes to prevent gelling.  Insulated/heated containers are not needed for biodiesel that has been 
blended with petroleum-based diesel fuel in low concentrations (i.e. B2, B5, B20).  Biodiesel 
plants are not as dependent on being located close to feedstock sources as are corn and cellulosic 
ethanol plants.RRR  This has allowed some biodiesel plants to be located adjacent to petroleum 
terminals.  Biodiesel production facilities are more geographically dispersed than ethanol 
facilities and the production volumes also tend to be smaller than ethanol facilities.SSS  These 
characteristics in combination with the smaller volumes of biodiesel that we project will be used 
under the RFS2 standards compared to ethanol allow relatively more biodiesel to be used within 
trucking distance of the production facility.  However, we project that there will continue to be a 
strong and growing demand for biodiesel as a blending component in heating oil which could not 
be satisfied alone by local sources of production.  It is likely that State biodiesel mandates will 
also need to be satisfied in part by out-of-State production.  Fleets are also likely to continue to 
be a substantial biodiesel user, and these will not always be located close to biodiesel producers.  
Thus, we are assuming that a substantial fraction of biodiesel will continue to be shipped long 
distances to market.  Downstream of the petroleum terminal, B2 and B5 can be distributed in the 
same manner as petroleum diesel and used in conventional diesel engines.  
 
 Concerns remain regarding the shipment of biodiesel by pipeline (either by batch mode 
or in blends with diesel fuel) related to the potential contamination of other products (particularly 
jet fuel), the solvency of biodiesel, and compatibility with pipeline gaskets and seals.  The 
smaller anticipated volumes of biodiesel and the more dispersed and smaller production facilities 
relative to ethanol also make biodiesel a less attractive candidate for shipment by pipeline.  Due 
to the uncertainties regarding the suitability of transporting biodiesel by pipeline, we assumed 
that biodiesel which needs to be transported over long distance will continue be carried by rail 
car and to a lesser extent by barge.  Due to the relatively small plant size and dispersion of 
                                                 
QQQ
 Most terminals are likely to install in-line ethanol blending equipment by 2013 as the use of E10 becomes 
virtually nationwide. The growth in ethanol consumption under the proposed RFS2 standards is discussed in Section 
1.7.1.2 of this DRIA. 
RRR
 Biodiesel feedstocks are typically preprocessed to oil prior to shipment to biodiesel production facilities.  This 
can substantially reduce the volume of feedstocks shipped to biodiesel plants relative to ethanol plants. 
SSS
 Section 1.5.4 of this DRIA contains a discussion of our projections regarding the location of biodiesel production 
facilities.  
 183 
biodiesel plants, we anticipate the volumes of biodiesel that can be gathered at a single location 
will continue to be insufficient to justify shipment by unit train.  To the extent that pipelines do 
eventually play a role in the distribution of biodiesel, this could tend to the reduce distribution 
costs and improve reliability in supply. 
 
1.6.1.3 Overview of Renewable Diesel Distribution 
 
 We believe that renewable diesel fuel will be confirmed to be sufficiently similar to 
petroleum-based diesel fuel blendstocks with respect to distribution system compatibility.  
Hence, renewable diesel fuel could be treated in the same manner as any petroleum-based diesel 
fuel blendstock with respect to transport in the existing petroleum distribution system.  
Approximately two-thirds of renewable diesel fuel is projected to be produced at petroleum 
refineries.TTT  The transport of such renewable diesel fuel would not differ from petroleum-based 
diesel fuel since it would be blended to produce a finished diesel fuel before leaving the refinery.  
The other one-third of renewable diesel fuel is projected to be produced at stand-alone facilities 
located more closely to sources of feedstocks.  We anticipate that such renewable diesel fuel 
would be shipped by tank trucks to nearby petroleum terminals where it would be blended 
directly into diesel fuel storage tanks.  Because of its high cetane, we anticipate that all 
renewable diesel fuel would likely be blended with petroleum based diesel fuel prior to use.  
Downstream of the terminal, renewable/petroleum diesel fuel mixtures would be distributed the 
same as petroleum diesel. 
 
1.6.2 Shipment of Ethanol to Petroleum Terminals 
 
 There is considerable uncertainty regarding how ethanol would be shipped to petroleum 
terminals once the market matures under the RFS2 standards.  Our evaluation for this NPRM is 
based on an assessment of current trends in ethanol distribution and engineering judgment 
regarding how these trends are likely to develop over time.  As discussed below, there is a lack 
of data on existing biofuels distribution facilities and capabilities as well as uncertainties 
regarding how the distribution system would respond to increased biofuels volumes.  Hence, we 
were compelled to make certain assumptions based on a review of available literature and 
discussions with industry.  We currently have a study underway through Oakridge National 
Laboratories (ORNL) to model the transportation of ethanol from production/import facilities to 
petroleum terminals.  The ORNL model optimizes freight flows over the rail, marine, and road 
distribution net while addressing the use of multiple shipping modes.  We plan to use the results 
of the ORNL study to adjust our projections regarding how ethanol would be shipped to 
petroleum terminals for the final rule, particularly with respect to how much ethanol can be 
shipped directly by tank truck from production facilities and the relative roles of unit train, 
manifest rail, and barge in the distribution chain. 
 
USDA estimated that approximately 30% of direct ethanol deliveries from production 
facilities to petroleum terminals in 2005 were accomplished by tank truck.418   As the total 
volume of ethanol used increases and ethanol is shipped to more markets that are distant from 
                                                 
TTT
 A discussion of the projected location of renewable diesel fuel production facilities is contained in Section 1.5.4 
of this DRIA.  Renewable diesel fuel produced at petroleum refineries would either be co-processed with crude oil 
or processed in separate units located at the refinery for blending with other diesel blendstocks at the refinery. 
 184 
production centers (e.g. in the Southeast), we expect that shipments by rail would increase and 
direct tank truck shipments to petroleum terminals to decrease to 20%.  We believe that for 
transportation distances of less than 200 miles all shipments of ethanol to petroleum terminals 
would be by tank truck.  Transportation by tank truck for a distance over 200 miles typically 
requires an overnight layover which significantly increases costs.  Thus, we anticipate that only a 
limited volume of ethanol would be transported by tank truck for a distance of between 200 and 
300 miles and essentially none over 300 miles once the market matures. 
 
The amount of ethanol that can be shipped directly by truck from production 
plants/import centers to petroleum terminals is a function of the relative location of production 
plants/import centers to petroleum terminals, the ethanol production/import capacity of 
production/import facilities, and the potential ethanol demand at each terminal.  Ethanol demand 
at a given terminal is governed by ethanol cost considerations relative to gasoline, State ethanol 
use incentives, the penetration of E85 into the market, and the total gasoline motor vehicle 
demand served the terminal.  As an input to the ORNL study, we provided our estimates of the 
location of ethanol production plants and imports centers as well as our estimate of how much 
ethanol would be used on a State-by-State basis.UUU  ORNL will allocate ethanol usage to 
terminals located within a given State on a population weighted basis given the terminals service 
areas.  Thus, we anticipate that the ORNL study will provide an enhanced estimate of the volume 
of ethanol that could be shipped to petroleum terminals by tank truck  
 
Where shipping distances are greater than 300 miles, we assumed that unit train would be 
the preferred means of transport where ethanol volumes are sufficiently large.  We estimated that 
shipment by manifest rail car would continue to be an important means of bringing ethanol to a 
subset of petroleum terminals that could not support the receipt of unit trains or otherwise 
receive ethanol from hub terminals that are equipped for unit train receipt.VVV  We assumed that 
10% of ethanol production/imports would be shipped to petroleum terminals by manifest rail car.  
We also assumed that shipment by barge would continue to be a significant means of moving 
ethanol from certain hub terminals in the Northeast that receive ethanol via unit train to other 
Northeast terminals.  We anticipate that the analysis of the relative merits of the various modes 
for long distance transportation of ethanol inherent in the ORNL modeling work will provide 
additional basis for us to adjust our estimates of the relative extent to which the different modes 
would be utilized.   
 
The extent to which multiple shipping links are needed to bring ethanol to petroleum 
terminal depends on two principal factors.  The first is whether the ethanol production facility is 
configured to support shipment by unit train.  The Manly unit train gathering facility was 
constructed to serve a number of ethanol production plants that were either too small to support 
unit train service themselves or otherwise chose not to install a unit train shipping facility.  Our 
analysis indicates that the vast majority of new ethanol production plants will have a production 
capacity of at least 70 million gallons per year (MGY).419  The current industry rule of thumb is 
                                                 
UUU
 A discussion of our estimates of where ethanol would be used under the RFS2 standards is contained is 
contained in Section 1.7 of this DRIA.  A discussion of our estimates of where ethanol would be produced / 
imported in response to the RFS2 standards is contained in Section 1.5 of this DRIA.  
VVV
 Manifest rail car shipment refers to the practice of shipping several ethanol rail cars in a train that is composed 
of rail cars carrying various products.  
 185 
that ethanol production plants need to have a production capacity of approximately 80 million 
MGY to support the installation of a unit train loading facility.  This appears to be based on the 
assumption of an ~2 week cycle time for unit train rail cars which we believe is widely accepted 
for ethanol shipments by unit train, and the use of a 100 car unit train.WWW  A 70 MGY ethanol 
plant could only support the shipment of a 100 car unit train every 17 days, resulting in a 20% 
less efficient use of rail cars compared to a 2 week cycle.  Rail car lease costs are estimated at 
$750 per month per car and thus can constitute a significant fraction to total ethanol freight costs.   
 
Ethanol unit trains range between a minimum of 70 to a maximum of 100 rail cars.  By 
reducing the number of cars in a unit train to 90, a 70 MGY ethanol could support a two week 
rail car cycle time.  Thus, we believe that a 70 MGY ethanol plant should be able to support the 
installation of a unit train shipping facility.  It is also likely that the level of ethanol demand at 
some downstream ethanol unit train receipt facilities would be better suited to the receipt of 
smaller sized unit train than 100 rail cars.  We anticipate that all ethanol production facilities of 
sufficient scale to support unit train service other than those currently served by the Manly 
facility will choose to install such service due to the associated market advantages.  We assume 
that the new production plants that are too small to support installation of unit train service 
would primarily serve local markets by tank truck and ship the remainder of their production to 
terminal by manifest rail car.  Based on the above discussion, we are assuming that no additional 
unit train rail gathering facilities would be needed.  Hence, we are projecting that no additional 
manifest rail car shipments to form unit trains would be needed as a result of the RFS2 standards. 
 
 The second factor influencing the need for secondary shipments of ethanol is the extent to 
which ethanol will be shipped to hub terminals via unit train for further distribution to satellite 
terminals and the degree to which such hub terminals are located at petroleum terminals as 
opposed to being located at rail terminals.  A significant challenge facing terminals and one that 
is currently limiting the volume of ethanol that can be used is the ability to receive ethanol by 
rail.  Only a small fraction of petroleum terminals currently have rail receipt capability and a 
number likely have space constraints (particularly those in the Northeast) or are located too far 
from the rail net to allow installation of such capability.   
 
There is significant uncertainty regarding the extent to which additional rail receipt 
facilities can be accommodated at petroleum terminals.  This is true regarding the installation of 
manifest rail receipt capability as well as unit train receipt capability.  Comprehensive data on 
the current rail receipt capability at petroleum terminals or on logistical considerations regarding 
the addition of such capability does not exist.  We do not expect to receive significant additional 
information from the current ORNL modeling work on this subject.  The use of GIS data in 
concert with satellite imagery is being considered within the context of the Biomass Research 
Board’s Distribution Infrastructure workgroup to further evaluate logistical considerations in the 
delivery of ethanol of ethanol to petroleum terminals.420  However, we do not anticipate that the 
results of such work would be available for the final rule.  Nevertheless, the results of such work 
would be useful to the extent that EPA needs to conduct evaluations after the rule is finalized of 
whether the RFS2 standards need to be adjusted due to constraints in the ethanol distribution 
system.   
 
                                                 
WWW
 Rail car cycle time for shipment of ethanol by manifest rail car is typically one month.  
 186 
For the purpose of our analysis, we are assuming that 50% of new ethanol unit train 
facilities would be located at petroleum terminals and 50% would be located at rail terminals.  
We will continue to seek information from industry on the logistical considerations associated 
with bringing ethanol to petroleum terminals and will adjust our estimates regarding how this 
would be accomplished for the final rule.  
 
Ethanol not blended at hub petroleum terminals or shipped to rail terminals would need to 
be further shipped to smaller “satellite” petroleum terminals.  We assume that 20% of the ethanol 
received by unit train at a petroleum terminal would be blended into gasoline at that terminal.  
The remaining 80% would be further shipped to satellite petroleum terminals.  We are assuming 
that 90% of such secondary shipments would be done by tank truck and 10% by barge.  We also 
assumed the ethanol shipped by unit train to rail terminals would be shipped to petroleum 
terminals by the same means.  At one ethanol unit train hub facility at a rail terminal, there are 
plans to ship ethanol by a short pipeline to a nearby petroleum terminal.  We anticipate that this 
practice will expand as the industry matures.  However, due to a lack of information on the 
extent to which short pipelines could feasibly play such a role, and to provide a conservatively 
high estimate of ethanol distribution costs, we assumed that all secondary shipments from rail 
terminals would be tank truck and barge.  We anticipate that the results from the ORNL 
modeling work will provide the means for us to modify our estimates of the extent to which 
secondary shipments of ethanol will need to be made from unit train receipt facilities at 
petroleum terminals and the breakdown of the transportation modes that would be used for 
secondary shipments from all ethanol unit train receipt facilities (including those at rail 
terminals). 
 
 Our estimate of how ethanol would be shipped to petroleum terminals in 2022 is 
summarized in Table 1.6-1.  A discussion of ethanol freight costs can be found in Section 4.2 of 
this DRIA. 
 
 187 
Table 1.6-1.  Estimated 2022 Ethanol Shipping Volumes by Link/Mode of Shipment 
 
Million Gallons of Ethanol  
Shipped Annually in 2022 
Shipping Link / Shipment Mode 
Total Volume 
Change from 
Reference 
Caseb 
From production facilities by manifest 
rail car and tank truck to unit train 
gathering facility  
1,000 0 
From production/import facility to 
petroleum terminal by tank truck 
6,830 
(20% production/import vol.) a  4,190 
From production or unit train 
gathering facility to petroleum 
terminal by unit train 
11,950 
(35% production/import vol.) a 7,340 
From production/import facility to 
petroleum terminal by manifest rail 
car 
3,410 
(10% production/import vol.) a 2,100 
From production or unit train 
gathering facility to rail terminal by 
unit train 
11,950 
(35% production/import vol.) a 7,340 
From petroleum terminals that receive 
ethanol by unit train by barge to 
satellite petroleum terminals 
960 590 
From petroleum terminals that receive 
ethanol by unit train by tank truck to 
satellite petroleum terminals 
8,600 5,280 
From rail terminals that receive 
ethanol by unit train or port facilities 
that receive imported ethanol by barge 
to satellite petroleum terminals  
1,190 730 
From rail terminals that receive 
ethanol by unit train by tank truck to 
satellite petroleum terminals 
10,750 6,600 
a
 34.14 BGY of ethanol would be produced/imported by 2022 to satisfy the RFS2 standards. 
b
 Total – the AEO 2007 based 2022 reference case absent the RFS2 standards.  Our ethanol consumption projections 
under RFS2 standards are discussed in Section 1.7.1 of this DRIA.  
 
1.6.3 Shipment of Biodiesel to Petroleum Terminals 
 
 We projected the volumes of biodiesel that would be used on a State-by-State basis to 
meet anticipated State biodeisel mandates/incentives and the estimated demand for biodiesel as a 
blending component in heating oil.XXX  Using the estimated locations of biodiesel production 
                                                 
XXX
 A discussion of our estimates regarding the location of biodiesel production facilities and centers of biodiesel 
demand is contained in Section 1.5.4 of this DRIA. 
 188 
facilities and their volumes, we evaluated the most efficient means of meeting this projected 
demand while minimizing shipping distances (and cost).  The remaining biodiesel production 
volume that was not taken up meeting this demand was assumed to be used in the same State it 
was produced to the extent that the State’s diesel fuel did not already contain 5% biodiesel.  We 
believe that this should provide a somewhat conservatively high estimate of biodiesel 
distribution costs since biodiesel might be used in excess of 5% even absent a State mandate.  If 
the State was already saturated with 5% biodiesel, the remaining volume was assumed to be 
shipped out of State within a 1,000 mile shipping distance.  A 1,000 mile shipping distance was 
selected to ensure that all biodiesel not used to satisfy a State mandate or for bio-heat could find 
a market.  It is likely that some fraction would not need to travel quite as far.  Therefore, this 
assumption is also likely to result in a conservatively high estimate of biodiesel freight costs.  It 
was assumed that biodiesel production volumes will continue to be insufficiently concentrated to 
justify shipment by unit train.  Where distances are beyond 300 miles, shipment by manifest rail 
was assumed to be the preferred option other than in cases on the East coast where there were 
apparent barge routes from production to demand centers.  In no case was it assumed that 
biodiesel would need to be shipped by multiple modes prior to delivery at the petroleum terminal 
where it is blended with petroleum-based distillate fuel.   
 
Table 1.6-2 contains our estimate of how biodiesel would be shipped to petroleum 
terminals in 2022.  Additional discussion on our estimate of how biodiesel used to comply with 
the RFS2 standards would be transported to petroleum terminals can be found in Section 4.2 of 
this DRIA on biodiesel freight costs.   
 
Table 1.6-2.   
Estimated 2022 Biodiesel Shipping Volumes by Link/Mode of Shipment 
 
Million Gallons of Biodiesel Shipped Annually in 2022 Shipping Link / Shipment 
Mode Total Volume Change from Reference Case b  
From production facility to 
petroleum terminal by tank 
truck 
696 
(86% of total production volume) a  369 
From production facility to 
petroleum terminal by 
manifest rail car 
109 
(13% of total production volume) a  5 
From production facility to 
petroleum terminal by barge 
5 
(1% of total production volume) a  3 
a
 810 MGY of biodiesel would be produced in 2022 to satisfy the RFS2 
b
 Total – the AEO 2007 based 2022 reference case absent the RFS2 standards.  Our ethanol consumption projections 
under RFS2 standards are discussed in Section 1.7.2 of this DRIA.  
 
 
 
 
1.6.4 Shipment of Renewable Diesel to Petroleum Terminals 
 
 189 
 We project that the distribution of the 2/3 of renewable diesel fuel (251 MGY in 2022, or 
potentially earlier) produced to petroleum terminals would be transparent with respect the impact 
on the distribution system.YYY   We assume that the remaining 125 MGY would be shipped to 
nearby terminals or petroleum refineries (within a 200 mile radius) by tank truck to be blended 
with petroleum-based diesel fuel. 
 
1.6.5 Changes in Freight Tonnage Movements Due to RFS2 
 
 In order to evaluate the magnitude of the challenge to the distribution system up to the 
point of receipt at the terminal, we compared the growth in freight tonnage for all commodities 
from the AEO 2007 reference case to the growth in freight tonnage under the RFS2 standards in 
which ethanol increases, as does the feedstock (corn) and co-products (distillers grains).  We did 
not include a consideration of the transportation of cellulosic feedstocks in this analysis.  The 
distribution of cellulosic feedstocks is discussed in Section 1.3.3 of this DRIA.  For purposes of 
this analysis, we focused on only the ethanol portion of the renewable fuel goals for ease of 
calculation and because ethanol represents the vast majority of the total fuel.  The resulting 
calculations serve as an indicator of changes in freight tonnages associated with increases in 
renewable fuels.  We calculated the freight tonnage for the total of all modes of transport as well 
as the individual cases of rail, truck, and barge. 
 
 In calculating the AEO 2007 reference case percent growth rate in total freight tonnage, 
we used data compiled by the Federal Highway Administration to calculate the tonnages 
associated with these commodities.   We then calculated the growth in freight tonnage for 2022 
under the RFS2 standards and compared the difference with the AEO 2007 reference case.  The 
comparisons indicate that across all transport modes, the incremental increase in freight tonnage 
of ethanol and accompanying feedstocks and co-products associated with the increased ethanol 
volume under the RFS2 standards are small.  The percent increase for total freight across all 
modes (rail, barge, truck, and pipeline) by 2022 is 0.9 percent.  Because pipelines currently do 
not carry ethanol, and the increase in volume of ethanol displaces a corresponding volume of 
gasoline, pipelines showed a decrease in tonnage carried.  The displaced gasoline also resulted in 
some decrease in tonnage in other modes that slightly reduced the overall increases in tonnage 
reflected in the totals. 
  
 To further evaluate the magnitude of the increase in freight tonnage under the RFS2 
standards, we calculated the portion of the total freight tonnage from the rail, barge, and truck 
modes made up of ethanol-related freight for both the AEO 2007 based 2022 reference case and 
control cases.  The freight associated with ethanol constitutes only a very small portion of the 
total freight tonnage for all commodities.  Specifically, ethanol freight represents approximately 
0.5 and 2.5% of total freight for the AEO 2007 based 2022 reference case and RFS2 standards 
case, respectively.  For the rail mode only, the fright associated with ethanol represents 
approximately 3.2% of the total for the RFS2 case.  The results of this analysis, suggest that it 
should be feasible for the distribution infrastructure upstream of the terminal to accommodate the 
additional freight associated with this RFS2 standards especially given the lead time available.   
                                                 
YYY
 A discussion of the projected location of renewable diesel fuel production facilities is contained in Section 1.5.4 
of this DRIA.  Renewable diesel fuel produced at petroleum refineries would either be co-processed with crude oil 
or processed in separate units located at the refinery for blending with other diesel blendstocks at the refinery. 
 190 
Specific issues related to transportation by rail, barge, and tank truck are discussed in the 
following sections.  Our estimate of the percent changes in total freight tonnage by mode for 
2022 required to satisfy the RFS2 standards is contained in Table 1.6-3. 
 
Table 1.6-3.  
Estimate of Percent Changes in Total Freight Tonnage by Mode for 2022 
 
 Reference 
Case RFS2 case % change
 a
  
Total freight tonnage for all commodities                
(thousands of tons) 25,161,284 25,673,207 1.99% 
Portion of total freight tonnage made up of ethanol-
related freight (thousands of tons) 135,018 643,418 
Percent ethanol related freight to total freight 0.54% 2.51% 
 
 
Total freight tonnages for specific transport 
modes (thousands of tons) 
Reference 
Case RFS2 case % change
 a
  
Truck 16,521,816 16,884,804 2.15% 
Rail 2,552,227 2,636,173 3.18% 
Water 714,483 734,292 2.70% 
Pipeline 5,372,758 5,417,937 0.83% 
aTotal – the AEO 2007 based 2022 reference case absent the RFS2 standards.  Our ethanol consumption projections 
under RFS2 standards are discussed in Section 1.7.1 of this DRIA.  
 
 To better elucidate ethanol transport activity and potential distribution constraints, we 
commissioned the Department of Energy’s (DOE) Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) to 
conduct an analysis of ethanol transport by domestic truck, marine, and rail distribution systems 
using its North American Transportation Infrastructure Network Model.  Final results for the 
analysis are expected in early 2009. 
 
1.6.6 Rail Transportation System Accommodations 
 
 Many improvements to the freight rail system will be required in the next 15 years to 
keep pace with the large increase in the overall freight demand.  Much of the projected increase 
in rail freight demand is associated with the expected rapid growth of inter-modal rail transport.  
Most of the needed upgrades to the freight rail system are not specific to the transport of 
renewable fuels and would be needed irrespective of today’s proposed rule.  The modifications 
required to satisfy the increase in demand include upgrading tracks to allow the use of heavier 
trains at faster speeds, the modernization of train braking systems to allow for increased traffic 
on rail lines, the installation of rail sidings to facilitate train staging and passage through 
bottlenecks. 
 
 191 
 Some industry groupsZZZ and governmental agencies in discussions with EPA, and in 
testimony provided for the Surface Transportation Board (STB) expressed concerns about the 
ability of the rail system to keep pace with large increase in demand even under the AEO 2007 
reference case (27% by 2022).  For example, the electric power industry has had difficulty 
keeping sufficient stores of coal in inventory at power plants due to rail transport difficulties and 
has expressed concerns that this situation will be exacerbated if rail congestion worsens.  One of 
the more sensitive bottleneck areas with respect to the movement of ethanol from the Midwest to 
the East coast is Chicago.  The City of Chicago commissioned its own analysis of rail capacity 
and congestion, which found that the lack of rail capacity is “no longer limited to a few choke 
points, hubs, and heavily utilized corridors.”  Instead, the report finds, the lack of rail capacity is 
“nationwide, affecting almost all the nation’s critically important trade gateways, rail hubs, and 
intercity freight corridors.”  This is due, in part, to the lack of critical linkages between the 27 
major rail yards located in the Chicago-land area. 
 
 To help improve east-west rail connections through the city, federal, state, and local 
officials announced an agreement in 2006 to invest $330 million over three-years in city-wide 
rail infrastructure designed to improve the flow of rail traffic through the area.  The State of 
Illinois, the City of Chicago, and seven Class I rail carriers, as well as Amtrak and Metra, the 
area's transit system, also committed $1.5 billion in improvements.  Chicago is the largest rail 
hub in the country with more than 1,200 trains passing through it daily carrying 75% of the 
nation's freight valued at $350 billion; 37,500 rail freight cars pass through the city every day 
projected to increase to 67,000 by 2020.  Chicago is the only city where all six Class I railroads 
converge and exchange freight. The plan calls for the creation of five rail corridors to aid in 
alleviating the bottleneck. 
 
 Significant private and public resources are focused on making the modifications to the 
rail system to cope with the increase in demand.  Rail carriers report that they typically invest 16 
to 18 billion dollars a year in infrastructure improvements.421 Substantial government loans are 
also available to small rail companies to help make needed improvements by way of the Railroad 
Rehabilitation and Improvement Finance (RRIF) ProgramAAAA, administered by Federal 
Railroad Administration (FRA), as well as Section 45G Railroad Track Maintenance Credits, 
offered by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS).   
 
 The RRIF program offers loans to railroads for a variety of capital purposes including 
track and equipment rehabilitation at “cost of money” for 25 year terms.  Typically, short line 
railroads cannot secure this kind of funding in the private markets.  Under this program, FRA is 
                                                 
ZZZ
 Industry groups include the Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers, American Chemistry Council, and the 
National Industrial Transportation League; governmental agencies include the Federal Railroad Administration 
(FRA), the General Accountability Office (GAO), and the American Association of State Highway Transportation 
and Officials (AASHTO).  Testimony for the STB public hearings includes Ex Parte No. 671, Rail Capacity and 
Infrastructure Requirements and Ex Parte No. 672, Rail Transportation and Resources Critical to the Nation’s 
Energy Supply. 
AAAA
 The RRIF program was established by the Transportation Equity Act for the 21st Century (TEA-21) and 
amended by the Safe Accountable, Flexible and Efficient Transportation Equity Act: a Legacy for Users 
(SAFETEA-LU).  RRIF funding may be used to: acquire, improve, or rehabilitate intermodal or rail equipment or 
facilities, including track, components of track, bridges, yards, buildings and shops; refinance outstanding debt 
incurred for the purposes listed above; and develop or establish new intermodal or railroad facilities.  
 192 
authorized to provide direct loans and loan guarantees up to $35.0 billion.  Up to $7.0 billion is 
reserved for projects benefiting freight railroads other than Class I carriers.  However, the 
program has lent less than $650 million to non-passenger rail carriers since 2002, according to 
the FRA/RRIF website. 
  
 The American Association of State Highway Transportation Officials (AASHTO) 
estimates that between $175 billion and $195 billion must be invested over a 20-year period to 
upgrade the rail system to handle the anticipated growth in freight demand, according to the 
report’s base-case scenario.422  The report suggests that railroads should be able to provide up to 
$142 billion from revenue and borrowing, but that the remainder would have to come from other 
sources including, but not limited, to loans, tax credits, sale of assets, and other forms or public-
sector participation.  Given the reported historical investment in rail infrastructure, it may be 
reasonable to assume that rail carriers would be able to manage the $7.1 billion in annual 
investment from rail carriers that AASHTO projects would be needed to keep pace with the 
projected increase in freight demand.   
 
 The Association of American Railroads (AAR) estimates423 that meeting the increase in 
demand for rail freight transportation will require an investment in infrastructure of $148 billion 
(in 2007 dollars) over the next 28 years and that Class I railroads' share is projected to be $135 
billion, with $13 billion projected for short line and regional freight railroads.  
 
 In testimony before the STB, Class I railroads committed to working with all parties in 
the ethanol logistical chains to provide safe, cost-effective, and reliable ethanol transportation 
services as well as to resolve past freight rail capacity difficulties.  Presumably, this commitment 
extends to the projected three-percent increase in overall freight tonnage envisioned herein. 
 
 However, the Government Accounting Office (GAO) found that it is not possible to 
independently confirm statements made by Class I rail carriers regarding future investment 
plans.BBBB   In addition, questions persist regarding allocation of these investments, with the 
Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers, American Chemistry Council, National Industrial 
Transportation League, and others expressing concern that their infrastructural needs may be 
neglected by the Class I railroads in favor of more lucrative intermodal traffic.  Moreover, the 
GAO has raised questions regarding the competitive nature and extent of Class I freight rail 
transport.  This raises some concern that providing sufficient resources to facilitate the transport 
of increasing volumes of ethanol and biodiesel might not be a first priority for rail carriers.  In 
response to GAO concerns, the Surface Transportation Board (STB) agreed to undertake a 
rigorous analysis of competition in the freight railroad industry.CCCC 
                                                 
BBBB
 The railroads interviewed by GAO were generally unwilling to discuss their future investment plans with the 
GAO.  Therefore, GAO was unable to comment on how Class I freight rail companies are likely to choose among 
their competing investment priorities for the future, including those of the rail infrastructure, GAO testimony Before 
the Subcommittee on Surface Transportation and Merchant Marine, Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and 
Transportation, U.S. Senate, Freight Railroads Preliminary Observations on Rates, Competition, and Capacity 
Issues, Statement of JayEtta Z. Hecker, Director, Physical Infrastructure Issues, GAO, GAO-06-898T Washington, 
D.C.: June, 21, 2006). 
CCCC
 GAO, Freight Railroads: Industry Health Has Improved, but Concerns about Competition and Capacity 
Should Be Addressed, GAO-07-94 (Washington, D.C.: Oct. 6, 2006); GAO, Freight Railroads: Updated 
Information on Rates and Other Industry Trends, GAO-07-291R Freight Railroads (Washington, D.C.: Aug. 15, 
 193 
 
 Given the broad importance to the U.S. economy of meeting the anticipated increase in 
freight rail demand, and the substantial resources that seem likely to be focused on this cause, we 
believe that overall freight rail capacity would not be a limiting factor to the successful 
implementation of the biofuel requirements under the RFS2 standards.  Evidence from the recent 
ramp up of ethanol use has also shown that rail carriers are enthusiastically pursuing the 
shipment of ethanol, although there is some indication that the Class I freight rail industry will 
expect ethanol to primarily be shipped by unit train from facilities that assemble unit trains 
which are developed and paid for by the ethanol industry. 
 
 Class 2 railroads have been particularly active in gathering sufficient numbers of ethanol 
cars to allow Class 1 railroads to ship ethanol by unit train.  Based on this recent experience, we 
believe that ethanol will be able to compete successfully with other commodities in securing its 
share of freight rail service. 
 
 While many changes to the overall freight rail system are expected to occur irrespective 
of today’s proposed rule, a number of ethanol-specific modifications will be needed.  For 
instance, a number of additional rail terminals are likely to be configured for receipt of unit trains 
of ethanol for further distribution by tank truck or other means to petroleum terminals.  Each 
ethanol rail car holds approximately 29,500 gallons.DDDD  Thus, each 100 car unit train would 
deliver 2,950,000 gallons of ethanol.  We believe that it would be reasonable for an ethanol unit 
train facility to accept a unit train approximately every 3 days.  Thus, we assumed that each unit 
train facility could handle 120 unit trains per year which translates to 354 million gallons per 
year for each unit train facility.   Based on the volumes we projected to be transported by unit 
train in Table 1.6-1 of this DRIA, this translates to a total of 68 unit train receipt facilities for all 
ethanol used by 2022 and 42 such facilities to handle the volume attributed to the RFS2 
standards alone (relative to the AEO 2007 based 2022 reference case).  As discussed in Section 
1.6.2 of this DRIA, we are assuming that half of the unit train receipt facilities needed to cope 
with the additional volumes of ethanol projected to be used to comply with the RFS2 standards 
would be constructed at petroleum terminals (i.e. 21) and half would be constructed at rail 
terminals. 
 
As discussed in Section 1.6.2 of this DRIA, there is considerable uncertainty regarding 
the extent to which ethanol unit train receipt facilities can be placed at petroleum terminals.  The 
placement of ethanol receipt facilities at rail terminals would be particularly useful in situations 
where petroleum terminals would find it difficult or impossible to install their own ethanol rail 
receipt capability.  If the projected number of ethanol rail receipt facilities can not be 
accommodated at petroleum terminals then additional ethanol unit train receipt facilities would 
be needed at rail terminals.EEEE  We do not have information on the extent to which there is 
available space at rail terminals to accommodate ethanol receipt facilities.  However, the 
                                                                                                                                                             
2007).  STB's final report, entitled Report to the U.S. STB on Competition and Related Issues in the U.S. Freight 
Railroad Industry, is expected to be completed November, 1, 2008. 
DDDD
 Ethanol cars have a nominal capacity of 30,000 gallons. 
EEEE
 As discussed in Section 1.6.6 of this DRIA, we estimate that 148 additional manifest rail receipt facilities would 
be constructed at petroleum terminals to handle the volumes of ethanol that we project would be shipped by 
manifest rail.  
 194 
majority of the required space would be needed to locate the train itself, the facilities for which 
would already be in place at rail terminals.  We expect the other space requirements for truck 
loading and storage tanks would be relatively modest and could be accommodated at a sufficient 
number of rail terminals to meet the projected need.  The need for long-term demand to be 
established prior the construction of such facilities would likely mean that the needed facilities 
would at best come on line in a just-in-time basis.  We anticipate that ethanol storage will 
typically be installed at rail terminal ethanol receipt hubs over the long run.  However, the ability 
to rely on transloading while ethanol storage facilities at rail terminal ethanol receipt hub 
facilities are constructed would help to ease the introduction of downstream rail receipt 
capability. 
 
 We anticipate that rail terminals would only install the minimum amount of ethanol 
storage capacity in order to maintain steady deliveries by unit train.  This is based on the 
assumption that petroleum terminals would be the ones to maintain an inventory buffer to ensure 
a steady supply of ethanol to blend with gasoline.FFFF  Under this model, rail terminals would 
empty their ethanol storage by shipment to petroleum terminals as soon as possible.  Therefore, 
we believe that it not appropriate to apply the formula we used to estimate the ethanol storage 
tank requirements at petroleum terminals which is based on the premise of always having ethanol 
on hand even the face of temporary upsets in delivery.  Each delivery of an ethanol unit train 
contains 2.95 million gallons.  To ensure that a rail terminal is always ready to unload an ethanol 
unit train, we believe that it would be sufficient to size the ethanol storage capacity at 6 times 
unit train capacity (17.7 million gallons).  This should allow for a reasonable amount of 
irregularity in both the receipt of ethanol by unit train into rail terminals and the delivery of 
ethanol from rail terminal storage to petroleum terminals.  For all of the projected 21 rail 
terminal ethanol unit train receipt facilities, this totals 371.7 million gallons or 8.85 million 
barrels of ethanol storage.  All of the ethanol storage at rail terminals would need to be new 
construction, since we do not believe there would be existing tankage at rail terminals that could 
be converted to ethanol service. 
 
A substantial number of additional rail cars would be needed to transport the volumes of 
ethanol and to a lesser extent biodiesel that are projected to be used in response to the RFS2 
standards.  Our estimate of the number of rail cars needed is based on the an assumed cycle time 
of 2 weeks for shipment by unit train and one month for shipment by manifest rail car which we 
believe is conservatively high given current industry experience.GGGG  Biodiesel rail cars are 
typically somewhat smaller than those used for ethanol.  We assumed a deliverable volume of 
25,600 gallons for biodiesel rail cars and 29,000 for ethanol rail cars.  We estimated the number 
of rail cars that would be needed to transport ethanol and biodiesel using the projected volumes 
of ethanol and biodiesel that we expect would be shipped by unit train and manifest rail (see 
Tables 1.6-1 and 1.6-2) and the assumed rail car volumes and cycle times.   As discussed in 
Section 1.6.1.3, we project that renewable diesel fuel would not need to be transported by rail.  
Our estimate of the number of rail cars to transport the volume of renewable fuels projected to be 
used by 2022 to satisfy the RFS2 standards is contained in Table 1.6-4.  
 
                                                 
FFFF
 A discussion of the projected demand for ethanol storage is contained in Section 1.6.6 of this DRIA. 
GGGG
 Rail car cycle time refers to the time needed to complete one delivery and return to the origin including the 
time to prepare for the next shipment.   
 195 
Table 1.6-4. 
Estimated Number of Rail Cars Needed by 2022  
for Shipment of Ethanol and Biodiesel 
 
 Number of Rail Cars Needed to Transport Ethanol 
 Total Volume Volume Attributed to RFS2 Standards a 
Ethanol Rail Cars 43,398 26,644 
Biodiesel Rail Cars      665      353 
Ethanol & Biodiesel Rail Cars 44,063 26,997 
a
 Total – the AEO 2007 based 2022 reference case absent the RFS2 standards 
 
Our analysis of ethanol and biodiesel rail car production capacity indicates that access to 
these cars should not represent a serious impediment to meeting the requirements under the 
RFS2 standards.  Ethanol tank car production has increased approximately 30% per year since 
2003, with over 21,000 tank cars expected to be produced in 2007.  To accommodate the 
increased demand for ethanol tank cars, rail car producers converted existing boxcar production 
facilities to tank production facilities and brought on additional work shifts to adjust to rapidly 
changing to market conditions. 
 
1.6.7 Marine Transportation System Accommodations 
 
   The American Waterway’s Association has expressed concerns about the need to 
upgrade the inland waterway system in order to keep pace with the anticipated increase in overall 
freight demand.  The majority of these concerns have been focused on the need to upgrade the 
river lock system on the Mississippi river to accommodate longer barge tows and on dredging 
inland waterways to allow for movement of fully loaded vessels.  We do not anticipate that a 
substantial fraction of renewable/alternative fuels will be transported via these arteries.  Thus, we 
do not believe that the ability to ship ethanol/biodiesel by inland marine will represent a serious 
barrier to the implementation of implementation of the requirements under RFS2 standards.  
Substantial quantities of the corn ethanol co-product dried distiller grains (DDG) is expected to 
be exported from the Midwest via the Mississippi river as the US demand for DDG becomes 
saturated.  We anticipate that the volume of exported DDG would take the place of corn that 
would be shifted from export to domestic use in the production of ethanol.  Thus, we do not 
expect the increase in DDG exports to result in a substantial increase in river freight traffic. 
 
A number of new barges would be needed to transport the volumes of ethanol and to a 
lesser extent biodiesel that are projected to be used in response to the RFS2 standards.  We 
assumed the use of tank barges with a carrying capacity of 10,000 barrels (42,000 gallons).  We 
understand that the tank barge industry is trending towards the use of tank barges with a carrying 
capacity of 30,000 barrels.  Thus, our assumed use of 10,000 barrel barges may overstate the 
number of barges that would be needed.  We assumed a 2 week barge cycle time, which we 
 196 
understand to be typical given the markets where we expect most barge shipments would 
occur.HHHH  
 
We estimated the number of barges that would be needed to transport ethanol and 
biodiesel using the projected volumes of ethanol and biodiesel that we expect would be shipped 
by barge (see Tables 1.6-1 and 1.6-2), and the assumed barge volume and cycle time.  As 
discussed in Section 1.6.1.3, we project that renewable diesel fuel would not need to be 
transported by barge.  Our estimate of the number of barges to transport the volume of renewable 
fuels projected to be used by 2022 to satisfy the RFS2 standards is contained in Table 1.6-5.  
 
Table 1.6-5. 
Estimated Number of Barges Needed by 2022  
for Shipment of Ethanol and Biodiesel 
 
 Number of Barges Needed to Transport  
Ethanol and Biodiesel  
 Total Volume Volume Attributed to RFS2 Standards a  
Ethanol Barges 213 131 
Biodiesel Barges 20 11 
Ethanol & Biodiesel Barges 233 142 
a
  Total – the AEO 2007 based 2022 reference case absent the RFS2 standards 
 
The U.S. tank barge fleet currently numbers 3,600.424  In 2004, over 500 barges of all 
types were added to the U.S. barge fleet.  Given the gradual ramp up in demand for shipment of 
biofuels by barge over time, we believe that the addition to the fleet of the 142 barges estimated 
to be needed to transport biofuels can be accommodated by the industry. 
  
 As discussed in Section 1.5.2.2 of this DRIA, we project that imports of ethanol will 
ramp up significantly to 3.14 BGY by 2022.425  To estimate which ports would receive ethanol 
imports we gave priority to ports that have a history of receiving ethanol imports from Brazil and 
Caribbean Basin Initiative CountiesIIII according to company-level historical fuel import data 
from the Energy Information Administration (EIA).426  Additional ports were selected from those 
that have a history of receiving finished gasoline imports.  Ports were selected in States that 
could not satisfy their internal ethanol demand from in-State production and from those ports that 
were closest to large demand centers.  We estimate that a total of 28 ports would receive 
imported ethanol by 2022 (see Figure 1.6-1).JJJJ  We estimate that the 12 ports which did not 
                                                 
HHHH
 We believe most barge shipments of biofuels would originate and terminate in the Northeast.  Cycle time refers 
to the time needed to complete one delivery and return to the origin including the time to prepare for the next 
shipment.   
IIII
 Caribbean Basin Initiative countries receive special exemptions from U.S. ethanol import tariffs (See Section 1.5 
of this DRIA regarding the source of ethanol imports and for additional discussion regarding how we estimated 
where ethanol imports would enter the U.S..   
JJJJ
 Paulsboro/Gloucester NJ were treated as separate ports for purposes of our capital cost analysis but were treated 
as a single port for the purposes of our ethanol freight costs analysis due to their close proximity.  The same is true 
for Belfast and Searsport ME.  
 197 
receive ethanol in the past would need to install/modify ethanol receipt facilities including 
piping, pumps, vapor handling systems, and ethanol storage tanks while ports that had received 
ethanol in the past would primarily need to install additional ethanol storage tanks.  We believe 
that all of these ports also serve as petroleum terminals.  Hence, the need for additional ethanol 
storage as well as outgoing ethanol shipping facilities would be covered within the context of our 
estimation of the upgrades needed to petroleum terminal facilities.   
 
 
 
Figure 1.6-1.  Projected Ethanol Import Locations and Volumes (MGY) in 2022 
 
 
Note:  We are considering adding Hampton Roads VA, and Baltimore MD to the list of future ethanol import 
locations and may adjust our analysis for the final rule accordingly.  This figure is the same as figure 1.5-13 and is 
repeated here for reference purposes. 
 
1.6.8 Accommodations to the to the Road Transportation System 
 
We estimated the number of tank trucks that would be needed to transport ethanol, 
biodiesel, and renewable diesel fuel using the projected volumes of ethanol and biodiesel that we 
expect would be shipped by tank truck (see Table 1.6-1, Table 1.6-2, and Section 1.6.4 of this 
DRIA ), and the assumed tank truck volume and cycle times.  In all cases, we assumed a tank 
truck capacity of 8,000 gallons.  Larger tank trucks are permitted in some areas, so this 
assumption will tend to overestimate of the number of tank trucks needed.  We assumed 312 
truck shipping days per year and two 8 hour shifts.  For shipments of ethanol from 
production/import facilities to petroleum terminals we assumed 3.75 shipments per day (4 hours 
Seattle, WA (73) 
Vancouver, WA (16) 
Portland, OR (13) 
San Francisco (25) 
& Selby, CA (81) 
Los Angeles, CA (539) 
Honolulu, HI (19) 
Port Arthur (24),  
Houston (424), & 
Brownsville, TX (34) 
Tampa, FL (121) 
Port Everglades, FL (179 ) 
Port Canaveral, FL (64) 
Jacksonville, FL (106) 
Savannah, GA (198) 
Charleston, SC (79) 
Wilmington, NC (153) 
Philadelphia, PA (246) 
Newark (56),  
Perth Amboy (102), & 
Paulsboro, NJ (39) 
New York, NY (299) 
New Haven (36) & 
Bridgeport, CT (42) 
Providence, RI (24) 
Boston, MA (143) 
Belfast/Searsport (<1) 
& Portland, ME (1) 
Total U.S. Ethanol Imports in 2022 = 3,140 Million Gallons 
 198 
for round trip).  For secondary ethanol shipments from hub to satellite terminals, we assumed 6 
shipments per day (2.5 hours per round trip).  For shipments of biodiesel and renewable diesel 
fuel from production facilities to terminals, we assumed 6 shipments per day.  We believe that 
the shorter shipping distance for tank truck transport from biodiesel production facilities is 
justified based on the greater dispersion of such facilities relative to ethanol facilities and the fact 
that some would be located at petroleum terminals.   
 
Tables 1.6-6 and 1.6-7 contain our estimates of the number of new tractor trailer tank 
trucks and truck drivers that would be needed by 2022 to transport the additional volumes of 
ethanol, biodiesel, and renewable diesel fuel that are projected to be used in response to the 
proposed RFS2 standards.  Our estimate of the number of truck drivers that would be needed is 
based on the assumption that each tank truck would be operated for two shifts with one driver for 
each shift. 
 
Table 1.6-6. 
Estimated Number of Tank Trucks Needed by 2022  
to Transport Ethanol, Biodiesel, and Renewable Diesel Fuel 
 
 Number of Tank Trucks Needed for the Transport of 
Ethanol, Biodiesel, and Renewable Diesel Fuel 
 Total Volume Volume Attributed to RFS2 Standards a  
Ethanol 2,022 1,241 
Biodiesel     74      39 
Renewable Diesel       8       8 
All Biofuels 2,106 1,288 
 
a
  Total – the AEO 2007 based 2022 reference case absent the RFS2 standards 
 
 
Table 1.6-7. 
Estimated Number of Tank Truck Drivers needed by 2022  
to Transport Ethanol, Biodiesel, and Renewable Diesel Fuel 
 
 Number of Tank Truck Drivers Needed to Transport 
Ethanol, Biodiesel, and Renewable Diesel Fuel 
 Total Volume Volume Attributed to RFS2 Standards a  
Ethanol 4,044 2,483 
Biodiesel    148      78 
Renewable Diesel      16     16 
All Biofuels 4,208 2,577 
 
a
  Total – the AEO 2007 based 2022 reference case absent the RFS2 standards 
 
 According to a 2005 study commissioned by the American Trucking Association (ATA), 
the motor carrier industry will face a shortage of qualified professional long-haul truck drivers by 
2014.427  In the study, ATA found that the long-haul, heavy-duty truck transportation industry in 
 199 
the United States is currently experiencing a national shortage of 20,000 truck drivers and, if the 
current trend continues, that shortage of long-haul truck drivers could increase to 111,000 by 
2014.  ATA projected the need for additional 54,000 drivers each year.  The trucking industry is 
active in a number of efforts to attract and retrain a sufficient number of new truck drivers 
including ATA’s National Truck Driver Recruiting Campaign and Driver Tuition Finance 
Program. 
 
As discussed above, we estimate that the growth in the transportation of biofuels by truck 
through 2022 due to the RFS2 standards would result in the need for a total of approximately 
2,600 additional trucks drivers.  Given the relatively small number of new truck drivers needed 
to transport the volumes of biofuels projected to be used to comply with the RFS2 standards 
through 2022 compared to the total expected increase in demand for drivers over the same time 
period (>750,000), we do not expect that the implementation of the RFS2 standards would 
substantially exacerbate the potential for an overall shortage of truck drivers.  However, 
specially-certified drivers are required to transport biofuels because these fuels are classified as 
hazardous liquids.  Thus, there may be a heightened level of concern about the ability to secure a 
sufficient number of such specially-certified drivers to transport biofuels.  The trucking industry 
is involved in efforts to streamline the certification of drivers for hazardous liquids transport.  
We do not anticipate that the need for special hazardous liquids certification for biofuels truck 
drivers of would substantially interfere with the ability to transport the projected volumes of 
biofuels by tank truck.  We project that tank truck deliveries of biofuels would typically be 
accomplished within an 8 hour shift allowing the driver to return home each evening.KKKK  The 
ATA sponsored study indicated that there was particular difficulty in attracting and retaining 
drivers for long haul routes the keep the driver away from home overnight.  Thus, driving a tank 
truck (with typical 8 hour shift) may be relatively more attractive compared to a long haul truck 
driving position.  
 
 Truck transport of biofuel feedstocks to production plants and finished biofuels and co-
products from these plants naturally is concentrated on routes to and from these production 
plants.  This may raise concerns about the potential impact on road congestion and road 
maintenance in areas in the proximity of these facilities.  We do not expect that such potential 
concerns would represent a barrier to the implementation of the RFS2 standards.  The potential 
impact on local road infrastructure and the ability of the road net to be upgraded to handle the 
increased traffic load is an inherent part in the placement of new biofuel production facilities.  
Consequently, we expect that any issues or concerns would be dealt with at the local level.  The 
transport of biofuel feedstocks is discussed in Section 1.3.3 of this DRIA. 
 
1.6.9 Petroleum Terminal Accommodations 
 
  Terminals will need to install additional storage capacity to accommodate the volume of 
ethanol/biodiesel that we anticipate will be used in response to the RFS2 standards.  By 2022, an 
additional 20.96 BGY of ethanol would be used as a result of the RFS2 standards.LLLL  We 
                                                 
KKKK
 A small fraction of biofuels deliveries may require a sleep-over on the road of the driver due to limitations on 
the amount of time a driver can spend behind the wheel in a day. 
LLLL
 A total of 34.14 BGY of ethanol would be used by 2022 under the RFS2 standards.   13.18 BGY is projected to 
have been used in the absence of the RFS2 standards under the AEO 2007 based 2022 reference case.  See Section 
 200 
estimate that it would be necessary to maintain an inventory level of 15% of annual ethanol 
consumption at the terminal level in order to provide a sufficient downstream buffer to ensure 
consistent supply.  We chose a working inventory level of 15% rather than the 10% that is 
typical for petroleum-based fuels to compensate for the potential increase in temporary 
disruptions in ethanol delivery compared to petroleum-based fuels.  We believe that this is 
appropriate due to the reliance on rail, barge, and truck for the transport of biofuels as opposed to 
use of pipelines for the shipment of petroleum-based fuels.  Accommodating a 15% working 
inventory equates to 3.14 BG or 74.9 million barrels of additional ethanol storage at terminals 
due to the RFS2 standard.  We further estimate that an additional 30% of ethanol storage (22.4 
million barrels) would be needed as working space to accommodate ethanol deliveries.MMMM  
Thus we project that a total of 97.3 million barrels of additional ethanol storage would be needed 
at petroleum terminals due to the RFS2 standards.NNNN  
 
 Overall demand for the gasoline motor vehicle fuel is expected to remain relatively 
constant through 2022.428  Thus, much of the demand for new ethanol storage could be 
accommodated by modifying storage tanks that had previously been used for the gasoline that 
would be displaced by ethanol.  Due to the lower energy density of ethanol relative to gasoline 
(67%), we project that only 67% of the demand for new ethanol storage (65.2 million barrels) 
could be accommodated by modifying existing gasoline tanks for ethanol service.  Therefore, we 
project that 32.1 million barrels of new ethanol storage tanks would be need to be constructed at 
petroleum terminals. 
 
By 2022, an additional 430 MGY of biodiesel would be used as a result of the RFS2 
standards.OOOO  We used the same terminal tankage sizing factors used above for ethanol to 
estimate the volume of new biodiesel storage volume that would be needed at petroleum 
terminals.  This results in an estimated need for an additional 77.4 million gallons or 1.84 million 
barrels of new biodiesel storage space at petroleum terminals as a result of the RFS2 standards.  
Our projections of the growth in diesel fuel demand indicate that there would not be the 
opportunity to switch tanks currently in petroleum-based diesel fuel service to biodiesel service.  
Thus, all of the demand for new biodiesel storage would need to be satisfied through the 
construction of new tanks.  Biodiesel storage tanks would need to be insulated/heated in colder 
climes.  
 
Concerns have been raised by terminal operators in the Eastern U.S. about the ability of 
some terminals to install the needed storage capacity due to space constraints and difficulties in 
securing permits.429  We acknowledge that it may not be possible for some terminals that have 
become surrounded by urban growth over time to install additional storage tanks within the 
                                                                                                                                                             
1.5 of this DRIA for a discussion of projected ethanol volumes that would be used under the RFS2 standards and 
under the reference cases. 
MMMM
 Petroleum terminals typically allow an additional 30 percent of storage capacity (in relation to the amount 
provided for working inventory) to accommodate the receipt of petroleum products.  
NNNN
 We also project that 8.8 million barrels of new ethanol storage would be needed at rail terminals that act as 
ethanol unit train receipt facilities as discussed in Section 1.6.4 of this DRIA. 
OOOO
 A total of 810MGY of biodiesel would be used by 2022 under the RFS2 standards.   380 MGY is projected to 
have been used in the absence of the RFS2 standards under the AEO 2007 based 2022 reference case.  See Section 
1.5 of this DRIA for a discussion of projected biodiesel volumes that would be used under the RFS2 standards and 
under the reference cases. 
 201 
boundaries of their existing facilities.  However, we believe that there are ways to manage this 
situation.  The areas served by existing terminals often overlap.  In such cases, one terminal 
might be space constrained while another serving the same area may be able to install the 
additional capacity to meet the increase in demand.  Terminals with limited ethanol storage (or 
no access to rail/barge ethanol shipments) could receive truck shipments of ethanol from 
terminals with more substantial ethanol storage (and rail/barge receipt) capacity.  The trend 
towards locating ethanol receipt and storage capability at rail terminals located near petroleum 
terminals is likely to be an important factor in reducing the need for large volume ethanol receipt 
and storage facilities at some petroleum terminals.  In cases where it is impossible for existing 
terminals to sufficiently expand their storage capacity due to a lack of adjacent available land or 
difficulties in securing the necessary permits or to make arrangements to sufficiently reduce the 
need for such additional storage, new satellite storage or new separate terminal facilities may be 
need for additional ethanol storage.  However, we believe that there will be few (if any) such 
situations.   
 
As discussed below, we project that all terminals that distribute gasoline would install 
ethanol blending capability in response to the RFS2 standards.  However, we estimate that only 
44% of terminals that distribute diesel would install biodiesel blending/storage capability under 
the RFS2 standards.  Therefore, in the case of biodiesel, those terminals that would experience 
that most difficulty in installing new storage capacity could forgo bringing biodiesel into their 
terminal   
 
 Another question is whether the storage tank construction industry would be able to keep 
pace with the increased demand for new tanks that would result from today’s proposal.  The 
storage tank construction industry recently experienced a sharp increase in demand after years of 
relatively slack demand for new tankage.  Much of this increase in demand was due to the 
unprecedented increase in the use of ethanol.  Storage tank construction companies have been 
increasing their capabilities which had been pared back during lean times.  Given the projected 
gradual increase in the need for biofuel storage tanks, it seems reasonable to conclude that the 
storage tank construction industry would be able to keep pace with the projected demand. 
 
 Petroleum terminals would need to install additional equipment to blend ethanol with 
gasoline as well as making other miscellaneous upgrades to piping, pumps, seals, and vapor 
recovery systems to ensure ethanol compatibility.  There are currently 1,063 petroleum terminals 
that carry gasoline.430  We project that 899 of these terminals (85% of the total) would install 
E10 blending equipment absent the implementation of today’s proposed requirements in order to 
support the consumption of 13.18 BGY of ethanol by 2022 under the reference case.  This is 
based on 85% of the gasoline needing to be blended with ethanol in order to consume 13.18 
BGY of ethanol considering the projected use levels of E10 versus E85 and total motor vehicle 
fuel consumption in 2022.431   We project that essentially all gasoline would be either E10 or E85 
by 2022 under the RFS2 standards.  Thus, we estimate that all terminals would need to have 
ethanol blending capability to support the use of the volume of ethanol we project would be used 
under the RFS2 standards.  Based on our projection that 899 terminals would install ethanol 
blending capability absent the RFS2 standards, we estimate that 164 terminals would need to 
install ethanol blending equipment as a result of the proposed requirements.   
 
 202 
We estimate that E85 would need to be reasonably available in 70% of the nation in order 
to support the use of the projected volume of E85 needed to comply with the proposed 
standards.PPPP  To provide a conservatively high estimate, we are projecting that 90% of all 
gasoline terminals (931) would need to install E85 blending capability by 2022.  The remaining 
terminals (132 out of a total of 1,063) would only have E10 blending capability in 2022.  We 
estimate that the terminals which would have installed E10 blending capability absent the 
proposed standards would upgrade their E10 blending facilities to accommodate E85 as well as 
E10.  This is based on the assumption that those terminals that were the first to blend E10 would 
also be the first to begin blending E85.  Input from terminal operators indicates that the 
modification of E10 blending equipment to handle E85 primarily involves an upgrade to the 
blending equipment software.QQQQ  We estimate that the vapor recovery systems at all terminals 
that had not received ethanol before would need to be upgraded to handle ethanol-blended 
gasoline. 
 
 We considered the following in estimating the number of terminals that would 
store/blend biodiesel in response to the RFS2 standards.  We estimate that 853 terminals handle 
diesel fuel.432  We estimate that approximately 62.5 billion gallons of diesel fuel would be used 
in 2022.RRRR  Thus, the average diesel throughput per terminal would be approximately 73.2 
MGY.  We estimate that on a national average basis biodiesel would represent approximately 
2.9% of the diesel fuel pool.  For the purposes of our calculation of the number of terminals that 
would carry biodiesel, we assumed that 2.9% of the diesel fuel they dispense would be biodiesel.  
This is likely to result in a conservatively high number of terminals that would need to carry 
biodiesel, since those terminals that do carry biodiesel would be expected too blend at higher 
than the national average concentration.  Assuming that 2.9% of a terminal’s diesel fuel 
throughput would be biodiesel, we arrive at an estimate that 377 terminals would need to blend 
biodiesel to support the projected use of 810 MGY of biodiesel by 2022 under the RFS2 
standards.  We estimate that 200 terminals would need to store/blend biodiesel in order to 
support the use of volume of biodiesel that we estimate would be used as a result of the RFS2 
standards  relative to the AEO 2007 380 MGY 2022 baseline    
 
New equipment will be needed at terminals to facilitate the receipt of ethanol by   truck, 
manifest rail car, and by unit train.  As discussed in Section 1.6.2, there is considerable 
uncertainty regarding the extent to which ethanol rail receipt facilities would be placed at 
petroleum terminals rather than at rail terminals.  As discussed in Section 1.6.3 of this DRIA, we 
estimate that half of the ethanol unit train receipt facilities (21) needed as a result of the RFS2 
standards would be placed at petroleum terminals and half would be placed at rail terminals.  In 
estimating the number of additional manifest rail car receipt facilities that would be needed at 
petroleum terminals, we assumed 5 deliveries per month of 8 cars at each facility.  This would 
result in the delivery of 1,180,000 gallons of ethanol per month which we believe to be 
reasonable, giving the anticipated motor vehicle gasoline throughput at terminals we expect 
would receive ethanol shipments by manifest rail car.  Based on the ethanol volumes we 
                                                 
PPPP
 A discussion of our E85 use projections is contained in chapter 1.7 of this DRIA. 
QQQQ
 Additional ethanol storage and modifications to terminal piping would also be needed to supply additional 
quantity of ethanol needed to blend E85. 
RRRR
 A discussion of our estimate of  biodiesel use in relation to the use of petroleum-based diesel is contained in 
Section 1.5.4 of this DRIA.  
 203 
projected to be transported by manifest rail car in Table 1.6-1 of this DRIA, this translates to a 
total of 241 manifest rail car receipt facilities for all ethanol used by 2022 and 148 such facilities 
to handle the volume attributed to the RFS2 standards alone (relative to the AEO 2007 based 
2022 reference case).  Lacking any specific data on the number of terminals that currently have 
rail receipt capability, we estimate that 50% of the terminals that install ethanol rail receipt 
capability would have already had an active rail connection and that 50% would need to install a 
short spur to connect to a nearby rail line.   
 
As discussed in Section 1.6.3 of this DRIA, we expect that to the extent that the projected 
number of ethanol rail receipt facilities could not be cited at petroleum terminals that they would 
be cited at rail terminals.  Petroleum terminals within trucking distance of each other are also 
likely to cooperate so that only one would need to install rail receipt capability.  Given the 
timeframe during which the projected volumes of ethanol ramp up, we believe that these means 
can be utilized to ensure that a sufficient number of terminals have access to ethanol shipped by 
rail although some will need to rely on secondary shipment by truck from large ethanol hub 
receipt facilities.   
 
We project that those terminals that would receive domestic shipments of ethanol by 
barge would have already installed the necessary barge offloading equipment.  Terminals that 
also serve as points of entry for imported ethanol which did not previously receive shipments of 
ethanol would need to install facilities to accept marine shipments of ethanol.  We estimate that 
there would be a total of 29 terminals that receive imported ethanol by 2022 and that 12 of these 
terminals would not have received ethanol shipments previously.SSSS  We do not project the need 
for additional facilities at terminals to accept receipts of biodiesel and renewable diesel fuel.  We 
expect that the facilities projected to be installed for ethanol could be used for biodiesel and 
renewable diesel fuel.  In the case of biodiesel, new heated/insulated transfer piping would be 
needed from the receipt facility to the storage tank.    
 
 The Independent Fuel Terminals Operators Association (IFTOA) stated that terminals are 
concerned that the market would not be able to adapt in time to ensure that the necessary 
distribution infrastructure accommodations are in place to support compliance with the timetable 
for the implementation of the RFS2 standards.433  Based on this concern, in a presentation at the 
recent SAE government-industry conference  
IFTOA suggested that EPA should consider reducing and or slowing the pace of the 
implementation of the RFS2 standards in order to allow the market sufficient time to adjust. 434  
We do not believe that there is sufficient reason at this time to conclude that the distribution 
system could not adapt sufficiently within the time frame established by statute for the 
implementation of the RFS2 standards.  We will continue to monitor the progress made to by the 
distribution system to make the necessary changes.  To the extent that the fuel distribution 
industry experiences difficulty in installing the needed storage tanks and blending equipment, the 
continuation of the interim practices of transloading and splash blending would help to bridge the 
gap.  
 
The RFG and anti-dumping regulations currently require certified gasoline to be blended 
with denatured ethanol to produce E 85.  The gasoline must meet all applicable RFG and anti-
                                                 
SSSS
 See Section 6.1.5 of this DRIA for a discussion of ethanol import locations. 
 204 
dumping standards for the time and place where it is sold.  We understand that some parties may 
be blending butanes and or pentanes into gasoline before it is blended with denatured ethanol in 
order to meet ASTM minimum volatility specifications for E85 that were set to ensure proper 
driveability, particularly in the winter. TTTT  If terminal operators add blendstocks to finished 
gasoline for use in manufacturing E85, the terminal operator would need to register as a refiner 
with EPA and meet all applicable standards for refiners. 
 
Recent testing has shown that much of in-use E85 does not meet minimum ASTM 
volatility specifications. UUUU  However, it is unclear if noncompliance with these specifications 
has resulted in a commensurate adverse impact on driveability.  This has prompted a re-
evaluation of the fuel volatility requirements for in-use E85 vehicles and whether the ASTM E85 
volatility specifications might be relaxed. VVVV  For the purpose of our analysis, we are assuming 
that certified gasoline currently on hand at terminals can be used to make up the non-ethanol 
portion of E85.WWWW 
 
We will continue to evaluate the extent that special blendstocks would be used to 
manufacture E85 at terminals particularly in light of the outcome of the ASTM process and 
adjust our estimates for the final rule as appropriate.  Input from industry indicates that it is not 
common for gasoline terminals to have butane/pentane storage capability.  This input further 
indicates that the space requirements for citing a pressurized butane storage vessel make 
installation of butane storage at some terminals impractical.  If special gasoline blendstocks not 
typically found at terminals are needed for the manufacture of E85, there could be substantial 
additional costs and logistical challenges associated with shipping these blendstocks to terminals. 
 
1.6.10 Additional E85 Retail Facilities 
 
 As discussed in Section 1.7.1.2 of this DRIA, we estimate that end-users would need to 
have reasonable access to E85 in 70% of the nation by 2022 given our projections regarding the 
population of flexible fuel vehicles (FFVs) and E85 refueling frequencies.435  We define 
reasonable access as one in four gasoline retail facilities offering E85 in fashion consistent with 
the way they currently offer gasoline.  We selected one in four based on a review of the number 
of facilities that have been postulated to be needed to support the introduction of alternative fuels 
vehicles such as hydrogen and natural gas vehicles, the number of facilities that currently offer 
diesel fuel, and industry estimates regarding the number of E85 facilities that would be needed.  
One in five to one in three retail facilities has been discussed as a reasonable rule of thumb 
regarding the number of retail facilities needed to support the widespread introduction of 
alternative fuel vehicles. 
 
                                                 
TTTT
 “Specification for Fuel Ethanol (Ed75-Ed85) for Spark-Ignition Engines”, American Society for Testing and 
Materials standard ASTM D5798.   
UUUU
 Coordinating Research Council (CRC) report No. E-79-2, Summary of the Study of E85 Fuel in the USA 
Winter 2006-2007, May 2007. http://www.crcao.org/reports/recentstudies2007/E-79-2/E-79-
2%20E85%20Summary%20Report%202007.pdf    
VVVV
 CRC Cold Start and Warm-up E85 Driveability Program, 
http://www.crcao.com/about/Annual%20Report/2007%20Annual%20Report/Perform/CM-133.htm   
WWWW
 This is different from the approach taken in the refinery modeling which assumed that special blendstocks 
would be used to blend E85.  A discussion of the refinery modeling can be found in Section 4 of this DRIA. 
 205 
We estimate that approximately one in three fuel retail facilities (32%) offered diesel fuel 
in 1999 based on our review of fuel retailer survey data.436  The National Association of 
Convenience Stores (NACS) reported that in 2006, 36.6% of the respondents to their survey 
offered diesel fuel.437  We believe that given that NACS members typically do not include truck 
stop operators (who all offer diesel fuel) that that it is most likely that the number of diesel fuel 
retailers has increased since 1999.  Since fuel retailers make most of their money from in-store 
sales as opposed to fuel sales, it seems likely that more retailers recognized an opportunity to 
attract additional customers by offering diesel fuel since 1999.  In any event, the number of 
diesel fuel refueling facilities available in 1999 or 2006 has not hindered the use of diesel fuel 
vehicles.  Unlike diesel fuel vehicles that can refuel only on diesel fuel, flex fuel vehicles can 
refuel on gasoline as well as E85.  We project that flex-fuel vehicles would only refuel on E85 
70% of the time in order to meet the ethanol consumption goals necessary to support the RFS2 
standards.XXXX  Thus, we believe that the percentage of total fuel retail facilities that sell diesel 
fuel (32% based on our 1999 estimate) serves as an upper bound regarding the number of E85 
retail facilities that would be needed.   
 
At the same many time fleet operators were divesting of their in-house fueling facilities 
because of new environmental regulations, most retailers were installing equipment to blend 
mid-grade gasoline at the pump rather than store a separate mid-grade gasoline.  This allowed for 
a significant number of retailers to begin offering diesel fuel at relatively low capital cost by 
converting storage tanks that had been dedicated to mid-grade gasoline storage to diesel fuel 
service.  A number of retail facilities (40% of the total that installed diesel fuel tanks had low 
annual diesel throughput volumes of less than 60,000 gallons per year in 2000.438  Only 5% of 
total diesel retail sales are estimated to be sold at these low-volume retailers.  Given that the 
installation of some diesel retail facilities was not strictly driven on the expectation or realization 
of substantial throughput, it seems reasonable to assume that some fraction of low-volume 
retailers may not be absolutely necessary to ensure adequate diesel availability.  Therefore, 
somewhat less than 32% of retail facilities might actually be needed to ensure adequate diesel 
fuel availability.  We believe that this comparison to the number of diesel fuel retail facilities 
available supports our estimate that one in four retail facilities would be sufficient to provide 
reasonable access to E85. 
 
 By multiplying the one-in-four reasonable access assumption by the assumed 70% of the 
retail market that would need to have reasonable access to E85, and the total number of retail 
facilities, we arrived at our estimate that there would need to be a total of 28,750 E85 retail 
locations to facilitate the consumption of the amount of ethanol that we project would be used by 
2022 in response to the requirements under the RFS2 standards.  The National Ethanol Vehicle 
Coalition (NEVC) estimates there are currently 1,767 E85 refueling facilities.439  However, the 
NEVC estimate includes E85 refueling facilities that are not open to the general public.440  
“NEAR85” estimates that there are currently 1,247 E85 retail facilities.  The Near85 estimate 
includes only retail facilities.  Based on these data, we are assuming that there are approximately 
1,300 E85 retail facilities currently in service.   By growing the number of E85 retail facilities by 
the same proportion as the growth in our projections for the growth in ethanol use under the 
AEO 2007 based 2022 reference case, we estimate that 4,500 E85 refueling facilities would be in 
                                                 
XXXX
 A discussion of E85 refueling rates is contained in Section 1.7.1.2.4 of this DRIA.  
 206 
place by 2022 absent the RFS2 standards.  Thus, we estimate that today’s rule would result in the 
need for an additional 24,250 retail E85 facilities by 2022. 
 
We project that a number of E85 facilities would install multiple E85 pump stands.  We 
based our estimate on the number of facilities that would install multiple E85 pump stands on an 
evaluation of how the anticipated E85 use levels translate to daily throughput per delivery 
nozzle.  We estimate that by 2022 approximately 27.1 BGY of E85 would be used under the 
RFS2 standards.YYYY  We are assuming that all existing E85 refueling facilities and those that 
would be constructed absent the RFS2 standards have one pump stand each.  There are two 
delivery nozzles (i.e. refueling positions) per each pump stand.  Assuming that 40% of new E85 
retail facilities constructed due to the RFS2 standards install 2 pump stands (4 nozzles) and the 
remainder install a single pump stand results in a total of 76,900 E85 fueling positions (nozzles) 
by 2022.  We assumed an average E85 refueling volume of 15 gallons.  This translates to an 
annual E85 throughput per refueling position of 353,000 gallons or one refueling event every 22 
minutes.  We believe this may be a reasonable, albeit optimistic, assumption regarding the future 
use rates of E85 refueling equipment.  To evaluate the validity of this assessment, we reviewed 
historical data regarding the use rates for refueling equipment for other fuels.  
 
The National Association of Convenience Stores (NACS) reports throughput per 
refueling position.441  For all types of fuel dispensed, NACS reports that from 2001 through 
2006, the annual throughput varied from approximately 142,000 to 164,000 gallons per refueling 
position.  These data include reports on the sales of all fuels including premium, mid-grade, and 
regular gasoline, diesel fuel and other fuels.  The most appropriate comparison would be made to 
throughput from refueling positions that dispense only regular gasoline since the use of E85 
would primarily displace regular gasoline sales.  However, this is not possible given that most 
gasoline is dispensed from blender pumps that can dispense any gasoline grade.  Hence, we 
choose to make the comparison to throughput over dispensers that offer all gasoline grades, 
which may tend to underestimate the potential utilization rate of dispenser that dispenses only 
regular grade gasoline. 
 
  NACS reports that there is an average of 8.6 refueling positions at the retail facilities 
that responded to their survey.  NACS reports that 36.6% of stores sold diesel fuel and 15.1% 
sold “other” fuels (i.e. not diesel, regular, mid-grade, or premium gasoline).ZZZZ  To estimate 
how many refueling positions are dedicated to diesel fuel and “other” fuels, we assumed that 
retailers offer diesel fuel from one pump with two nozzles, and other fuels from one pump with 
one nozzle.  By multiplying the percentage of retailers that offer diesel fuel/other fuel by the 
assumed refueling positions for these fuels where they are present, we arrived at an estimate of 
0.9 refueling positions per facility on average dedicated to diesel fuel and other fuel.  This 
translates to an average of 7.7 refueling positions per facility that dispenses gasoline.  NACS 
reports that 92.7% of fuel volumes sold by respondents to their survey is gasoline (of all grades).  
By dividing 92.7% of the total average throughput for all fuels per facility reported by NACS by 
7.7 refueling positions, we arrived at an estimate of annual gasoline throughput per nozzle of 
                                                 
YYYY
 A discussion of our E85 use projections is contained in Section 1.7.1.2 of this DRIA. 
ZZZZ
 In many cases, we expect that the “other” fuel is kerosene. 
 207 
177,000 gallons for 2003.AAAAA  The estimated E85 throughput per nozzle under the assumption 
that 40% of new facilities would install four E85 refueling positions is nearly twice this figure.   
 
We anticipate that most new E85 refueling facilities would be installed at larger fuel 
retailers because these would be most forward looking with respect to attracting new customers, 
would be most likely to have the needed space, and be would have the best access to capital.  A 
higher throughput could be expected at larger fuel retailers compared to that across all retail 
facilities reflected in the NACS survey.  Thus, we believe that the projected level of E85 
refueling position throughput of 353,000 gallons per year may be attainable, albeit ambitious.  
We performed a sensitivity analysis to evaluate the effect on E85 refueling position throughput if 
additional E85 pumps were installed. 
 
If each of the 28,750 E85 refueling facilities that we estimate would be needed by 2022 
installed 2 E85 pumps/4 nozzles, the annual E85 throughput per nozzle would be 236,000 
gallons.  If each installed 3 E85 pumps/6 nozzles the annual E85 throughput per nozzle would be 
157,000 which is consistent with current gasoline pump utilization rates. We anticipate that some 
of the additional E85 pumps would take the place of existing gasoline pumps as E10 use is 
displaced by E85 use.  It is also possible that pumps could be configured to dispense E10 as well 
as E85.   
 
We assumed that one new 8,000 gallon E85 underground storage tank would be installed 
at each E85 refueling facility.  Based on our estimate of 28,750 E85 refueling facilities and the 
use of 27.125 BGY of E85 by 2022, annual E85 throughput per facility would be approximately 
943,000 gallons.  This translates to one 7,000 gallon E85 delivery by tank truck every 2.7 
days.BBBBB  We believe that this is a reasonable fuel delivery rate, particularly in light of our 
projection that new E85 facilities would likely be installed at the larger fuel retail facilities.  We 
believe that a number of larger retailers have multiple gasoline storage tanks.  Although not 
necessary to support E85 retail facility throughput, as E85 throughput ramps up and gasoline 
throughput decreases, some facilities may choose to retrofit one of their gasoline storage tanks to 
E85.  However, we understand that it may be difficult or impossible to confirm the compatibility 
of some existing underground storage tanks and other tank-related hardware.  In fact, several 
states (e.g. California) will not allow existing underground storage tanks to be upgraded to store 
ethanol blends greater than 10% due to compatibility concerns.   
 
Approximately 1,960 new E85 facilities would need to be added each year from 2009 
through 2022 in order to satisfy this goal of 28,750 facilities by 2022.  The addition of 1,960 new 
E85 retail facilities a year is very ambitious given that there are currently only 1,300 E85 retail 
facilities in service.  Nevertheless, we believe the addition of these numbers of new E85 facilities 
may be possible for the industries that manufacture and install E85 retail equipment.  
Underwriters Laboratories recently finalized its certification requirements for E85 retail 
equipment.442  Equipment manufactures are currently evaluating the changes that will be needed 
to meet these requirements.  However, we anticipate the needed changes will not substantially 
                                                 
AAAAA
 The year 2003 had the highest average throughput per refueling position over the years 2001- 2006.  
BBBBB
 A 7,000 delivery volume was assumed to provide adequate reserve at the retail facility to ensure consistent 
availability. 
 208 
increase the difficulty in the manufacture of such equipment compared to equipment which is 
specifically manufactured for dispensing E85 today. 
 
Petroleum retailers expressed concerns about their ability to bear the cost of installing 
new E85 refueling equipment because of the difficulty of obtaining the necessary capital and to 
achieve adequate capital recovery.  We estimated the costs under both our primary scenario 
where only 40% of E85 retailers install 2 pumps and under the sensitivity case where all E85 
retail facilities are assumed to have 3 E85 pumps.CCCCC  A full discussion of our estimated of 
E85 facility costs is contained in Section 4.2 of this DRIA.  We assumed all new pump stands 
under both scenarios.  This will tend to provide a conservatively high estimate of costs since we 
expect that some E10 dispensers would be replaced by E85 dispensers under the 3 pump per 
facility sensitivity case.  Under the 3-pump sensitivity case, we also included the cost of 
retrofitting an existing gasoline storage tank to provide additional E85 storage capacity at 50% of 
new E85 facilities.  Under our primary case where we assume that 40% of new facilities install 2 
E85 pumps and the remainder would have one pump, we estimate that the cost of installing E85 
refueling equipment will average $122,000 per facility which equates to $3 billion by 2022.  
These costs include the installation of an underground storage tank, piping, dispensers, leak 
detection, and other ancillary equipment that is compatible with E85.DDDDD  Under the sensitivity 
case, where all E85 facilities are assumed to have 3 E85 pumps, we estimate the cost for 
facilities that did not offer E85 before would be approximately $166,000 per facility.  For those 
facilities that already offered E85, the cost of installing 2 additional pump stands is estimated at 
$46,000 per facility.  The total cost of E85 refueling facilities under the 3-pump sensitivity case 
is estimated at 4.2 billion by 2022. 
 
Today’s proposal does not contain a requirement for retailers to carry E85.  We 
understand that retailers will only install E85 facilities if it is economically advantageous for 
them to do so and that they will price their E85 and E10 in a manner to recover these costs.  As 
discussed earlier we expect that larger fuel retailers would be most likely to install new E85 
refueling facilities.  While the $3 billion total cost for E85 refueling facilities is a substantial sum 
under our primary E85 facility scenario, it equates to just 1.2 cents per gallon of E85 throughput.  
Under the 3-pump sensitivity case, the total E85 facility cost of $4.2 billion equates to 1.7 cents 
per gallons of E85 throughput.EEEEE Therefore, we do not believe that the cost of installing E85 
refueling equipment will be unmanageable to retailers given the very large projected consumer 
demand for E85.  Government incentives are also available to help defer the cost of installing 
E85 retail equipment and expansions of these incentives are under consideration.FFFFF   
 
 Petroleum retailers also expressed concern regarding their ability to discount the price of 
E85 sufficiently to persuade flexible fuel vehicle owners to choose E85 given the lower energy 
density of ethanol.  Given the current trend in ethanol pricing relative to gasoline and other 
factors that may tend to encourage ethanol consumption, we believe that it may be possible for 
                                                 
CCCCC
 Section 4.2 of this DRIA contains a discussion of estimated E85 retail facility costs. 
DDDDD
 40 CFR 280.32 states that underground storage tank systems must be made of or lined with materials that are 
compatible with the substance stored in the system.  
EEEEE
 Our estimates of the cost of the E85 retail facilities that would be needed to support the use of the volume of 
ethanol that we project would be used under the RFS2 standards is contained in Section 4.2 of this DRIA. 
FFFFF
 See Section 1.7.1.2.3 of this DRIA for a discussion of government incentives to install E85 retail refueling 
equipment. 
 209 
retailers to price E85 in such a way as to facilitate the use of the ethanol volumes projected under 
today’s proposal.  This issue is discussed in Section 1.7.1.2.5 of this DRIA. 
 
1.6.11 Potential Impact on Ethanol Distribution if a Waiver is Granted for  
Mid-Level Ethanol Blends  
 
 As discussed in Section 1.7.1.3.1 of this DRIA, there is interest in evaluating the 
suitability of midlevel ethanol blends (e.g. E15) for use in non-flex fuel vehicles to facilitate the 
consumption of the large volumes of ethanol that would be needed to satisfy the RFS2 standards.  
Given our assumption that no ethanol would be transported by pipeline, we expect that there 
would be no impact on the ethanol distribution system through the terminal level.  If shipment of 
ethanol by pipeline does become practicable, there would obviously be implications regarding 
which ethanol blend ratio would be most desirable to ship.  At the terminal level, the amount of 
ethanol blended into gasoline as it is delivered into tanks would be adjusted to the desired mid-
level blend ratio.  We expect that only minimal changes to the software for the blending 
equipment would be needed to accommodate the delivery of mid-level blends up to the point of 
delivery to retail facilities. 
 
 The primary effect of the potential adoption of mid-level ethanol blends on the fuel 
distribution system would be at the fuel retail level.  As discussed in Section 1.7.1.3.1 of this 
DRIA, the use of mid-level ethanol blends would reduce/delay the needed expansion of the E85 
refueling network.  Should a mid-level ethanol blend be adopted, we anticipate that it would be 
dispensed from pumps and stored in underground storage tanks at fuel retailers that currently are 
dedicated to regular grade gasoline with a 10% maximum ethanol content.  Underwriters 
Laboratory certifies such equipment to handle a nominal maximum ethanol content of 10 
percent.  Ethanol blends of 15 volume percent are used during testing for such certification, but 
this is only intended to provide a margin of safety and to accommodate occasional in-use 
excursions above 10 percent ethanol.  To dispense mid-level ethanol blends, such equipment 
would need to be modified in a manner consistent with the changes needed to handle E85.  Thus, 
we anticipate that the adoption of mid-level ethanol blends would result in an increase in 
distribution system capital costs.  Our estimate of the additional costs associated with modifying 
retail facilities to dispense a mid-level ethanol blend is discussed in Section 4.2 of this DRIA. 
1.7 Biofuel Consumption Feasibility  
 
1.7.1 Ethanol Consumption  
 
1.7.1.1 Historical/Current Ethanol Consumption 
 
 Ethanol and ethanol-gasoline blends have a long history as automotive fuels.  However, 
cheap gasoline/blendstocks kept ethanol from making a significant presence in the transportation 
sector until the end of the 20th century when environmental regulations and tax incentives helped 
to stimulate growth.   
 
 210 
 In 1978, the U.S. passed the Energy Tax Act which provided an excise tax exemption for 
ethanol blended into gasoline that would later be modified through subsequent regulations.GGGGG  
In the 1980s, EPA initiated a phase-out of leaded gasoline which created some interest in ethanol 
as a gasoline oxygenate.  Upon passage of the 1990 CAA amendments, states implemented 
winter oxygenated fuel (“oxyfuel”) programs to monitor carbon monoxide emissions.  EPA also 
established the reformulated gasoline (RFG) program to help reduce emissions of smog-forming 
and toxic pollutants. Both the oxyfuel and RFG programs called for oxygenated gasoline.  
However, petroleum-derived ethers, namely methyl tertiary butyl ether (MTBE), dominated 
oxygenate use until drinking water contamination concerns prompted a switch to ethanol.  
Additional support came in 2004 with the passage of the Volumetric Ethanol Excise Tax Credit 
(VEETC).  The VEETC provided domestic ethanol blenders with a $0.51/gal tax credit, 
replacing the patchwork of existing subsidies.HHHHH  The phase-out of MTBE and the 
introduction of the VEETC along with state mandates and tax incentives created a growing 
demand for ethanol that surpassed the traditional oxyfuel and RFG markets.  By the end of 2004, 
not only was ethanol the lead oxygenate, it was found to be blended into a growing number of 
states’ conventional gasoline.  According to our RFS1 baseline oxygenate assessment, in 2004, 
ethanol was found to be blended into 15 states’ conventional gasoline, 10 states’ winter oxyfuel, 
and 15 states’ RFG as shown in Table 1.7-1.IIIII   
 
 
                                                 
GGGGG
 Gasohol, a fuel containing at least 10 percent biomass-derived ethanol, received a partial exemption from the 
federal gasoline excise tax.  This exemption was implemented in 1979 and a blender’s tax credit and a pure alcohol 
fuel credit were added to the mix in 1980. 
HHHHH
 The 2008 Farm Bill replaces the $0.51/gal ethanol blender credit with a $0.45/gal corn ethanol blender credit 
and also introduces a $1.01/gal cellulosic biofuel producer credit.  Both credits are effective January 1, 2009.   
IIIII
 Total ethanol usage based on fuel ethanol energy reported in EIA Monthly Energy Review June 2006 (Table 
10.2b).  State ethanol allocations based on 2004 Federal Highway Association (FHWA) State Gasohol Report less 
estimated RFG and oxyfuel ethanol usage based on EPA’s 2004 RFG Fuel Survey results and knowledge of state 
oxyfuel programs and fuel oxygenates. 
 211 
Table 1.7-1. 
2004 U.S. Ethanol Usage by State (Million Gallons) 
State CG Oxy RFG Total
California 0.0 0.0 853.0 853.0
Illinois 110.8 0.0 310.7 421.5
New York 0.0 0.0 301.2 301.2
Minnesota 268.4 0.0 0.0 268.4
Ohio 191.6 0.0 0.0 191.6
New Jersey 0.0 0.0 187.6 187.6
Connecticut 0.0 0.0 152.2 152.2
Indiana 105.3 0.0 42.7 148.0
Missouri 42.9 0.0 79.1 122.0
Iowa 116.7 0.0 0.0 116.7
Wisconsin 47.3 0.0 61.3 108.6
Arizona 0.0 13.5 74.8 88.3
Colorado 0.0 80.2 0.0 80.2
Michigan 76.9 0.0 0.0 76.9
Kentucky 0.0 0.0 49.9 49.9
Hawaii 45.2 0.0 0.0 45.2
Kansas 40.8 0.0 0.0 40.8
Texas 0.0 13.1 26.3 39.5
Nebraska 37.2 0.0 0.0 37.2
Alabama 31.4 0.0 0.0 31.4
Oregon 0.0 30.8 0.0 30.8
South Dakota 23.9 0.0 0.0 23.9
Nevada 0.0 23.1 0.0 23.1
Massachusetts 0.0 0.0 18.4 18.4
Washington 0.0 17.9 0.0 17.9
North Dakota 10.5 0.0 0.0 10.5
New Mexico 0.0 8.0 0.0 8.0
Alaska 0.0 3.4 0.0 3.4
Utah 0.0 1.9 0.0 1.9
Montana 0.0 1.1 0.0 1.1
Rhode Island 0.0 0.0 0.3 0.3
Maryland 0.0 0.0 0.3 0.3
Florida 0.1 0.0 0.0 0.1
Virginiaa 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Total 1,149.0 193.0 2,158.0 3,500.0
aApproximately 3,200 gallons of ethanol use according to FHWA.
 
 212 
 In the years that followed, rising crude oil prices and other favorable market conditions 
continued to drive ethanol usage.  In May 2007, EPA promulgated a Renewable Fuel Standard 
(“RFS1”) in response to the Energy Policy Act of 2005.  The RFS1 program set a floor for 
renewable fuel use reaching 7.5 billion gallons by 2012, the majority of which was ethanol.  The 
country is currently on track for exceeding the RFS1 requirements and meeting the introductory 
years of today’s proposed RFS2 program.  For a summary of the growth in U.S. ethanol usage 
over the past decade, refer to Table 1.7-2.   
 
Table 1.7-2. 
U.S. Ethanol Consumption (Including Imports) 
Trillion BTU Bgal
1998 115 1.4
1999 120 1.4
2000 138 1.6
2001 144 1.7
2002 171 2.0
2003 233 2.8
2004 292 3.5
2005 334 4.0
2006 451 5.4
2007 567 6.7
Total Ethanol Usea
Year
aEIA Monthly Energy Review September 2008 
(Table 10.2b)
 
 
 
 According to EIA’s September 2008 Monthly Energy Review, the U.S. consumed about 
4.3 billion gallons of fuel ethanol in transportation fuels during the first half of 2008.443  With 
that, ethanol consumption is expected to be at least 8 billion gallons by the end of the year.JJJJJ  
However, if plant capacity continues to grow (as it did in 2005-2007) ethanol usage will likely be 
closer to 9 billion gallons.  Based on this projection, the nation is currently on track for meeting 
the 2009 renewable fuel standard set forth by EISA (9 Bgal).  For a graphical representation of 
monthly ethanol usage over the past few years, refer to Figure 1.7-1.   
 
                                                 
JJJJJ
 Based on doubling the January-June, 2008 reported ethanol usage. 
 213 
Figure 1.7-1. 
2005-2008 Monthly Ethanol Consumption (Including Imports)444 
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec
Month
M
on
th
ly
 
Pr
o
du
c
tio
n
 
(M
ill
io
n
 
G
al
lo
n
s
)
2008
2007
2006
2005
 
 
 Not only is ethanol usage expected to grow in future years under the proposed RFS2 
program, it is expected to come from more diversified sources.  The Food, Conservation, and 
Energy Act of 2008 (also known as the “2008 Farm Bill”) is expected to spur cellulosic ethanol 
production and use.  The recently-enacted Farm Bill modifies the existing $0.51 per gallon 
alcohol blender credit to give preference to ethanol and other biofuels produced from cellulosic 
feedstocks.  Starting in 2009, corn ethanol will receive a reduced credit of $0.45/gal while 
cellulosic biofuel will earn a credit of $1.01/gal.445   
 
 Through the years, there have also been several policy initiatives to increase the number 
of flexible fuel vehicles (FFVs) capable of consuming up to 85 volume percent ethanol blends 
(E85).  The Alternative Motor Vehicle Fuels Act of 1988 provided automakers with Corporate 
Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) credits for producing alternative-fuel vehicles, including FFVs 
as well as CNG and propane vehicles.  Furthermore, the Energy Policy Act of 1992 required 
government fleets to begin purchasing alternative-fuel vehicles, and the majority of fleets chose 
FFVs.446  As a result of these two policy measures, there are over 6 million FFVs on the road 
today.KKKKK447   These vehicles increase our nation’s ethanol consumption potential beyond what 
is capable with conventional vehicles.  However, most FFVs are currently refueling on 
conventional gasoline (E0 or E10) due to limited E85 availability, the current E85/gasoline price 
                                                 
KKKKK
 In 2007, there were 6 million FFVs on the road and we expect the number to be even higher by now. 
 214 
relationship, and other factors.  As such, we are not currently tapping into the full ethanol 
consumption potential of our FFV fleet.  However, we expect refueling patterns to change in the 
future under the proposed RFS2 program.   
 
1.7.1.2 Increased Ethanol Use under RFS2 
 
 To meet the RFS2 standards, ethanol consumption will need to be much higher than both 
today’s levels and those projected to occur absent RFS2.  The Energy Information 
Administration (EIA) projects that under business-as-usual conditions, ethanol usage would 
grow to just over 13 billion gallons by 2022.448  This represents significant growth from today’s 
usage; however, this volume of ethanol is capable of being consumed by today’s vehicle fleet 
albeit with some fuel infrastructure improvements.LLLLL  Although EIA projects a small 
percentage of ethanol to be blended as E85 in 2022, 13 billion gallons of ethanol could also be 
consumed by displacing about 90 percent of our country’s forecasted gasoline energy demand 
with E10.  The maximum amount of ethanol our country is capable of consuming as E10 
compared to the projected RFS2 ethanol volumes is shown below in Figure 1.7-2.MMMMM 
  
                                                 
LLLLL
 For more on distribution accommodations, refer to section 1.6. 
MMMMM
 The maximum E10 ethanol consumption estimate is a function of the gasoline energy demand reported in 
EIA’s Annual Energy Outlook 2008 Table 2 (adjusted to reflect lower heating values).  The RFS2 ethanol volumes 
come from our interpretation of EISA for analysis purposes (refer to section 1.2 for more information). 
 215 
Figure 1.7-2. 
Max E10 Ethanol Consumption Compared to RFS2 Requirements 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
20
10
20
11
20
12
20
13
20
14
20
15
20
16
20
17
20
18
20
19
20
20
20
21
20
22
Year
B
ill
io
n
 
G
a
llo
n
s 
o
f E
th
an
o
l
Cellulosic Ethanol
Imported Ethanol
Corn Ethanol
E10 Blend Wall
 
 
 As shown in Figure 1.7-2, under the proposed RFS2 program, we are projected to hit the 
E10 regulatory blend wall by 2013.  This volume corresponds to 100 percent E10 nationwide.  
However, if current economic conditions continue to stymie gasoline demand, the nation could 
hit the “market blend wall” sooner.  Regardless, to get beyond the blend wall and consume more 
than 15 billion gallons of ethanol, we are going to need to see significant increases in the number 
FFVs on the road, the number of E85 retailers, and the FFV E85 refueling frequency.  In the 
subsections that follow, we will highlight the variables that impact our nation’s ethanol 
consumption potential and, more specifically, what measures the market may need to take in 
order to consume 34 billion gallons of ethanol by 2022.   
 
 As explained in Section 1.2, our primary RFS2 analysis focuses on ethanol as the main 
biofuel in the future.  In addition, from an ethanol consumption standpoint, we have focused on 
an E10/E85 world.  While E0 is capable of co-existing with E10 and E85 for a while, we 
assumed that E10 would replace E0 as expeditiously as possible and that all subsequent ethanol 
growth would come from E85.  Furthermore, we assumed that no ethanol consumption would 
come from the mid-level ethanol blends, i.e., E15 or E20.   
  
 We acknowledge that, if approved, mid-level ethanol blends could help the nation meet 
the proposed RFS2 volume requirements, at least in the near term.  First, approved vehicles (non-
FFVs) could consume more ethanol per gallon of “gasoline”.  This could result in greater ethanol 
 216 
consumption nationwide.  In addition, mid-level blends could result in less capital-intensive 
retail accommodations (on a per station basis) than bringing E85 to market.NNNNN  Furthermore, 
blending ethanol as E15 or E20 would require less gasoline blendstock reformulation (than E85) 
and allow refiners to continue to price ethanol relative to gasoline (as it currently is for E10).  
Because of these reasons, we believe mid-level ethanol blends could be brought to market 
relatively easily to help our nation get beyond the 15-billion gallon E10 blend wall.  However, as 
explained in Section 1.7.1.3, mid-level ethanol blends alone (even if made available nationwide) 
are not capable of fulfilling the RFS2 requirements in later years.  We would essentially hit 
another blend wall 3-6 years later (depending on the intermediate blend).  Nevertheless, this time 
could be very valuable when it comes to expanding E85/FFV infrastructure and/or 
commercializing other non-ethanol cellulosic biofuels.      
 
 Regardless, our primary analysis focuses on an E10/E85 world because mid-level ethanol 
blends are not currently approved for use in conventional gasoline vehicles and nonroad 
equipment.  Before usage could be legalized, EPA would need to grant a waiver declaring that 
mid-level blends are substantially similar or “sub-sim” to gasoline.  While such a waiver has not 
yet been granted, several organizations/agencies are performing vehicle emission testing and 
investigating other impacts of mid-level blends.  As a result, as a sensitivity analysis, we have 
analyzed what might need to be done to bring mid-level ethanol blends to market (should a sub-
sim waiver be approved) and the extent to which such blends could help our nation meet the 
RFS2 ethanol standards, at least in the near term.   
 
1.7.1.2.1 Projected Gasoline Energy Demand 
 
 The maximum amount of ethanol our country is capable of consuming in any given year 
is a function of the total gasoline energy demanded by the transportation sector.  Our nation’s 
gasoline energy demand is dependent on the number of gasoline-powered vehicles on the road, 
their average fuel economy, vehicle miles traveled (VMT), and driving patterns.  For analysis 
purposes, we relied on the gasoline energy projections reported by EIA in AEO 2008.OOOOO  
Unlike AEO 2007, AEO 2008 takes the fuel economy improvements set by EISA into 
consideration and also assumes a slight dieselization of the vehicle fleet.  The result is a 15 
percent reduction in the projected 2022 gasoline energy demand from AEO 2007 to AEO 
2008.449   As shown in Figure 1.7-3, EIA basically has gasoline energy demand (petroleum-based 
gasoline plus ethanol) flattening out, and even slightly decreasing, as we move into the future 
and implement the EISA vehicle standards.   
 
                                                 
NNNNN
 For more information on mid-level ethanol blend retail accommodations, refer to section 1.6 of the DRIA. 
OOOOO
 For analysis purposes, we adjusted the gasoline energy demand reported in AEO Table 2 to reflect lower 
heating values for ethanol.  In AEO 2007, EIA used a higher heating value of 83,333 BTU/gal for ethanol and in 
AEO 2008, EIA used a higher heating value of 84,262 for ethanol.  Our analyses were based on applying a lower 
heating value of 77,930 BTU/gal to represent denatured fuel-grade ethanol. 
 217 
Figure 1.7-3. 
Forecasted Reduction in Gasoline Energy Demand due to EISA 
0
5
10
15
20
25
20
10
20
11
20
12
20
13
20
14
20
15
20
16
20
17
20
18
20
19
20
20
20
21
20
22
Year
Qu
ad
ril
lio
n 
B
TU
s
AEO 2007
AEO 2008 (Final Release)
 
 
1.7.1.2.2 Projected Growth in Flexible Fuel Vehicles 
 
 In 2007, an estimated 6 million of the nation’s 230 million vehicles were FFVs capable of 
consuming E85.450  However, that number is growing steadily.  Automakers are incorporating 
more and more FFVs into their light-duty production plans.  While the FFV system (i.e., fuel 
tank, sensor, delivery system, etc.) used to be an option on some vehicles, most FFV producers 
are moving in the direction of converting entire product lines over to E85-capable systems.  Still, 
the number of FFVs that will be manufactured and purchased in future years is uncertain.  To 
reflect this uncertainty, we have analyzed multiple FFV production scenarios.PPPPP  However, for 
our primary ethanol usage and cost analyses we have focused on the “Optimistic FFV Production 
Scenario” (described in more detail below).  The other FFV production scenarios we considered 
are presented at the end of this subsection.    
 
 In response to the President’s “20-in-10” plan of reducing American gasoline usage by 20 
percent in 10 years, domestic automakers responded with aggressive FFV production goals.  
General Motors, Ford and Chrysler (referred to hereafter as “The Detroit 3”) announced plans to 
produce 50 percent FFVs by 2012.451  Assuming that The Detroit 3 continue to maintain 50 
percent marketshare and that total vehicle sales remain around 16 million per year, at least 4 
                                                 
PPPPP
 We also analyzed multiple E85 access scenarios.  For more information, refer to section 1.7.1.2.3. 
 218 
million FFVs will be produced by the 2012 model year.  Based on 2008 offerings, we assumed 
that approximately 80 percent of The Detroit 3’s FFV commitment would be met by light-duty 
trucks and the remaining 20 percent would be cars.452  For analysis purposes, we also assumed 
that all the FFVs in existence today were produced by The Detroit 3 (and therefore share the 
same aforementioned FFV car/truck ratio) and that production would ramp up linearly beginning 
in 2008 to readch the 2012 commitment.QQQQQ   
 
 Although non-domestic automakers have not made any official FFV production 
commitments, Nissan, Mercedes, Izuzu, and Mazda all included at least one flexible fuel vehicle 
in their 2008 model year offerings.453  And we anticipate that additional FFVs (or FFV options) 
will be added in the future.  Ultimately, we predict that non-domestic FFV production could be 
as high as 25 percent by 2022, or about 2 million FFVs per year.  While we are not forecasting 
an official FFV production commitment from the non-domestic automakers, we believe that this 
represents an aggressive, yet reasonable FFV production estimate for analysis purposes.  
Furthermore, based on current offerings, we assumed that the majority of non-domestic FFVs 
would be trucks, i.e., 100 percent.  With respect to timing, we expect that the non-domestic 
automakers would ramp up FFV production later than The Detroit 3.  For analysis purposes, we 
assumed that non-domestic automakers would ramp up FFV production beginning in 2013, and 
like The Detroit 3, it would take about five years for them to reach their FFV production goals 
(or in this case, the assumed 25 percent production level).  For a summary of the year-by-year 
FFV production assumptions we made under the Optimistic FFV Production Scenario, refer to 
Table 1.7-3. 
 
                                                 
QQQQQ
 As a simplifying assumption, we assumed that all FFVs in today’s fleet were produced by The Detroit 3 
beginning in 2002.   
 219 
Table 1.7-3. 
Optimistic FFV Production Scenario – FFV Production Assumptions 
Tot FFVs FFV-Cars FFV-Trucks Tot FFVs FFV-Cars FFV-Trucks
2002 1,000,000 200,000 800,000 0 0 0
2003 1,000,000 200,000 800,000 0 0 0
2004 1,000,000 200,000 800,000 0 0 0
2005 1,000,000 200,000 800,000 0 0 0
2006 1,000,000 200,000 800,000 0 0 0
2007 1,000,000 200,000 800,000 0 0 0
2008 1,600,000 320,000 1,280,000 80,000 0 80,000
2009 2,200,000 440,000 1,760,000 160,000 0 160,000
2010 2,800,000 560,000 2,240,000 240,000 0 240,000
2011 3,400,000 680,000 2,720,000 320,000 0 320,000
2012 4,000,000 800,000 3,200,000 400,000 0 400,000
2013 4,000,000 800,000 3,200,000 720,000 0 720,000
2014 4,000,000 800,000 3,200,000 1,040,000 0 1,040,000
2015 4,000,000 800,000 3,200,000 1,360,000 0 1,360,000
2016 4,000,000 800,000 3,200,000 1,680,000 0 1,680,000
2017 4,000,000 800,000 3,200,000 2,000,000 0 2,000,000
2018 4,000,000 800,000 3,200,000 2,000,000 0 2,000,000
2019 4,000,000 800,000 3,200,000 2,000,000 0 2,000,000
2020 4,000,000 800,000 3,200,000 2,000,000 0 2,000,000
2021 4,000,000 800,000 3,200,000 2,000,000 0 2,000,000
2022 4,000,000 800,000 3,200,000 2,000,000 0 2,000,000
Year
GM, Chrysler & Ford Non-Domestic Automakers
 
 
 
 Based on these FFV production assumptions and forecasted vehicle phase-out, VMT, and 
fuel economy estimates provided by EPA’s MOVES Model, we calculate that the maximum 
percentage of fuel (gasoline/ethanol mix) that could feasibly be consumed by FFVs in 2022 
would be about 30 percent.RRRRR  The resulting gasoline energy consumption by vehicle type 
under the Optimistic FFV Production Scenario is shown below in Figure 1.7-4. For all analyses, 
we assumed that the percentage of gasoline energy consumed by nonroad, heavy-duty gasoline 
vehicles (HDGVs), and motorcycles would be about 8 percent based on historical information 
provided by DOE.454  
 
                                                 
RRRRR
 For more on the EPA MOVES Model, refer to Chapter 3 of this DRIA. 
 220 
Figure 1.7-4.  
Optimistic FFV Production Scenario - Gasoline Consumption by Vehicle Type 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
20
10
20
11
20
12
20
13
20
14
20
15
20
16
20
17
20
18
20
19
20
20
20
21
20
22
%
 o
f G
as
o
lin
e 
Co
n
su
m
pt
io
n
FFVs
Tier 2 Vehicles (Non-FFVs)
Pre-Tier 2 Vehicles
Nonroad, HDGVs & Motorcycles
 
 
 
 As mentioned above, the number of FFVs that will be produced in the future under the 
RFS2 rule is relatively unknown.  However, to bracket the uncertainly, we have analyzed a less 
optimistic FFV production scenario as well as what FFV production might look like under a 
congressional mandate. Although EPA does not have the authority to require automakers to 
produce FFVs, there are a number of bills in Congress that are set out to do just that, e.g., The 
Open Fuel Standard Act of 2008.SSSSS 
 
 For the less optimistic production scenario (referred to hereafter as the “Committed FFV 
Production Scenario”), we considered what production might look like if only The Detroit 3 
followed through with their 50 percent by 2012 FFV commitment,  Under this scenario, we 
assumed the same Detroit 3 FFV production assumptions as in the Optimistic FFV Production 
scenario.  However, we assumed that the non-domestic automakers would only produce the 
FFVs they are currently forecasting in their existing production plans.  Based on 2008 MY 
offerings, we assumed that the non-domestic automakers would produce approximately 5% 
FFVs by 2012.455  For analysis purposes, we assumed that production would creep up beginning 
in 2008, and like the Optimistic FFV Production Scenario, and all non-domestic FFVs would be 
                                                 
SSSSS
 Refer to Senate Bill 3303 and House Rule 6559 discussed in more detail below. 
 221 
light-duty trucks.  For a summary of the year-by-year vehicle production assumptions we made 
under the Committed FFV Production Scenario, refer to Table 1.7-4.   
 
Table 1.7-4. 
Committed FFV Production Scenario – FFV Production Assumptions 
Tot FFVs FFV-Cars FFV-Trucks Tot FFVs FFV-Cars FFV-Trucks
2002 1,000,000 200,000 800,000 0 0 0
2003 1,000,000 200,000 800,000 0 0 0
2004 1,000,000 200,000 800,000 0 0 0
2005 1,000,000 200,000 800,000 0 0 0
2006 1,000,000 200,000 800,000 0 0 0
2007 1,000,000 200,000 800,000 0 0 0
2008 1,600,000 320,000 1,280,000 80,000 0 80,000
2009 2,200,000 440,000 1,760,000 160,000 0 160,000
2010 2,800,000 560,000 2,240,000 240,000 0 240,000
2011 3,400,000 680,000 2,720,000 320,000 0 320,000
2012 4,000,000 800,000 3,200,000 400,000 0 400,000
2013 4,000,000 800,000 3,200,000 400,000 0 400,000
2014 4,000,000 800,000 3,200,000 400,000 0 400,000
2015 4,000,000 800,000 3,200,000 400,000 0 400,000
2016 4,000,000 800,000 3,200,000 400,000 0 400,000
2017 4,000,000 800,000 3,200,000 400,000 0 400,000
2018 4,000,000 800,000 3,200,000 400,000 0 400,000
2019 4,000,000 800,000 3,200,000 400,000 0 400,000
2020 4,000,000 800,000 3,200,000 400,000 0 400,000
2021 4,000,000 800,000 3,200,000 400,000 0 400,000
2022 4,000,000 800,000 3,200,000 400,000 0 400,000
Year
GM, Chrysler & Ford Non-Domestic Automakers
 
 
 
 As expected, having fewer FFVs in the fleet translates to this group of vehicles having a 
lower gasoline/ethanol consumption potential.  Based on the less optimistic FFV production 
assumptions (summarized above in Table 1.7-4) and forecasted vehicle phase-out, VMT, and 
fuel economy estimates provided by EPA’s MOVES Model, we calculate that the maximum 
percentage of fuel (gasoline/ethanol mix) that could feasibly be consumed by FFVs in 2022 
would be about 24 percent.  The resulting gasoline energy consumption by vehicle type under the 
Committed FFV Production Scenario is shown below in Figure 1.7-5.   
 222 
Figure 1.7-5. 
Committed FFV Production Scenario - Gasoline Consumption by Vehicle Type 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
%
 
o
f G
a
so
lin
e
 
Co
n
s
u
m
pt
io
n
FFVs
Tier 2 Vehicles (Non-FFVs)
Pre-Tier 2 Vehicles
Nonroad, HDGVs & Motorcycles
 
 
 For our third and final FFV production scenario, we considered what FFV production 
might look like under some sort of Congressional mandate.  At the time of our analysis, we were 
unaware of any formal legislation being considered by Congress.  However, since that time there 
have been multiple bills introduced by Congress.  On July 22, 2008 Senator Sam Brownback (R-
KS) on behalf of himself and Senators Susan Collins (R-ME), Joseph Lieberman (I-CT), Ken 
Salazar (D-CO), and John Thune (R-SD) introduced the Open Fuel Standard Act of 2008, a bill 
that calls for 50 percent of the U.S. vehicle fleet to be FFVs capable of using high blends of 
ethanol or methanol (in addition to gasoline) by 2012.  This number would grow to 80 percent by 
2015.456  A similar FFV bill was introduced by Eliot Engel (D-NY) in the House on July 22, 
2008.457 
 
 However, because our analysis was conducted before these bills were introduced, we had 
to come up with our own set of assumptions with respect to the number of FFVs and the 
implementation timeline under a theoretical mandate.  Under our “Mandated FFV Production 
Scenario,” we considered the possibility that Congress could require all light-duty vehicles to be 
equipped with E85-capable fuel systems in the future.  While we realize this is more aggressive 
than the mandates currently being considered by Congress, we believe this is a good upper bound 
for our ethanol usage analysis.  Furthermore, we believe that such a mandate is feasible based on 
the lead-time required to engineer and implement the vehicle fuel system changes.   
 
 223 
 Under our Mandated FFV Production Scenario, we assumed that the first phase of the 
FFV mandate could require all automakers to meet the production goals set by The Detroit 3 – 
50 percent FFVs by 2012.  From there, we assumed the mandated percentage could grow to 100 
percent FFVs by 2015.  This implementation timeline is consistent with Senate Bill 3303 and 
House Rule 6559 – the mandates currently being considered by Congress.  For a summary of the 
year-by-year vehicle production assumptions we made under the Mandated FFV Production 
Scenario, refer to Table 1.7-5. 
  
Table 1.7-5. 
Mandated FFV Production Scenario – FFV Production Assumptions 
Tot FFVs FFV-Cars FFV-Trucks Tot FFVs FFV-Cars FFV-Trucks
2002 1,000,000 200,000 800,000 0 0 0
2003 1,000,000 200,000 800,000 0 0 0
2004 1,000,000 200,000 800,000 0 0 0
2005 1,000,000 200,000 800,000 0 0 0
2006 1,000,000 200,000 800,000 0 0 0
2007 1,000,000 200,000 800,000 0 0 0
2008 1,600,000 560,000 1,040,000 800,000 520,000 280,000
2009 2,200,000 770,000 1,430,000 1,600,000 1,040,000 560,000
2010 2,800,000 980,000 1,820,000 2,400,000 1,560,000 840,000
2011 3,400,000 1,190,000 2,210,000 3,200,000 2,080,000 1,120,000
2012 4,000,000 1,400,000 2,600,000 4,000,000 2,600,000 1,400,000
2013 5,333,333 1,866,667 3,466,667 5,333,333 3,466,667 1,866,667
2014 6,666,667 2,333,333 4,333,333 6,666,667 4,333,333 2,333,333
2015 8,000,000 2,800,000 5,200,000 8,000,000 5,200,000 2,800,000
2016 8,000,000 2,800,000 5,200,000 8,000,000 5,200,000 2,800,000
2017 8,000,000 2,800,000 5,200,000 8,000,000 5,200,000 2,800,000
2018 8,000,000 2,800,000 5,200,000 8,000,000 5,200,000 2,800,000
2019 8,000,000 2,800,000 5,200,000 8,000,000 5,200,000 2,800,000
2020 8,000,000 2,800,000 5,200,000 8,000,000 5,200,000 2,800,000
2021 8,000,000 2,800,000 5,200,000 8,000,000 5,200,000 2,800,000
2022 8,000,000 2,800,000 5,200,000 8,000,000 5,200,000 2,800,000
Year
GM, Chrysler & Ford Non-Domestic Automakers
 
 
 
 As expected, having more FFVs in the fleet results in these vehicles having a higher 
gasoline/ethanol consumption potential.  Based on the mandated FFV production assumptions 
(summarized above in Table 1.7-5) and forecasted vehicle phase-out, VMT, and fuel economy 
estimates provided by EPA’s MOVES Model, we calculate that the maximum percentage of fuel 
(gasoline/ethanol mix) that could feasibly be consumed by FFVs in 2022 would be 
approximately 68 percent.  The resulting gasoline energy consumption by vehicle type under the 
Mandated FFV Production Scenario is shown below in Figure 1.7-6.   
 
 
 224 
Figure 1.7-6. 
Mandated FFV Production Scenario - Gasoline Consumption by Vehicle Type 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
%
 
o
f G
a
so
lin
e
 
Co
n
s
u
m
pt
io
n
FFVs
Tier 2 Vehicles (Non-FFVs)
Pre-Tier 2 Vehicles
Nonroad, HDGVs & Motorcycles
 
 
 For analysis purposes, we assumed that all FFVs would be distributed homogeneously 
throughout the nation in future years.  However, the reality is, FFVs may be more concentrated 
in certain areas of the country based on variation in regional product demand (and corresponding 
FFV offerings) and state-level FFV incentives.  We plan to revisit this for the final rule and also 
consider the theoretical cost and refueling frequency impacts of co-locating FFVs with E85 
stations.  In the meantime, we acknowledge that there are a number of states offering incentives 
to get consumers to purchase alternative fuel vehicles (AFVs).  The AFV incentives range from 
purchasing rebates to discounted registration fees and even free parking in certain metropolitan 
areas.  According to a July 2008 assessment of DOE’s Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy 
(EERE) websiteTTTTT, 13 states currently offer some form of AFV incentive.  A summary of 
these states is provided in Table 1.7-6 below.  There are also a number of federal vehicle fleets 
(e.g., the U.S. Postal Service) and state government fleets (e.g., Police Departments) that require 
the purchase AFVs.   
 
                                                 
TTTTT
 http://www.eere.energy.gov/afdc/ethanol/incentives_laws.html 
 225 
Table 1.7-6. 
Alternative Fuel Vehicle Incentives 
Region States
PADD 1 GA, NC, SC, VT
PADD 2 IL, IN, KS, NE
PADD 3 LA, NM
PADD 4 MT
PADD 5 CA, OR
 
 
 
1.7.1.2.3 Projected Growth in E85 Access  
 
According to the National Ethanol Vehicle Coalition (NEVC), there are currently over 
1,700 retailers offering E85 in 43 states plus the District of Columbia.458  While this represents 
significant industry growth, it still only translates to about 1 percent of the retail stations 
nationwide carrying the fuel.UUUUU459  As a result, most FFV owners clearly do not have 
reasonable access to E85.  For our primary FFV/E85 analysis, we have defined “reasonable 
access” as one-in-four pumps offering E85 in a given area.VVVVV  Accordingly, just over four 
percent of the nation currently has reasonable access to E85, up from three percent in 2007 
(based on a mid-year NEVC E85 pump estimate).WWWWW460   
 
There are a number of states promoting E85 usage by offering FFV/E85 awareness 
programs and/or retail pump incentives.  There are also a growing number of states offering 
infrastructure grants to help expand E85 availability.  According to a July 2008 assessment of 
DOE’s Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy (EERE) websiteXXXXX, 26 states currently 
offer some form infrastructure grant for facilities that bring biofuels, including E85 to market.  A 
summary of these state programs is provided in Table 1.7-7 below.   
                                                 
UUUUU
 Based on the assumption that there are currently 1,733 E85 stations (number reported by NEVC in August 
2008) and 164,292 total gas stations (number reported by National Petroleum News in October 2007).  
VVVVV
 For a more detailed discussion on how we derived our one-in-four reasonable access assumption, refer to 
section 1.6 of the DRIA.  For the distribution cost implications as well as the cost impacts of assuming reasonable 
access is greater than one-in-four pumps, refer to section 4.2 of the DRIA 
WWWWW
 Computed as percent of stations with E85 (1,733/164,292 as of Aug 2008 or 1251/164292 as of July 2007) 
divided by 25 % (one-in-four stations). 
XXXXX
 http://www.eere.energy.gov/afdc/ethanol/incentives_laws.html 
 226 
 
Table 1.7-7. 
States Offering E85 Infrastructure Support 
Region States
PADD 1 FL, ME, NY, NC, PA, SC
PADD 3 AR, NM
PADD 4 CO, ID
PADD 5 CA, OR, WA
IL, IN, IA, KS, KY, MI, MN, 
NE, ND, OH, OK, SD, TN
PADD 2
  
 
 
 In addition, nine Midwest states have adopted a progressive Energy Security and Climate 
Stewardship Platform.YYYYY  The platform includes a Regional Biofuels Promotion Plan with a 
goal of making E85 available at one third of all stations by 2025.  In addition, on July 31, 2008, 
Congresswoman Stephanie Herseth Sandlin (D-SD) and John Shimkus (R-IL) introduced a 
legislative proposal that would increase the existing federal income tax credit from $30,000 or 30 
percent of the total cost of improvements to $100,000 or 50 percent of the total cost of needed 
alternative fuel equipment and dispensing improvements.ZZZZZ  While not signed into law, such a 
tax credit could provide a significant retail incentive to expand E85 infrastructure. 
 
 Given the growing number of state infrastructure incentives and the proposed Federal 
alternative fuel infrastructure subsidy, it is clear that E85 infrastructure will continue to expand 
in the future under the RFS2 program  However, the extent to which nationwide E85 access will 
grow is difficult to predict, let alone quantify.  To represent practical yet aggressive station 
growth, we considered the possibility that 70 percent of the nation could have reasonable access 
to E85 by 2022.  This is roughly equivalent to all urban areas in the United States offering 
reasonable, one-in-four-station access to E85.  For this analysis, we have defined “urban” areas 
as: 
 
• The top 150 metropolitan statistical areas according to the U.S. Census Bureau and/or 
counties with the highest 150 VMT projections according the EPA MOVES model.   
• Federal RFG areas 
• Winter oxy-fuel areas 
• Summertime low-RVP areas 
• Other relatively populated cities in the Midwest.  Cities with populations greater than 
100,000 people in states with a projected ethanol surplus in 2022.  [For more information 
on ethanol production, refer to Sections 1.5.1 through 1.5.3 of the DRIA.]  
 
For an illustration of the urban areas representing about 70 percent of the nation’s VMT, refer to 
Figure 1.7-7.   
                                                 
YYYYY
 The following states have adopted the plan: Indiana, Kansas, Michigan, Minnesota, Ohio, South Dakota, 
Wisconsin, Iowa, and most recently, North Dakota. For more information, visit: 
http://www.midwesterngovernors.org/resolutions/Platform.pdf 
ZZZZZ
 A copy of the bill can be accessed at: 
http://www.e85fuel.com/news/2008/080108_shimkus_release/shimkus.pdf 
 227 
 
 
Figure 1.7-7. 
A Look at 70% E85 Access - Concentrating Pumps in Urban Areas 
 
 
 We are not concluding that E85 would only be offered in urban areas in the future.  In 
fact, most E85 stations are currently located in the Midwest.  However, we believe that this 
would be one possible way to provide 70 percent of the population with reasonable access to 
E85.  From a fuel price standpoint, it makes sense that E85 might be offered in areas of the 
country with relatively high gasoline prices (e.g., RFG and low-RVP areas). Additionally, from 
an infrastructure cost standpoint, it makes sense that E85 might be offered in more populated 
metropolitan areas with high gasoline throughput.AAAAAA  For more on retail distribution costs, 
refer to Section 4.2 of this DRIA. 
 
                                                 
AAAAAA
 We acknowledge that land costs, spatial limitations, and air quality/regulations could potentially restrict E85 
growth in densely populated metropolitan areas.  However, for analysis purposes, we assumed that it would be 
possible for one-in-four stations to offer E85 to provide FFV owners with reasonable access to the fuel.    
 228 
 Accordingly, for our primary analysis, we assumed that the percentage of the county with 
reasonable access to E85 could grow to 70 percent by 2022.  This translates to about 29,000 
retailers offering E85, or about 1:6 stations nationwide.BBBBBB  According to our distribution 
assessment, we believe it’s possible to bring this many stations to market by 2022.  And 
furthermore, our analysis indicates that 29,000 stations are capable of dispensing 29 billion 
gallons of E85 – the volume required to meet the RFS2 standard in 2022 in an E10/E85 world.  
For more information on E85 retail accommodations and fuel volumes required under RFS2, 
refer to Sections 1.6.10 and 1.7.1.4, respectively. 
 
 If we assume that reasonable E85 access grows to 70 percent by 2022, we can iteratively 
compute the corresponding nationwide E0 and E10 access assuming that a.) each fuel retailer 
only carries one type of conventional gasoline (E0 or E10) and b.) the nation does not exceed the 
RFS2 ethanol volume requirements presented in Section 1.2.  Under the most aggressive FFV 
production scenario, we estimate that E0 could theoretically remain in existence until 2016 as 
shown below in Figure 1.7-8.   However, we anticipate that E10 will likely replace E0 sooner 
based on current market trends.   
 
Figure 1.7-8. 
Assumed Phase-Out of E0 and Phase-In of E10 & E85 
 
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
20
10
20
11
20
12
20
13
20
14
20
15
20
16
20
17
20
18
20
19
20
20
20
21
20
22
Year
N
a
tio
n
w
id
e 
A
c
ce
ss
 to
 
Fu
el
E0
E10
E85
 
 
                                                 
BBBBBB
 Computed as the number of U.S. gas stations (164,292) times the percent of stations with reasonable access 
to E85 by 2022 (70%) times the definition of reasonable access (1-in-4 stations or 25%) 
 229 
 
 As an upper bound, we considered the possibility that reasonable one-in-four E85 access 
could theoretically grow to 100 percent by 2022.  While we do not believe this is very likely 
(after all, diesel fuel - a required fuel for compression engines is only offered at about one-third 
of stations nationwide), this is a meaningful sensitivity analysis because it corresponds to the 
maximum E85 retail costs under the RFS2 program (for more on E85 infrastructure costs, refer 
to Section 4.2 of the DRIA).  For both E85 access scenarios, we assumed a linear phase-in from 
today’s estimated 3 percent access level as shown in Figure 1.7-9. 
 
Figure 1.7-9. 
Estimated Growth in E85 Access under RFS2 
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
20
07
20
08
20
09
20
10
20
11
20
12
20
13
20
14
20
15
20
16
20
17
20
18
20
19
20
20
20
21
20
22
Year
%
 o
f c
o
u
n
tr
y 
w
ith
 
re
as
o
n
a
bl
e 
1-
in
-
4 
a
cc
e
ss
 
to
 
E8
5 Maximum Growth in E85 Access
Practical Yet Aggressive Growth in E85 Access
 
 
1.7.1.2.4 Required Increase in E85 Refueling Rates 
 
 As mentioned above, there were approximately 6 million FFVs on the road in 2007.  If all 
FFVs refueled on E85 100 percent of the time, this would translate to about 5.4 billion gallons of 
E85 use.  This estimate is based on the assumption that FFV owners travel approximately 12,000 
miles per year and get about 18 miles per gallon during actual in-use driving conditions.CCCCCC  
                                                 
CCCCCC
 Based on the assumption that 20% of FFVs are cars (27 MPG) and 80% are trucks (20.7 MPG) and the 
assumption that all vehicles/FFVs achieve about 80% of the rated fuel economy under real driving conditions.  
 230 
This estimate also assumes that it takes about 1.3 gallons of E85 for an FFV to travel the same 
distance as a gallon of gasoline due to the difference in energy density of the fuels.DDDDDD   
 
 Although we computed the E85 usage potential to be around 5.4 billion gallons in 2007, 
actual E85 usage was only reported to be around 18 million gallons in 2007.EEEEEE  This means 
that, on average, FFV owners were only tapping into about 0.34 percent of their vehicles’ 
E85/ethanol usage potential last year.  Assuming that only 3 percent of the nation had reasonable 
one-in-four access to E85 in 2007 (refer to Section 1.7.1.2.3), this equates to an estimated 11 
percent E85 refueling frequency for those FFVs that had reasonable access. 
 
 There are several rationales behind today’s low E85 refueling frequency in areas of the 
country with reasonable access to the fuel.  For starters, many FFV owners may not know they 
are driving a vehicle that is capable of handling E85.  As mentioned above, more and more 
automakers are starting to produce FFVs by engine/product line, e.g., all 2008 Chevy Impalas are 
FFVs.FFFFFF461  Consequently, consumers, especially brand loyal consumers, may inadvertently 
buy a flexible fuel vehicle without making a conscious decision to do so.  And without effective 
consumer awareness programs in place, these FFV owners may never think to refuel on E85.  In 
addition, FFV owners with reasonable access to E85 and knowledge of their vehicle’s E85 
capabilities may still not choose to refuel on E85.  They may feel inconvenienced by the 
increased E85 refueling requirements.  Based on its lower energy density, FFV owners will need 
to stop to refuel 21 percent more often when filling up on E85 over E10 (and likewise, 24 
percent more often when refueling on E85 over conventional gasoline).GGGGGG  In addition, some 
FFV owners may be deterred from refueling on E85 out of fear of reduced vehicle performance 
or just plain unfamiliarity with the new motor vehicle fuel.  However, as we move into the 
future, we believe the biggest determinant will be price – whether E85 is priced competitively 
with gasoline based on its reduced energy density and the fact that you need to stop more often, 
drive a little further to find an E85 station, and depending on the retail configuration, wait in 
longer lines to fill up on E85. 
 
 To comply with the proposed RFS2 program and consume 34 billion gallons of ethanol 
by 2022, not only would we need more FFVs and more E85 retailers, we would need to see a 
significant increase in the current FFV E85 refueling frequency.  Under the Optimistic FFV 
Production Scenario (assuming practical growth in E85 access), our analysis suggests that FFV 
owners with reasonable one-in-four access to E85 would need to fill up on it 74 percent of the 
time in 2022 - a significant increase from today’s estimated 11 percent refueling frequency.  As 
shown below in Figure 1.7-10, with fewer FFVs in the fleet, the E85 refueling frequency would 
                                                 
DDDDDD
 Based on our assumption that denatured ethanol has an average lower heating value of 77,930 BTU/gal and 
conventional gasoline (E0) has average lower heating value of 115,000 BTU/gal.  And based on EIA’s AEO 2008 
report, E85 was assumed to contain 74 vol% ethanol and 26 vol% gasoline on average.   Our analysis ignores the 
potential that there could be a thermal efficiency improvement when vehicles burn ethanol. 
EEEEEE
 EIA Annual Energy Outlook 2008, Table 17. 
FFFFFF
 Refers to all mass produced 3.5 and 3.9L Chevy Impalas.  However, it is our understanding that consumers 
may still place special orders for non-FFVs.   
GGGGGG
 Based on our assumption that denatured ethanol has an average lower heating value of 77,930 BTU/gal and 
conventional gasoline (E0) has average lower heating value of 115,000 BTU/gal.  For analysis purposes, E10 was 
assumed to contain 10 vol% ethanol and 90 vol% gasoline.  Based on EIA’s AEO 2008 report, E85 was assumed to 
contain 74 vol% ethanol and 26 vol% gasoline on average.    
 231 
need to be even higher.  Similarly, with more FFVs in the fleet, the E85 refueling frequency 
could be lower and still meet the proposed RFS2 requirements.  However, even with an FFV 
mandate, our analysis suggests that we would need to see an increase from today’s FFV E85 
refueling frequency.  As expected, if the E85 access were to grow beyond 70 percent to 100 
percent by 2022 (refer to dashed lines in Figure 1.7-10) the required refueling rates would be 
lower.  However, at an estimated cost of $122,000 per station, it is unlikely that retailers would 
invest in more E85 stations than what is necessary to meet the RFS2 program.  For more 
information on E85 infrastructure costs, refer to Section 4.2 of the DRIA. 
 
Figure 1.7-10. 
FFV E85 Refueling Rates Needed to Meet the RFS2 Requirements 
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
20
10
20
11
20
12
20
13
20
14
20
15
20
16
20
17
20
18
20
19
20
20
20
21
20
22
Year
FF
V 
E8
5 
R
e
fu
el
in
g 
Fr
eq
u
e
n
c
y 
(G
iv
en
 
A
c
ce
ss
) Committed FFV Production (Up to 70% E85 Access)
Optimistic FFV Production  (Up to 70% E85 Access)
Mandated FFV Production  (Up to 70% E85 Access)
Committed FFV Production (Up to 100% E85 Access
Optimistic FFV Production (Up to 100% E85 Access)
Mandated FFV Production (Up to 100% E85 Access)
 
 
 As shown in Figure 1.7-10, all analyzed FFV production and E85 access scenarios would 
require an increase from today’s 11% E85 refueling frequency.  In order for this to be possible, 
we believe there will need to be an improvement in the current E85/gasoline price relationship.   
 
1.7.1.2.5 Market Pricing of E85 versus Gasoline 
 
 According to an online fuel price survey, E85 is currently priced 17.5 percent lower than 
conventional gasoline on average.HHHHHH  In some areas of the country (e.g., certain Midwest 
cities), the reported spread was as large as 37 percent.  In other areas of the country it was as low 
                                                 
HHHHHH
 Based on the E85/gasoline price relationship reported online on July 8, 2008 which reflects prices reported 
in the last 20 days.  (http://e85prices.com/) 
 232 
as 5-10 percent, and in some geographically isolated areas, the reported price difference was 
virtually negligible.   
 
 To increase our nation’s E85 refueling frequency to the levels described above, E85 
needs to be priced competitively or lower than conventional gasoline based on its reduced energy 
content, increased time spent at the pump, and its limited availability.  To quantify the required 
price differential, we started by examining 2006 gasoline price data.  According to EIA’s 2006 
Petroleum Marketing Annual, gasoline was priced at $2.12 per gallon (average of all grades) at 
retail before taxes.462  Applying the American Petroleum Institute’s estimated gasoline tax of 
45.5 cents per gallon (average state plus federal taxes), this put retail gasoline around $2.58 per 
gallon in 2006.463  While this is significantly lower than today’s pump prices, EIA forecasted that 
2008 would be a record year for crude oil pricing, the main determinant in gasoline pricing.  It is 
possible that EIA underestimated the extent of the 2008 price spike; however, their outlook 
(shown below in Table 1.7-8) suggests that crude oil prices will come back down by 2022.  
Accordingly, we believe that relying on 2006 gasoline price data for our RFS2 E85 price 
assessment is appropriate.    
 
Table 1.7-8. 
EIA Forecasted Imported Crude Oil Prices 
Year
Projected Crude Oil 
Price ($/bbl)
Change Relative to 
2006 Price (%)
2006 66.02
2007 67.05 1.6%
2008 83.59 26.6%
2009 76.96 16.6%
2010 74.03 12.1%
2011 71.20 7.9%
2012 68.38 3.6%
2013 65.61 -0.6%
2014 62.72 -5.0%
2015 59.85 -9.3%
2016 56.96 -13.7%
2017 57.11 -13.5%
2018 57.99 -12.2%
2019 58.91 -10.8%
2020 59.70 -9.6%
2021 60.56 -8.3%
2022 61.47 -6.9%
Source: AEO 2008, Table 12. Imported Low-Sulfur Light 
Crude Oil Price.
 
 
 233 
 In order for E85 to be priced competitively with conventional gasoline (assumed to be 
E10 by 2022), first it would need to be priced lower based on its reduced energy density.IIIIII  As 
shown below, E85 is 79 percent as energy dense as E10.   
 
79.0
/000,11590.0/930,7710.0
/000,11526.0/930,7774.0
10
85
=
∗+∗
∗+∗
=
galBTUgalBTU
galBTUgalBTU
ityEnergyDensE
ityEnergyDensE
 
 
Accordingly, it E85 should be priced at least 21 percent lower at retail to compensate.  This 
means that E85 would need to be priced at least 54 cents less than $2.58 per gallon gasoline.  
However, we also need to take the value of FFV owners’ time into consideration because they  
could be spending 21 percent more time at the pump if they are refueling exclusively on E85,.  In 
the U.S., a person’s time is currently valued at around $30 per hour.  This value of time (VOT) 
estimate was based on an average of values identified in a review of economics literature and is 
consistent with 2005 Brownstone and Small VOT estimates.464  Assuming it takes about six 
minutes for a 15-gallon refill, E85 needs to be priced an additional $0.04 per gallon less than 
E10.   
 
 Finally, we accounted for the fact that, as an alternative fuel, it is unlikely that E85 will 
ever be available nationwide.  As mentioned above in Section 1.7.1.2.3, we project that E85 will 
only be available at one-in-four stations in 70 percent of the country by 2022 (under our primary, 
practical maximum scenario).  And unlike diesel fuel, FFV owners are not required to fill up on 
it.  So in order to get consumers to want to refuel on E85 over gasoline, there needs to be an 
additional price incentive at the pump according to a 1997 Oakridge National Lab report.JJJJJJ465  
As shown below in Figure 1.7-11, if an alternative fuel is only available at 25 percent of stations 
and you want people to refuel on it about 74 percent of the time (refer to Section 1.7.1.2.4), it 
needs to be given a 21 cent per gallon price advantage (1997$).  Inflating the 1997 David Greene 
estimate to 2006 dollars, E85 would need to be priced an additional 26 cents per gallon lower 
than E10.  For a breakdown of the required E85 price advantage by program year (after the E10 
blend wall), refer to Table 1.7-9.  
 
 
                                                 
IIIIII
 Denatured ethanol was assumed to have a lower heating value of 77,930 BTU/gal and conventional gasoline 
(E0) was assumed to have an average lower heating value of 115,000 BTU/gal.  E10 was assumed to contain 10 
vol% denatured ethanol and 90 vol% gasoline and E85 was assumed to contain 74 vol% denatured ethanol and 26 
vol% gasoline on average (based on EIA’s AEO 2008 report).    
JJJJJJ
 Although the 1997 David Greene study was based on asking consumers about a hypothetical fuel that “works 
just as well as gasoline”, we assumed that Figure 6 from the report (pictured above) could also be used to determine 
the retail price incentive given to E85 to account for its limited availability .  As explained in the preceding text, this 
was in addition to the incentives assigned to E85 to account for its reduced energy density and additional time spent 
at the pump.   
 234 
Figure 1.7-11. 
Required Price Incentive for Alternative Fuels with Limited Availability 
R
ef
ue
lin
g 
fre
qu
en
cy
 g
ive
n
 
“
re
a
so
n
a
bl
e 
ac
ce
ss
”
Percent of stations offering E85 in areas of the 
country with “reasonable access”, i.e., 25%
$0.21/gal Price Advantage (1997$)X
R
ef
ue
lin
g 
fre
qu
en
cy
 g
ive
n
 
“
re
a
so
n
a
bl
e 
ac
ce
ss
”
 
 
 
Table 1.7-9. 
E85 Limited Availability Price Advantage by Program Year 
1997$ 2006$*
2013 41% $0.05 $0.06
2014 45% $0.06 $0.08
2015 51% $0.09 $0.11
2016 55% $0.11 $0.14
2017 58% $0.13 $0.16
2018 61% $0.14 $0.18
2019 63% $0.15 $0.19
2020 65% $0.17 $0.21
2021 70% $0.19 $0.24
2022 74% $0.21 $0.26
Required E85 
Refueling FreqYear
Required Price Advantage
*Computed using U.S. Department of Labor Inflation Calculator
  http://www.bls.gov/data/inflation_calculator.htm
 
 
 To conclude, our price analysis suggests that E85 would need to be priced around $1.74 
per gallon at retail, or about a third lower than $2.58/gal gasoline in for consumers to refuel on it 
74 percent of the time in 2022.  As expected, higher crude oil prices could make E85 look 
slightly more attractive.  However, there would still need to be a strong E85 price incentive at the 
pump in order for consumers to want to choose it.  Similarly, there would need to be a marked 
price advantage at the terminal level in order for refiners to want to blend E85 (given 
 235 
transportation costs, taxes, and marketing/other costs at retail).   The ethanol and respective corn 
break-even prices for varying crude oil prices are shown below.   Figure 1.7-12 shows the 
projected break-even prices in 2013 (at the E10 blend wall) while Figure 1.7-13 shows the 
projected break-even prices in 2022.  As shown below, the more ethanol that needs to be blended 
as E85 under RFS2, the less valuable it is to refiners.      
 
Figure 1.7-12. 
2013 Ethanol & Corn Break-Even Prices 
0
50
100
150
200
250
50 85 130
Crude Oil Price ($/bbl)
Et
ha
no
l B
re
ak
ev
en
 P
ric
e 
 
(c/
ga
l)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Co
rn
 
B
re
ak
ev
en
 P
ric
e 
($/
bs
hl
)
Ethanol Breakeven Price
Corn Breakeven Price
This is what ethanol would 
need to be priced at in order 
for refiners to want to buy it 
and blend it as E85
This is what corn would 
need to be priced at in 
order for ethanol to be 
marketed at the 
breakeven price after 
the $0.45/gal subsidy.
 
 
 
 236 
Figure 1.7-13. 
2022 Ethanol & Corn Break-Even Prices 
0
50
100
150
200
250
50 85 130
Crude Oil Price ($/bbl)
Et
ha
n
o
l B
re
ak
ev
en
 P
ric
e 
 (c
/g
al
)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Co
rn
 B
re
ak
ev
en
 P
ric
e 
($/
bs
hl
)
Ethanol Breakeven Price
Corn Breakeven Price
This is what ethanol would 
need to be priced at in order 
for refiners to want to buy it 
and blend it as E85
This is what corn would need 
to be priced at in order for 
ethanol to be marketed at the 
breakeven price after the 
$0.45/gal subsidy.
The breakeven feedstock 
pricing for cellulosic ethanol is 
TBD; however, a more 
generous $1.01/gal subsidy 
would apply
 
 
 It is worth noting that these are the theoretical ethanol and corn breakeven prices based 
on what consumers should theoretically be willing to pay for E85 at retail.  However, it is 
possible that the average consumer might be willing to pay more for E85.  According to May 
2008 discussions with petroleum retailers, E85 has to be priced at least 20 percent lower than 
gasoline today in order for consumers to refuel on it.  This is lower than the 30 percent we are 
forecasting in the future under RFS2.  However, as mentioned earlier in Section 1.7.1.2.4, we 
expect also expect consumers motivations for filling up on E85 to shift more towards price in the 
future when large volumes of ethanol need to be consumed under RFS2.  For more information 
on gasoline/ethanol costs, refer to Section 4.4 of the DRIA.   
 
  
1.7.1.3 The Impact of Mid-Level Ethanol Blends (E15/E20) 
 
 For our primary ethanol usage analysis, we considered that there would only be two fuels 
in the future, E10 and E85.  And as demonstrated above, we show that it is feasible to consume 
34 billion gallons of ethanol by 2022 given growth in FFV production and E85 availability and 
projected improvements in the current E10/E85 price relationship.   
 
 However, as explained in Section V.D.3.b of the preamble, several organizations and 
government entities are interested in pursuing mid-level ethanol blends for use in the increasing 
 237 
the concentration of ethanol beyond the current 10 percent limit in the commercial gasoline pool. 
These parties are investigating the impact that mid-level ethanol blends (e.g., E15 or E20) may 
have on exhaust and evaporative emissions, catalyst, engine, and fuel system durability, 
drivability and material compatibility, and onboard diagnostics.  In order to use the information 
collected for waiver application purposes, the mid-level ethanol blend testing will need to 
consider the different engines and fuel systems currently in service that could be exposed to mid-
level ethanol blends and the long-term impact of using such blends. 
  
 While a great deal of testing and evaluation must still occur before EPA could consider 
any waiver request for mid-level ethanol blends, as a sensitivity analysis, we considered the 
implications that adding E15 or E20 to the marketplace could have on ethanol usage and 
supporting fuel infrastructure should such blends be permitted.  For each case, we assumed that 
E10 would need to continue to remain in existence to meet the demand of legacy vehicle and 
non-road engine owners.  We assumed that Tier 2 vehicles could handle up to 20 percent ethanol 
blends (i.e., E15 or E20) and flex fuel vehicles could handle up to E85 (if available) as shown in 
Table 1.7-10.   
 
Table 1.7-10. 
Mid-Level Ethanol Blends Vehicle/Engine Assumptions 
Gasoline Vehicle/Engine 
Classification
Maximum ETOH 
Threshold
Nonroad, HDGVs & Motorcycles Up to 10%
Pre-Tier 2 "Legacy" Vehicles Up to 10%
Tier 2 Vehicles Up to 20%*
Flex Fuel Vehicles (FFVs) Up to 85% 
aContingent upon vehicle test program and waiver approval
 
 
 
 Although Tier 2 and flex-fuel vehicles would not be reliant on E10 in a mid-level ethanol 
blends world, we believe that maintaining E10 (for all vehicles/engines) would be beneficial in  
providing consumer choice.  Experience in past fuel programs suggests that many consumers 
will not be comfortable refueling on higher ethanol blends and will blame any problems that may 
occur on the new fuel (regardless of the actual cause of the vehicle problems) causing a backlash 
against the new fuel requirements.  Therefore, we believe it is critical to continue to allow 
consumers the choice between midlevel blends and conventional gasoline (E10).     
 
 For each scenario, we assumed that mid-level ethanol blends (E15 or E20) could be 
available nationwide by the E10 blend wall (around 2013) by utilizing existing retail storage 
tanks.  We assumed that E10 would be marketed as premium-grade gasoline, the mid-level 
ethanol blend (E15 or E20) would serve as regular and, like today, midgrade would be blended 
from the two fuels as shown in Figure 1.7-14.   
 
 238 
Figure 1.7-14. 
Potential Mid-Level Ethanol Blends Retail Configuration 
 
 
 
 We considered multiple retail tank configurations, but decided the fuel configuration in 
Figure 1.7-14 would be the most likely for several reasons.  For starters, marketing E15 or E20 
as regular grade gasoline would allow retailers to continue to maintain the existing gasoline price 
relationship - regular is the cheapest followed by midgrade then premium.  While we 
acknowledge that this is not the gasoline price relationship in all areas of the county (e.g., in 
certain Midwest cities, migrade is priced below regular), we believe it represents the 
predominant retail trend.  Marketing the mid-level ethanol blend as regular would also result in 
the highest possible ethanol throughput since, as shown below in Table 1.7-11, regular gasoline 
accounts for 85 percent of gasoline sales.  Finally, we believe this configuration is advantageous 
because it allows premium gasoline to continue to be the universal fuel for all gasoline vehicles 
and engines.  The downside to this approach is that if mid-level ethanol blends were only 
approved for flex-fuel, Tier 2 or newer vehicles then legacy vehicles and small engines would be 
forced to refuel on premium gasoline.  Nonetheless, the aforementioned retail configuration is 
consistent with how SIGMA/NACS believes mid-level ethanol blends would be brought to 
market (pending approval).KKKKKK  We seek comment on this approach and alternate ways that 
mid-level ethanol blends could be brought to market without investing in new tanks or displacing 
diesel fuel.   
 
 For each mid-level ethanol blend scenario, we assumed that consumers filling up on 
conventional gasoline would choose fuel grade based on 2006 purchasing trends.  A summary of 
                                                 
KKKKKK
 Based on May 2008 meeting with SIGMA/NACS.   
 239 
historical gasoline purchasing data as well as our ethanol content assumptions for each fuel grade 
is found below in Table 1.7-11.  
 
Table 1.7-11. 
Mid-level Ethanol Blends Vehicle/Engine Assumptions 
In E15 Case In E20 Case
Regular 85% 15% 20%
Midgrade 6% 13% 15%
Premium 9% 10% 10%
Ethanol Content (vol%)% of CG
Sales*
*Source: EIA Petroleum Marketing Annual 2006
Grade of 
Gasoline
 
 
 Based on the vehicle capability assumptions outlined in Table 1.7-10 and the above 
refueling assumptions, we conclude that absent E85, mid-level ethanol blends could help 
increase ethanol usage to about 21 billion gallons (with E15) and 27 billion gallons (with E20).  
As shown below in Figure 1.7-15, adding E15 could postpone the blend wall by about three 
years to 2016 and adding E20 could postpone it another three years to 2019. Although mid-level 
ethanol blends will fall short of meeting the RFS2 requirements, they could provide interim relief 
while the county ramps up E85/FFV infrastructure and/or finds other non-ethanol alternatives 
(e.g., cellulosic diesel or biobutanol) to reach the RFS2 volumes. 
 
 240 
Figure 1.7-15. 
Max E15/E20 Ethanol Consumption Compared to RFS2 Requirements 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
20
10
20
11
20
12
20
13
20
14
20
15
20
16
20
17
20
18
20
19
20
20
20
21
20
22
Year
B
ill
io
n 
G
al
lo
n
s 
o
f E
th
an
ol
Cellulosic Ethanol
Imported Ethanol
Corn Ethanol
E20 Blend Wall
E15 Blend Wall
E10 Blend Wall
 
 
 The cost to make mid-level blends available nationwide is not insignificant.  According 
to the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL), the average retail cost to accommodate 
mid-level blends such as E15 and E20 is approximately $20 thousand per station.LLLLLL  This 
estimate assumes the existing underground storage tank is compatible with ethanol blends greater 
than 10 percent and that most of the necessary changes would be to the dispenser and associated 
above-ground hardware.  We understand that it may be difficult or impossible to confirm the 
compatibility of existing underground storage tanks and other tank-related hardware.  In fact, we 
recently learned that several states including California and Delaware will not allow existing 
underground storage tanks to be upgraded to allow the storage of greater than 10 percent ethanol 
blends.  If we were to assume that $20 thousand was sufficient to retrofit a dispenser/storage tank 
to dispense a mid-level ethanol blend, then the cost of upgrading all gasoline outlets nationwide 
would be $3.3 billion.  If a new underground storage is tank is needed, this would increase the 
per-station by approximately $84 thousand, which would add another $13.8 billion to the cost of 
providing mid-level ethanol blends nationwide.  And, as mentioned above, that would still not 
get us all the way to meeting the RFS2 volumes requirements.  Once the nation hit the mid-level 
blend wall, refiners and marketers would still need to invest another $2-3 billion in E85 
infrastructure (depending on the scenario) or find other non-ethanol alternatives to meet the 
                                                 
LLLLLL
 For more information on this cost estimate, refer to Section 4.2 of the DRIA. 
 241 
RFS2 volume requirements.  For more information on the retail impacts of bringing mid-level 
ethanol blends to market, refer to Section 1.6.11. 
 
 As explained above, without E85, mid-level ethanol blends will fall short of meeting the 
34 billion gallon ethanol standard.  It is possible that other non-ethanol biofuels could come 
online and help the nation meet the RFS2 standard without more ethanol.  However, for analysis 
purposes, we considered how the nation might meet RFS2 with a combination of mid-level 
ethanol blends and E85.  For this part of the sensitivity analysis, we maintained our assumption 
that mid-level ethanol blends could be available nationwide by 2013.  However, we also assumed 
that retailers would invest in E85 infrastructure in parallel.  But expect that retailers would not 
invest in as much E85 infrastructure as the primary E10/E85 scenario (refer to Figure 1.7-9).  For 
analysis purposes, we assumed that reasonable 1-in-4 access to E85 might only growth to 50 
percent by 2022.  Our logic was that gasoline retailers who already invested $20,000-$84,000 per 
station (depending on the necessary upgrades) to make mid-level ethanol blends available 
nationwide would not turn around and invest another $122,000 per station in E85 infrastructure 
if unnecessary.  The more conservative 50 percent E85 access growth curve we assumed 
compared to our business as usual growth estimate (detailed in Section 1.6 of the DRIA) is 
shown below in Figure 1.7-16.   
 
Figure 1.7-16. 
Projected Growth in E85 Access in a Mid-Level Ethanol Blends World 
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
20
07
20
08
20
09
20
10
20
11
20
12
20
13
20
14
20
15
20
16
20
17
20
18
20
19
20
20
20
21
20
22
Year
%
 o
f c
o
u
n
tr
y 
w
ith
 
re
as
o
n
ab
le
 
1-
in
-
4 
a
cc
e
ss
 
to
 
E8
5 Conservative Growth in E85 Access
Business as Usual E85 Access
 
  
 242 
 It is worth noting, that this graph assumes a gradual, linear phase in of E85 infrastructure 
reaching 50 percent by 2022.  In reality, retailers might wait until after the E15 or E20 blend wall 
to really invest in E85 infrastructure.  The result would be negligible E85 station growth until the 
2016 or 2019 timeframe (depending on the mid-level ethanol blends scenario) and then steep 
growth in E85 infrastructure.  While this would arguably provide retailers with the most lead-
time to postpone their E85 investments, it could result in unrealistic E85 station growth.  As a 
result, for analysis purposes, we analyzed the gradual phase-in on E85 infrastructure. shown 
above in Figure 1.7-16 
 
 In the hypothetical mid-level ethanol blends and E85 world, we assumed that automakers 
would only produce the “committed” number of FFVs detailed in Table 1.7-4.  To re-summarize, 
this involves The Detroit 3 following through with their 50 percent FFV commitment and no 
significant growth in non-domestic FFV production (beyond what was forecasted in 2009 MY 
offerings).    To meet the RFS2 requirements with mid-level ethanol blends and this less-
aggressive E85/FFV scenario, would require the following FFV E85 refueling rates. 
 
Figure 1.7-17. 
FFV E85 Refueling Rates Needed to Meet the RFS2 Requirements 
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
20
10
20
11
20
12
20
13
20
14
20
15
20
16
20
17
20
18
20
19
20
20
20
21
20
22
Year
FF
V 
E8
5 
Re
fu
el
in
g 
Fr
eq
u
e
n
c
y 
(G
ive
n
 
A
cc
es
s)
E10/E85, 70% E85 Access
E10/E15/E85, 50% E85 Access
E10/E20/E85, 50% E85 Access
  
 
 
 As shown above in Figure 1.7-17, in an E10/E15/E85 world (with committed FFV 
production and E85 access reaching 50 percent by 2022), the required FFV E85 refueling rate 
would be just as high in 2022 as that in the E10/E85 world (with optimistic FFV production and 
 243 
E85 access reaching 70 percent by 2022).  This scenario would essentially demand the same 
changes to the E10/E85 price relationship as described in Section 1.7.1.2.5 but require higher 
capital costs.  For this reason, E20 makes more sense than E15 if they both require the same 
retail upgrades (as described in Section 1.6).  However, offering E20 nationwide and investing in 
less aggressive E85/FFV infrastructure is still more expensive overall than investing solely in an 
E85/FFV infrastructure and not bringing mid-level blends to market.  For more information mid-
level ethanol blend costs, refer to Section 4.2 of the DRIA.  
 
1.7.1.4 Impacts on 2022 Fuel Volumes 
 
 As explained in Section 1.7.1.2.1, fixing gasoline energy demand according to AEO 2008 
essentially dictates how much ethanol can be consumed as conventional gasoline.  As a result, 
making different assumptions regarding the ethanol content of conventional gasoline (i.e.,  E10, 
E15, or E20), impacts the nation’s ethanol usage potential and the timing of the respective blend 
walls under the proposed RFS2 program (refer to Figure 1.7-15).  Adding in E85/FFVs to meet 
the RFS2 volume requirements shifts ethanol usage out of conventional gasoline and into E85.  
As shown below in Tables 1.7-12 and 1.7-13, although holding total gasoline energy demand and 
the ethanol volume constant under RFS2 fixes the overall fuel volumes in 2022, it changes the 
distribution of ethanol.   
 Table 1.7-12. 
Comparison of Total Fuel Volumes Under Various Scenarios 
E10 E12.5 E15 E20 E85 T
Blend Wall E10 Nationwide (No E15, E20 or E85) 147.61 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 14
Blend Wall E10 & E15 Nationwide (No E85)a 31.27 7.39 110.85 0.00 0.00 14
Blend Wall E10 & E20 Nationwide (No E85)b 31.27 0.00 7.45 112.76 0.00 15
RFS2 Control Case E10/E85 Scenario (No E15 or E20) 124.55 0.00 0.00 0.00 29.30 15
RFS2 Control Case Combination E10/E15/E85 Scenarioa 29.67 6.41 96.24 0.00 21.54 15
RFS2 Control Case Combination E10/E20/E85 Scenariob 30.34 0.00 6.88 104.14 12.50 15
Fuel Scenario
aAssumes E12.5 (midgrade) is blended from E10 (premium) and E15 (regular).
bAssumes E15 (midgrade) is blended from E10 (premium) and E20 (regular).
Projected 2022 Fuel Volumes
 
 
Table 1.7-13. 
Comparison of Ethanol Volumes Under Various Scenarios 
E10 E12.5 E15 E20 E85 T
Blend Wall E10 Nationwide (No E15, E20 or E85) 14.76 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 1
Blend Wall E10 & E15 Nationwide (No E85) 3.13 0.92 16.63 0.00 0.00 2
Blend Wall E10 & E20 Nationwide (No E85) 3.13 0.00 1.12 22.55 0.00 2
RFS2 Control Case E10/E85 Scenario (No E15 or E20) 12.45 0.00 0.00 0.00 21.69 3
RFS2 Control Case Combination E10/E15/E85 Scenario 2.97 0.80 14.44 0.00 15.94 3
RFS2 Control Case Combination E10/E20/E85 Scenario 3.03 0.00 1.03 20.83 9.25 3
Fuel Scenario
aAssumes E12.5 (midgrade) is blended from E10 (premium) and E15 (regular).
bAssumes E15 (midgrade) is blended from E10 (premium) and E20 (regular).
Projected 2022 Ethanol Usage
 
 
   
1.7.1.5 Projected Ethanol Consumption by County in 2022 
 
 To understand the impacts of increased ethanol use on emissions and air quality (to be 
modeled under the final rule), we estimated where the ethanol might be used under the RFS2 
program.  We started by assuming that E10 would be available nationwide in 2022 (no E0), and 
for this county-level analysis, we focused on our primary E85/FFV scenario.  We assumed 
practical, yet aggressive growth in E85 access (one-in-four station access reaching 70% by 
2022).  With respect to FFVs, we assumed optimistic production (outlined in Table 1.7-4) and 
made the simplifying assumption that all FFVs would be distributed homogeneously.  We plan 
on purchasing FFV registration data or relying on the DOE FFV study required under EISA for 
the final rule.  As explained in Section 1.7.1.2, this determined the manner in which E85 would 
be consumed (i.e., the number of FFVs required, the number of E85 stations, and the average 
FFV E85 refueling frequency).  However, it does not tell us where E85 would be consumed. 
 
 To estimate where E85 might be consumed under the proposed RFS2 program in 2022, 
we conducted a cost effectiveness study.  For each area of the county, we began by looking at 
gasoline delivered prices.  We started with state-level gasoline prices (excluding taxes) provided 
by EIA’s Petroleum Marketing Annual 2006.466  We relied on Table 31 for average gasoline 
prices, looked to Table 34 for RFG prices and back-calculated CG prices by applying the 
respective gasoline fuel volumes provided in Table 48.  For states requiring 7 or 7.8-lb gasoline 
in the summertime, we applied PADD-average low-RVP gasoline production costs467 to come up 
with the respective low-RVP and 9-lb conventional gasoline prices in these states  From there we 
added in the corresponding gasoline taxes (state plus federal) according to the American 
Petroleum Institute (API).468  This gave us the average retail cost of gasoline by state and fuel 
type.   
 
 Next we converted the gasoline prices into competitive retail E85 prices by adjusting for 
the reduced energy density of E85, the increased refueling time, and E85’s presumed limited 
availability in 2022.  For a more detailed assessment, refer to Section 1.7.1.2.5.  From there, we 
deducted fuel taxes (assumed to be the same as gasoline), backed out marketing costs and retail 
profits (assumed to be $0.10 per gallon) and subtracted the terminal-to-retail transportation costs 
(assumed to be $0.03) to arrive at the estimated retail value of E85, and ultimately, the retail 
value of ethanol.MMMMMM  Once we computed the retail value of ethanol, we compared it to the 
estimated ethanol delivered price (refer to Section 4.2 of the DRIA) to come up with the 
respective E85 profit margin.  
 
 To conclude, we assigned E85 to the areas of the county with the highest E85 profit 
margins, or in some cases, the least negative E85 profit margins until we arrived at 
approximately 34 billion gallons of ethanol in 2022.  For a graphical representation of the areas 
of the country we assumed would receive/consume E85, refer to Figure 1.7-18. 
 
                                                 
MMMMMM
 For analysis purposes we assumed that E85 was taxed at the same rate as gasoline.  We acknowledge that a 
number of states currently have reduced excise taxes or excise tax exemptions for E85.  However, the extent of the 
tax breaks is somewhat unknown and the potential that these tax breaks will exist in the future is uncertain.  We plan 
on revisiting state-level E85 excise tax exemptions for the Final Rule.  For more on marketing and transportation 
costs, refer to Section 4.4 of the DRIA.   
   
Figure 1.7-18. 
Projected E85 Usage in 2022 Under RFS2 
 
  
1.7.2 Biodiesel & Renewable Diesel Consumption  
 
 Biodiesel, like ethanol, is generally blended at the end of the distribution chain, just 
before delivery to retail outlets.  Because of its chemical properties, it is not currently considered 
fungible with diesel fuel, and thus its blend level in fuels offered for sale is typically deliberate 
and explicit.  Renewable diesel, on the other hand, is a fuel or hydrocarbon blendstock which can 
be blended into fungible fuel at any point in the distribution system, such that the blend level at 
the final point of use is not typically of concern and, in fact, would probably be difficult to 
determine.  Because of its nature, and the relatively small volumes we are projecting (less than 
0.5 billion gallons per year), we have not analyzed distribution or use impacts for renewable 
diesel.  The remainder of this section addresses biodiesel use. 
 
 Vehicle and engine manufacturers recognize biodiesel as a lubricity improver at low 
levels, something that is useful with ultra-low sulfur diesel fuel now phasing in across the 
country.  Therefore, most state that their products are compatible with blends up to 5%, and a 
few suggest blends up to 20% can be used without problems.  Therefore, our analysis assumes 
blends up to 5% can find widespread use. 
   
 
 In order to conduct our distribution and emissions analyses, we needed to forecast 
approximate volumes of biodiesel to be used in each state.  We considered transportation diesel 
fuel and home heating oil as the primary uses for biodiesel.  For transportation fuel estimates, we 
assumed that biodiesel would be preferentially used in states that have blend mandates or 
significant per-gallon incentives.  Table 1.7-14 shows the states with such mandates and 
incentives on record as of summer 2008, as well as the associated potential biodiesel volumes 
based on 2005 diesel fuel use.469  State-level forecasts were not available for transportation fuel 
use, thus the reliance on historical data for this estimate.  
 
Table 1.7-14. 
State biodiesel incentives as of summer 2008 and potential volumes based on 2005 data.470 
Diesel fuel use 2% biodiesel 5% biodiesel
(million gal/yr) (million gal/yr) (million gal/yr)
IL per-gallon tax incentive(s) for B11+, 
state fleet requirement
1,660 33.2
KS per-gallon tax incentive(s) for B2+ 816 16.3
LA B2 mandate with some conditions 1,734 34.7
MA B2 mandate, increasing to B15 with 
some conditions
491 24.5
MI per-gallon tax incentive(s) for B5+ 1,071 53.5
MN B2 mandate; state fleet requirement 999 20.0
NC per-gallon tax incentive(s), B2 school 
bus requirement
1,234 24.7
ND per-gallon tax incentive(s) 358 7.2
NE per-gallon tax incentive(s) 547 10.9
NM B5 mandate with some conditions 475 23.7
OH per-gallon tax incentive(s) 1,556 31.1
OR B2 mandate, increasing to B5 with 
some conditions
738 36.9
SC per-gallon tax incentive(s) 764 15.3
SD per-gallon tax incentive(s) 263 5.3
TX per-gallon tax incentive(s) 5,339 106.8
WA B2 mandate, increasing to B5 with 
some conditions
1,230 24.6
Total biodiesel 468.7
State Incentive or mandate
 
 
 
 Table 1.7-15 shows home heating oil use in 2005.  We estimate potential biodiesel use in 
heating oil at 89 million gallons per year based on a 2% blend in all heating oil north of the 
Washington, DC, area (i.e., PADD 1A and 1B).  This area was chosen because it is where the 
majority of heating oil is used, and should have adequate biodiesel access from New Jersey, 
Pennsylvania, and Connecticut in our forecasted production scenarios (see Section 1.5.4).  To the 
extent that heating oil use declines over time, the blend levels may increase in some areas or in 
the shoulder seasons, such that the total biodiesel volume used in this market would not decline 
drastically.   
 
   
Table 1.7-15. 
Potential biodiesel use in heating oil based on 2005 data.471 
Heating oil 2% biodiesel Volume Used
(million gal/yr) (million gal/yr) (million gal/yr)
U.S. 5,565,489 111.3
PADD 1 4,759,198 95.2
PADD 1A 1,923,405 38.5 38.5
CT 545,910 10.9
ME 308,464 6.2
MA 674,324 13.5
NH 175,484 3.5
RI 136,618 2.7
VT 82,604 1.7
PADD 1B 2,529,106 50.6 50.6
DE 33,221 0.7
DC 12,832 0.3
MD 149,919 3.0
NJ 322,088 6.4
NY 1,282,899 25.7
PA 728,147 14.6
PADD 1C 306,687 6.1
FL 3,608 0.1
GA 1,520 0.0
NC 81,528 1.6
SC 8,810 0.2
VA 197,255 3.9
WV 13,966 0.3
89.1Total used for biodiesel in heating oil
Area
 
 
 
 Combining these volumes gives 558 million gallons per year potential biodiesel 
consumption, leaving approximately 250 million gallons to be sold in blends above the projected 
levels shown here, or in states not included here.  Further use and distribution of biodiesel is 
discussed in more detail in Section 4.2.2.2. 
249 
Chapter 2:  Lifecycle GHG Analysis 
 
 
2.1 Life Cycle Introduction / Overview 
 
 Lifecycle modeling, often referred to as fuel cycle or well-to-wheel analysis, assesses the 
net impacts of a fuel throughout each stage of its production and use including production / 
extraction of the feedstock, feedstock transportation, fuel production, fuel transportation and 
distribution, and tailpipe emissions.  This chapter describes the methodology developed by EPA 
to determine the lifecycle greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions of renewable fuels as required by 
EISA.  This methodology was utilized to determine which renewable fuels qualify for the four 
different GHG reduction thresholds established in EISA.  We also explain how feedstocks and 
fuel types not included in our analysis will be addressed and incorporated in the future.  The 
overall GHG benefits of the RFS program, which are based on the same methodology presented 
here, are also provided.   
 
 The GHG provisions in EISA are notable for the GHG thresholds mandated for each 
category of renewable fuel and also the mandated lifecycle approach to those thresholds.  
Renewable fuel must achieve a 20% reduction in lifecycle greenhouse gas emissions compared 
to the average lifecycle greenhouse gas emissions for gasoline or diesel sold or distributed as 
transportation fuel in 2005.  Similarly, biomass-based diesel and advanced biofuels must achieve 
a 50% reduction, and cellulosic biofuels a 60% reduction.  To EPA’s knowledge, the GHG 
reduction thresholds are the first lifecycle GHG performance requirements included in federal 
law.  While these thresholds do not directly constitute a greenhouse gas control program for 
renewable fuels, in combination with the volume mandates, they are designed to ensure 
significant GHG emission reductions from the use of renewable fuels and encourage use of 
GHG-reducing renewable fuels.   
 
 The definition of lifecycle greenhouse gas emissions established by Congress is also 
important.  Congress specified that:  
 
The term ‘lifecycle greenhouse gas emissions’ means the aggregate quantity of 
greenhouse gas emissions (including direct emissions and significant indirect 
emissions such as significant emissions from land use changes), as determined by the 
Administrator, related to the full fuel lifecycle, including all stages of fuel and 
feedstock production and distribution, from feedstock generation or extraction 
through the distribution and delivery and use of the finished fuel to the ultimate 
consumer, where the mass values for all greenhouse gases are adjusted to account for 
their relative global warming potential.472 
 
This definition requires the Agency to look broadly at lifecycle analyses and to develop a 
methodology that accounts for all the important factors that may significantly influence this 
assessment, including the secondary or indirect impacts of expanded biofuels use.  EPA’s 
analysis described below indicates that the assessment of lifecycle GHG emissions for biofuels is 
significantly affected by the secondary agricultural sector GHG impacts from increased biofuel 
feedstock production (e.g., changes in livestock emissions due to changes in agricultural 
250 
commodity prices) and the international impact of land use change from increased biofuel 
feedstock production.  Thus, these factors must be appropriately incorporated into EPA’s 
lifecycle methodology to properly assess full lifecycle GHG performance of biofuels in 
accordance with the EISA definition of lifecycle GHG emissions.  As discussed below, there are 
many other potential impacts that do not have a meaningful impact on the lifecycle analysis and 
therefore fall outside the scope of our analysis.   
 
2.2 Fuels Life Cycle Analysis Background 
 
2.2.1 RFS1 Rulemaking Analysis 
 
 Use of a life cycle approach to analyze different transportation fuels requires modeling 
and evaluation of many different input factors.  The starting point for EPA’s life cycle work was 
the analysis conducted as part of the Renewable Fuel Standard (RFS1) rulemaking in response to 
the Energy Policy Act of 2005.  For the RFS1 rule, we estimated GHG benefits based on life 
cycle GHG modeling of the different renewable fuels mandated as part of the rule.  EPA’s 
approach for the RFS1 was to rely heavily on the “Greenhouse Gases, Regulated Emissions, and 
Energy Use in Transportation” (GREET) model, developed by the Department of Energy’s 
Argonne National Laboratory (ANL). 
 
However, it has become increasingly apparent that this type of first order or attributional 
life cycle modeling has notable shortcomings, especially when evaluating the implications of 
biofuel policies.NNNNNN  In fact, the main criticism EPA received in reaction to our previous 
RFS1 lifecycle analysis was that we did not include important secondary, indirect, or 
consequential impacts of biofuel use, specifically: 
 
− Biomass production focused on the feedstock used (e.g., corn) and did not capture 
other secondary market driven agricultural sector impacts, such as changes in 
other crop patterns and livestock production as a response to changing prices in 
biofuel feedstocks.   
 
− Production of co-products from ethanol production required some type of 
allocation, either splitting emissions of fuel production between fuel and co-
products or examining the use of co-products in other markets.  For example in 
the case of corn ethanol, the co-product of ethanol production is a feed product 
that is assumed to replace the use of corn and soybean meal.  Therefore, the 
emissions of producing an equivalent amount of these products are subtracted 
from the life cycle assessment.  This required modeling of the co-product 
economic market that is typically done outside of the life cycle modeling.   
 
− To the extent that they are included, land use impacts are typically confined to 
direct impacts, e.g., land converted to produce corn directly used for ethanol 
production.  This does not capture effects of land use converted to produce crops 
                                                 
NNNNNNSee also, Conceptual and Methodological Issues in Lifecycle Analysis of Transportation Fuels, Mark A. 
Delucchi, Institute of Transportation Studies, University of California, Davis, 2004, UCD-ITS-RR-04-45 for a 
description of issues with traditional life cycle analysis used to model GHG impacts of biofuels and biofuel policies.   
251 
that are indirectly impacted by increased biofuel production.  One specific 
example of this is increased corn ethanol production in the U.S. could lead to 
decreased crop exports resulting in increased crop production and land use 
impacts internationally.  Another example is corn acre increase resulting in less 
rice production acres and lower CH4 emissions.   
 
− The attributional modeling approach is not necessarily linked to a specific policy 
case, but is rather a general representation of biofuel production.  Consideration of 
specific policies and interaction between different fuel volumes could have very 
distinct impacts especially in the agricultural sector.   
 
− The replacement of petroleum fuel was represented by an average gallon of fuel.  
However, we recognize that an additional gallon of renewable fuel replaces the 
marginal gallon of petroleum fuel.  To the extent that the marginal gallon of 
renewable fuel is from feedstocks grown on highly productive land and displaces 
petroleum fuel derived from oil sands or other types of crude oil that are 
associated with higher than average GHG emissions, replacing these fuels could 
have a larger GHG benefit.  Conversely to the extent the marginal gallon of 
renewable fuel is from feedstocks grown on marginal land and displaces imported 
gasoline produced from light crude, replacing these fuels would have a smaller 
GHG benefit.   
 
− The attributional modeling approach assumes that one Btu of renewable energy 
produced displaces one Btu of petroleum energy.  In reality, the production of 
renewable fuels is expected to lower world energy prices (as discussed in Chapter 
5.2), which in turn could lead to a marginal increase in world energy consumption 
and less than a one-for-one Btu replacement. 
 
A key aspect of the issues described above is that the attributional life cycle approach 
typically does not include economic modeling and the impacts of price changes in the analysis.  
Therefore, to address some of these issues, we have updated our life cycle methodology to 
include the use of economic models to perform a consequential type of life cycle analysis.   
 
 This approach of incorporating economic models into a life cycle assessment is not a new 
concept.  Most notably the Economic Input-Output Life Cycle Assessment (EIO-LCA) method 
has been employed in the past.  The EIO-LCA method estimates the materials and energy 
resources required for, and the environmental emissions resulting from, activities in the overall 
economy.  The EIO-LCA method was theorized and developed by economist Wassily Leontief 
in the 1970s based on his earlier input-output work from the 1930s for which he received the 
Nobel Prize in Economics.  Researchers at the Green Design Institute of Carnegie Mellon 
University operationalized this method in the mid-1990s, once sufficient computing power was 
widely available to perform the large-scale matrix manipulations required in real-time.  This 
work relies on static input-output tables of the U.S. economy to determine the full economy wide 
impacts of producing a product or service.   
 
252 
 Mark Delucchi at the Institute of Transportation Studies of the University of California 
Davis has developed the Lifecycle Emissions Model (LEM) that looks at transportation fuels.  
He has also highlighted the need to look at market impacts when considering biofuel production 
and specifically to consider land use changes.  There have also been several studies examining 
the consequential or economic based life cycle assessment including several focusing on the 
agricultural sector.   
 
Several studies and analyses conducted since the completion of RFS1 rulemaking have 
also contributed to our understanding of the lifecycle environmental impacts of biofuel 
production.  These studies, and others, have highlighted the potential impacts of biofuel 
production on the agricultural sector and specifically identified land use change impacts as an 
important consideration when determining GHG impacts of biofuels.473, 474  In the meantime, the 
dramatic increase in U.S. production of biofuels has heightened the concern about the impacts 
biofuels might have on land use and has increased the importance of considering these and other 
indirect impacts in lifecycle analysis.   
 
In order to improve our life cycle modeling for this proposed rulemaking, EPA held a 
series of discussions with interested stakeholders during July and early August 2007 and again in 
early 2008.  Stakeholder outreach included discussions with academics and other researchers, the 
California Air Resources Board (CARB), the U.S. departments of Agriculture and Energy, and 
the following stakeholders who provided comments on RFS life cycle analysis: 
− American Petroleum Institute 
− National Petroleum Refiners Association 
− Renewable Fuels Association 
− National Biodiesel Board 
− DuPont 
− Union of Concerned Scientists 
− Natural Resources Defense Council 
− Environmental Defense 
 
Through dozens of meetings with this wide range of experts and stakeholders, EPA has 
shared and sought input on this methodology.  We also have relied on the expertise of the U.S. 
Department of Agriculture (USDA) and the Department of Energy (DOE) to help inform many 
of the key assumptions and modeling inputs for this analysis and have gained their support for 
their use.  Dialogue with the Government of California and the European Union on their parallel, 
on-going efforts in GHG life cycle analysis has also helped inform EPA’s methodology.  While 
there is no consensus, the input we received through these interactions is reflected in the 
approach described here.   
 
2.2.2 Updates for this Proposed Rulemaking 
 
Based on discussions with these numerous stakeholders and review of literature, we have 
developed an approach for this proposed rulemaking that enhances the GREET modeling by 
including additional information and models to address concerns with our existing work by 
significantly strengthening and expanding our coverage of agricultural sector impacts.   
 
253 
 Currently, no single model can capture all of the complex interactions associated with 
estimating lifecycle GHG emissions for biofuels, taking into account the "significant indirect 
emissions such as significant emissions from land use change" required by EISA.  For example, 
some lifecycle analysis tools typically used in the past focus on process modeling—the energy 
and resultant emissions associated with the direct production of a fuel at a petroleum refinery or 
biofuel production facility.  But this is only one component in the production of the fuel.  Clearly 
in the case of biofuels, impacts from and on the agricultural sector are important, because this 
sector produces feedstock for biofuel production.  Commercial agricultural operations make 
many of their decisions based on an economic assessment of profit maximization.  Assessment 
of the interactions throughout the agricultural sector requires an analysis of the commodity 
markets using economic models.  However, existing economy wide general equilibrium 
economic models are not detailed enough to capture the specific agricultural sector interactions 
critical to our analysis (e.g., changes in acres by crop type) and would not provide the types of 
outputs needed for a thorough GHG analysis.  As a result, EPA has used the best tools available 
for each specific component of the analysis to create a more comprehensive estimate of GHG 
emissions.  Where no direct links between the different models exist, specific components and 
outputs of each are used and combined to provide an analytical framework and the composite 
lifecycle assessment results.   
 
To quantify the emissions factors associated with different steps of the production and 
use of various fuels (e.g., extraction of petroleum products, transport of feedstocks), we used the 
spreadsheet analysis tool developed by Argonne National Laboratories, the Greenhouse gases, 
Regulated Emissions, and Energy use in Transportation (GREET) model.  This analysis tool 
includes the GHG emissions associated with the production and combustion of fossil fuels 
(diesel fuel, gasoline, natural gas, coal, etc.).  These fossil fuels are used both in the production 
of biofuels, (e.g., diesel fuel used in farm tractors and natural gas used at ethanol plants) and 
could also be displaced by renewable fuel use in the transportation sector.  GREET also 
estimates the GHG emissions estimates associated with electricity production required for 
biofuel and petroleum fuel production.  For the agricultural sector, we also relied upon GREET 
to provide GHG emissions associated with the production and transport of agricultural inputs 
such as fertilizer, herbicides, pesticides, etc.  While GREET provides direct GHG emissions 
estimates associated with the extraction-through-combustion phases of fuel use, it does not 
capture some of the secondary impacts associated with the fuel, such as changes in the 
composition of feed used for animal production which would be expected due to changes in cost.  
EPA addresses these secondary impacts through other models described later in this section.  
GREET has been under development for several years and has undergone extensive peer review 
through multiple updates.  Of the available sources of information on lifecycle GHG emissions 
of fossil energy consumed, we believe that GREET offers the most comprehensive treatment of 
emissions from the covered sources.   
 
For some steps in the production of biofuels, we use more detailed models to capture 
some of the dynamic market interactions that result from various policies.  Here, we briefly 
describe the different models incorporated into our analysis to provide specific details for various 
lifecycle components.   
 
254 
To estimate the changes in the domestic agricultural sector (e.g., changes in crop acres 
resulting from increased demand for biofuel feedstock or changes in the number of livestock due 
to higher corn prices) and their associated emissions, we used the Forestry and Agricultural 
Sector Optimization Model (FASOM), developed by Texas A&M University and others.  
FASOM is a partial equilibrium economic model of the U.S. forest and agricultural sectors.  EPA 
selected the FASOM model for this analysis for several reasons.  FASOM is a comprehensive 
forestry and agricultural sector model that tracks over 2,000 production possibilities for field 
crops, livestock, and biofuels for private lands in the contiguous United States.  It accounts for 
changes in CO2, methane, and N2O from most agricultural activities and tracks carbon 
sequestration and carbon losses over time.  Another advantage of FASOM is that it captures the 
impacts of all crop production, not just biofuel feedstock.  Thus, as compared to some earlier 
assessments of lifecycle emission, using FASOM allows us to determine secondary agricultural 
sector impacts, such as crop shifting and reduced demand due to higher prices.  It also captures 
changes in the livestock market (e.g., smaller herd sizes that result from higher feed costs) and 
U.S. export changes.   FASOM also has been used by EPA to consider U.S. forest and 
agricultural sector GHG mitigation options.475 
 
To estimate the impacts of biofuels feedstock production on international agricultural and 
livestock production, we used the integrated Food and Agricultural Policy and Research Institute 
(FAPRI) international models, developed by Iowa State University and the University of 
Missouri.  These models capture the biological, technical, and economic relationships among key 
variables within a particular commodity and across commodities.  FAPRI is a worldwide 
agricultural sector economic model that was run by the Center for Agricultural and Rural 
Development (CARD) at Iowa State University on behalf of EPA.  The FAPRI models have 
been previously employed to examine the impacts of World Trade Organization proposals, 
changes in the European Union’s Common Agricultural Policy, analyze farm bill proposals since 
1984, and evaluate the impact of biofuel development in the United States.   In addition, the 
FAPRI models have been used by the USDA Office of Chief Economist, Congress, and the 
World Bank to examine agricultural impacts from government policy changes, market 
developments, and land use shifts.   
 
Although FASOM predicts land use and export changes in the U.S. due to greater 
demand for domestic biofuel feedstock, it does not assess how international agricultural 
production might respond to these changes in commodity prices and U.S. exports.  The FAPRI 
model does predict how much crop land will change in other countries but does not predict what 
type of land such as forest or pasture will be affected.  We used data analyses provided by 
Winrock International to estimate what land types will be converted into crop land in each 
country and the GHG emissions associated with the land conversions.  Winrock has used 2001-
2004 satellite data to analyze recent land use changes around the world that have resulted from 
the social, economic, and political forces that drive land use.  Winrock has then combined the 
recent land use change patterns with various estimates of carbon stocks associated with different 
types of land at the state level.  This international land use assessment is an important 
consideration in our lifecycle GHG assessment and is explained in more detail later in this 
chapter.  
 
255 
To test the robustness of the FASOM, FAPRI and Winrock results, we are also evaluating 
the Global Trade Analysis Project (GTAP), a multi-region, multi-sector, computable general 
equilibrium model that estimates changes in world agricultural production.  Maintained through 
Purdue University, GTAP projects international land use change based on the economics of land 
conversion, rather than using the historical data approach applied by FAPRI/Winrock.  GTAP is 
designed to project changes in international land use as a result of the change in U.S. biofuel 
policies, based on the relative land use values of cropland, forest, and pastureland.  The GTAP 
design has the advantage of explicitly modeling the competition between different land types due 
to a change in policy.  As further discussed in Section 2.6.5.3.3, GTAP has several 
disadvantages, some of which prevented its use for the proposal.  We expect to correct several of 
these shortcomings between the proposed and final rules, therefore we expect to use the GTAP 
model as part of the final rule. 
 
The assessments provided in this proposal use the values provided by the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) to estimate the impacts of N2O emissions 
from fertilizer application.  However, due to concern that this may underestimate N2O emissions 
from fertilizer application476, we are working with the CENTURY and DAYCENT models, 
developed by Colorado State University to update our assessments.  The DAYCENT model 
simulates plant-soil systems and is capable of simulating detailed daily soil water and 
temperature dynamics and trace gas fluxes (CH4, N2O, NOx and N2). The CENTURY model is a 
generalized plant-soil ecosystem model that simulates plant production, soil carbon dynamics, 
soil nutrient dynamics, and soil water and temperature.  We anticipate the results of this new 
modeling work will be reflected in our assessments for the final rule.  More description of this 
ongoing work is included in the Section 2.6.2.2. 
 
 To estimate the GHG emissions associated with renewable fuel production, we used 
detailed ASPEN-based process models developed by USDA and DOE’s National Renewable 
Energy Laboratory (NREL).  While GREET contains estimates for renewable fuel production, 
these estimates are based on existing technology.  We expect biofuel production technology to 
improve over time, and we projected improvements in process technology over time based on 
available information.  These projections are discussed in DRIA Chapter 4.  We then utilized the 
ASPEN-based process models to assess the impacts of these improvements.  We also cross-
checked the ASPEN-based process model predictions by comparing them to a number of 
industry sources and other modeling efforts that estimate potential improvements in ethanol 
production over time, including the Biofuel Energy Systems Simulator (BESS) model.  BESS is 
a software tool developed by the University of Nebraska that calculates the energy efficiency, 
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, and natural resource requirements of corn–to-ethanol biofuel 
production systems.  We used the GREET model to estimate the GHG emissions associated with 
current technology as used by petroleum refineries, because we do not expect significant changes 
in petroleum refinery technology.   
 
 We used the EPA-developed Motor Vehicle Emission Simulator (MOVES) to estimate 
vehicle tailpipe GHG emissions.  The MOVES modeling system estimates emissions for on-road 
and nonroad sources, covers a broad range of pollutants, and allows multiple scale analysis, from 
fine-scale analysis to national inventory estimation. 
 
256 
Finally, for the FRM we intend to use the Energy Information Administration's National 
Energy Modeling System (NEMS) to estimate the secondary impacts on the energy market 
associated with increased renewable fuel production.  NEMS is a modeling system that simulates 
the behavior of energy markets and their interactions with the U.S. economy by explicitly 
representing the economic decision-making involved in the production, conversion, and 
consumption of energy products.  NEMS should model the secondary impacts that greater 
renewable fuel use may have on the prices and quantities of other sources of energy, and the 
greenhouse gas emissions associated with these changes in the energy sector.  It was not possible 
to complete this analysis in time for the NPRM. 
 
 While EPA is using the most state-of-the-art tools available today for each of the 
lifecycle components considered, we understand the concern that using multiple models 
necessitates integrating these models and, where possible, applying a common set of 
assumptions.  As discussed later in this chapter, this is particularly important for the two 
agricultural sector models, FASOM and FAPRI, which are being used in combination to describe 
the agricultural sector impacts domestically and internationally.  As described in more detail in 
the DRIA Chapter 5, we have worked with the FAPRI and FASOM models to align several key 
assumptions.  As a result, the projected agricultural impacts described in Section 2.6 are 
relatively consistent across both models.  One outstanding issue is the differences between the 
modeling results associated with increased soybean based biodiesel production.  We intend to 
further refine the soybean biodiesel scenarios for the final rule.    
 
Figure 2.2-1 graphically shows the different models used and what parts of the life cycle 
they are used to represent.   
 
Figure 2.2-1. System Boundaries and Models Used 
FASOM
FAPRI
WINROCK/GTAP
GREET
GREET
GREET/NREL/
USDA ASPEN
ORNL
GREET/MOVES
DAYCENT
NEMS/GREET
 
257 
2.3 Goal and Scope of This Analysis 
 
Life cycle analysis is used in several ways for this proposed rulemaking.  Per fuel GHG 
reductions are used to develop threshold determinations for specific fuels.  Life cycle analysis is 
also used to determine the overall impact of the rulemaking on GHG emissions worldwide.   
 
The analysis conducted to assess the fuel specific GHG performance relative to the 
thresholds in the standards is described in Section 2.3 through 2.8.  The analysis conducted to 
determine the overall GHG emission impact of the rulemaking is provided in Section 2.9.   
 
2.3.1 Goal 
 
The proposed rulemaking involves determining life cycle GHG impacts of specific fuels 
and fuel pathways for comparison with thresholds as defined in the legislation.  Obligated parties 
will be required to use mandated quantities of renewable fuels, but only fuels that meet the GHG 
thresholds can qualify under the program.  The life cycle GHG reductions represent the GHG 
differences between renewable fuels relative to the petroleum-based gasoline and diesel that they 
displace.  The life cycle methodology described here is used to determine the GHG displacement 
values for different renewable fuels to be compared to the thresholds.  Therefore this analysis 
will provide: 
 
− Amount of GHG emissions (in grams, lb., tons, etc.) per amount of fuel produced (per 
btu) for both conventional petroleum based fuels and renewable fuels. 
− Results are combined to quantify the emission change per btu of renewable fuel 
compared to that for the conventional fuel replaced. 
 
2.3.2 Scope 
 
2.3.2.1 Scenario Analysis 
 
To quantify the lifecycle GHG emissions associated with the increase in renewable fuel 
mandated by EISA, we needed to compare the impacts of renewable fuels with EISA to a 
reference case without EISA.  Since it is not practical or workable to conduct such an analysis 
and come up with factors for every year, to carry out this analysis we chose to look at the final 
year of the RFS2 standards when they are fully phased in.  For our reference case we assumed a 
“business as usual” volume of a particular renewable fuel based on what would likely be in the 
fuel pool in 2022 without EISA as predicted by the Energy Information Agency’s Annual Energy 
Outlook (AEO) for 2007 (which took into account the economic and policy factors in existence 
in 2007 before EISA).  The second assumed the higher volumes of renewable fuels as mandated 
by EISA for 2022.  For each individual biofuel, we analyzed the incremental impact of 
increasing the volume of that fuel to the total mix of biofuels needed to meet the EISA 
requirements while holding volumes of other fuels constant.  Any changes between now and 
2022 in factors such as crop yields, energy costs, or production plant efficiencies, both 
domestically and internationally, are reflected in both scenarios.  Rather than focus on the 
impacts associated with a specific gallon of fuel and tracking inputs and outputs across different 
lifecycle stages, we determined the overall aggregate impacts across sections of the economy in 
258 
response to a given volume change in the amount of biofuel produced.  We then normalize those 
impacts to a gallon of fuel by dividing total impacts over the given volume change.  In the case 
of overall rule impacts, we analyze the change in baseline vs. policy case volumes for all fuels 
together and take the absolute GHG results (e.g., do not normalize the overall rule impacts).   
 
We did not calculate the emission impacts for each gallon of fuel based upon its unique 
production characteristics which could vary widely across the nation (e.g., a gallon of ethanol 
produced using corn grown in Iowa may produce different lifecycle emissions compared to a 
gallon of ethanol produced at an identical facility in Nebraska using corn grown in Nebraska due 
to regional differences in agricultural practices).  Rather, we determined the overall aggregate 
impacts across sections of the economy in response to a given volume change in the amount of 
biofuel produced.  In the case of agricultural impacts, we assessed the impact on the entire U.S. 
agricultural system that would result from expanded demand for biofuel feedstock.  We then 
normalized those impacts to a gallon of fuel by dividing total impacts over the renewable fuel 
volume change between our business as usual case and the EISA volumes.  Similarly, we 
estimated the typical emissions impact of a type of biofuel production facility (e.g., a plant that 
uses the dry mill process to turn corn starch into ethanol).  The emissions assessment from a 
typical facility was then ascribed to all biofuel produced across facilities using that same basic 
technology. 
 
There are several important implications associated with this methodology.  First, this 
analysis focuses on the average impact of an increase in fuel produced using a technology 
pathway and does not distinguish the emission performance between biofuel production plants 
using the same basic production technology and type of feedstock.  Thus it does not account for 
relatively small differences in facility design or operation which may affect the lifecycle GHG 
performance at that facility.   
 
Second, the results presented here are based on the GHG impacts of the volumes 
analyzed.  For corn ethanol the impact represents the change in GHG emissions when national 
corn ethanol production increases from 12.4 to 15 Bgal which are the estimated volumes in corn 
ethanol production that would occur in 2022 without and then with EISA mandates in place.  The 
GHG impact is then normalized to a per gallon or Btu basis in relation to gasoline.  These values 
are used to represent every gallon of corn ethanol produced throughout the program.  The per 
gallon impact based on different volume changes could be different than the incremental impact 
studied.  For example, modeling a change from 0 to 15 Bgal would allow an assessment of the 
average GHG impact for all 15 Bgal of corn ethanol.  We examine this issue through a sensitivity 
analysis where we consider a change in corn ethanol volumes from 8.7 to 12.4 Bgal and plan to 
provide a broader set of assessments for the final rule.  We described corn ethanol here, but the 
other renewable fuels were assessed in the same manner. 
 
Third, by focusing on 2022, this analysis does not track how biofuel GHG emission 
performance may change over time between now and 2022.  While our estimates are based on 
the GHG emissions for each biofuel for a specific volume change in 2022, we recognize that an 
alternative approach would be to create incremental GHG emission curves for different volumes 
and different years.  As discussed above, we believe modeling the results in 2022 provides a 
representative assessment of the GHG impact of the additional biofuel mandated by EISA.   
259 
 
Finally, several of the life cycle emission impacts for one fuel are interrelated with those 
of another fuel, in particular the land-use changes.  For our analysis of the overall GHG impacts 
of the program (discussed in section 2.9), we modeled all of the fuel changes simultaneously to 
determine the land-use impact.  However, from that analysis it is not possible to differentiate the 
contribution of the land-use change to one fuel vs. another.  As a result, for this analysis we had 
to model the impacts of just one fuel change at a time.  In doing this we have held the other fuel 
volumes constant at their mandated levels in order to best approximate the impacts a single fuel 
change would have in the context of the full RFS2 standard volumes. 
 
We used the same approach to determine the lifecycle GHG emissions for corn ethanol, 
cellulosic ethanol, biodiesel produced from soybean (and other vegetable) oils, and biodiesel 
produced using waste oils as feedstock.  For waste oils, we note that no land use changes are 
included in the FASOM assessment, because any land use impacts are attributed to the original 
purpose of the feedstock (e.g.., the use of the vegetable oil for cooking or the production of 
animals for their meat), rather than the biofuel produced from the recovered waste material.  
 
FASOM does not model feedstocks for fuels produced outside the U.S.  We addressed 
imported ethanol by analyzing the difference in total GHG emissions based on two 2022 
scenarios using only the results from FAPRI modeling runs:  (1) the business as usual reference 
case volume of 0.6 Bgal and (2) an RFS2 projected volume of 3.1 Bgal of imported sugarcane 
ethanol.   
 
Current models present some challenges in estimating GHG lifecycle emissions for 
cellulosic biofuels.  The version of FASOM we used for this proposal did not include the forestry 
module, and therefore, we did not model forest products or forest waste as feedstock.  FASOM 
does have a module for the forest sector that EPA used in the past to assess forest impacts of 
changes in U.S. policies.  The forestry module works much like the agricultural sector module in 
assessing likely outcomes; however, the data populating the forestry module is currently being 
updated to reflect the most recent information, and was not available in time to use in analyses 
for this proposal.  EPA anticipates that the FASOM forestry module will be available for the 
final rule and intends to use it in the final rule assessments.  We also note that inclusion of the 
forestry module will potentially allow the FASOM model to use some currently forested lands 
for crop production or pasture.  To the extent this occurs, our assessment of the lifecycle impacts 
of farm crop changes may also be impacted.  In addition, FAPRI does not include switchgrass or 
similar energy crops, and can only use corn stover or other food crop residues as feedstock in 
predicting cellulosic biofuel impacts.  To overcome this limitation, we assumed that increased 
domestic switchgrass production would result in a decrease in U.S. crop exports, because 
switchgrass competes with other crops for acreage.  We allowed the FAPRI model to draw on 
additional CRP acres to represent increased demand for acreage for energy crops.   
 
For biofuels made from wastes and byproducts (e.g., MSW, rendered fats and waste oils 
and corn stover feedstock), we assumed no land use changes, because these biofuel feedstocks do 
not compete for domestic crop acreage.  For corn stover, we analyzed only the change in 
domestic GHG emission resulting from an increase in fertilizer replacement application rates to 
compensate for the removal of stover from the land.   
260 
 
Table 2.3-1 shows the different fuel scenarios considered under the different models used.   
 
Table 2.3-1.  Fuel Volume Scenarios Considered in This Analysis 
2.53.10.6FAPRISugarcane Ethanol
7.67.60FASOMCorn Stover Ethanol
0.30.70.4FASOM & FAPRIBiodiesel
3.23.20FAPRI
4.65.71.1FASOM
Switchgrass Ethanol
3.712.48.7
2.61512.4
FASOM & FAPRICorn Ethanol
Net ChangeHigh VolumeLow Volume
Volume (Billions of Gallons)ModelFuel
 
 
2.3.2.2 System Boundaries 
 
The scope of this approach will involve an analysis of the same system with different 
renewable fuel use volume scenarios.  Figure 2.3-1 provides a simplified diagram describing the 
system studied.   
 
Figure 2.3-1.  Simplified Life Cycle System Diagram 
 
International 
Agricultural 
Sector 
Domestic 
Agricultural 
Sector 
Conventional 
Petroleum Fuel 
Production 
Food / Feed Uses Transportation Sector 
Fuel Demand 
Biofuel 
Production 
 
 
The different fuel use volume scenarios will be compared on delivering the same 
functions, in this case providing for both the agricultural sector market and transportation fuels 
market.  Within the overall system shown in Figure 2.3-1, the unit process listed in Table 2.3-2 
will be considered. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
261 
Table 2.3-2.  Unit Processes Considered 
Biofuel Petroleum-Based Fuel 
Feedstock Agriculture Crude Oil Extraction 
Feedstock Transport Crude Oil Transport 
Feedstock Processing & 
Biofuel Production 
Refining 
Biofuel Transport and 
Distribution 
Fuel Transport and 
Distribution 
Biofuel Tailpipe Emissions Fuel Tailpipe Emissions 
 
In setting system boundaries for this analysis, we use a consistent approach across all 
fuels to determine what is included in the system boundaries considered.  In this way renewable, 
alternative and petroleum based fuels are all compared based on the same system boundaries.  In 
general this type of analysis could be expanded to cover many different sectors of the economy, 
with diminishing impact on the overall results.  Therefore, we rely on internationally accepted 
life cycle assessment standards, developed by the International Organization for Standardization 
(ISO), when setting the system boundaries of this analysis.  Based on the ISO standards we 
consider environmental significance as a cut off criteria for what to include in our system 
boundaries.   
 
Included in each unit process shown in Table 2.3-2 are the emissions and energy use 
associated with that operation as well as upstream components that feed into it.  For example, the 
feedstock agriculture stage includes emissions from fuel used in tractors as well as from 
producing and transporting the fertilizer used in the field.  Electricity production emissions are 
included in almost all of the stages shown.  For direct impacts, this results in system boundaries 
that include operation-related activities, but not infrastructure-related activities.  As such, while 
we do include the emissions associated with the operation of farm equipment and trucks used for 
feedstock / fuel transportation we do not include the emissions associated with the production of 
the equipment or vehicles.  Furthermore, we include the emissions from the operations of biofuel 
production plants and petroleum refineries but we do not include emissions from producing the 
material used to construct the facilities.   
 
This decision was based on analysis done for the RFS1 rulemaking which found that 
including farm equipment production energy use and emissions increases ethanol life cycle 
energy use and GHG emissions and decreases the percent reduction in GHG emissions from corn 
ethanol in comparison to gasoline by approximately 1 percent.  Furthermore, to be consistent in 
the modeling if system boundaries are expanded to include production of farming equipment 
they should also be expanded to include producing other material inputs to both the ethanol and 
petroleum life cycles.  For example, this expansion of system boundaries would include the 
energy use and emissions associated with producing concrete and steel used in the petroleum 
refinery.  The net effect of this would be a slight increase in both the ethanol and petroleum fuel 
life cycle results and a smaller or negligible effect on the comparison of the two. 
 
In determining what indirect impacts to include in the system boundaries of this analysis 
we again focus on those sources that will have the biggest effect on overall results.  Therefore, 
for the analysis used in this proposed rulemaking we have included those significant agricultural 
262 
sector domestic and international agriculture secondary indirect impacts.  We have plan to 
consider indirect effects in energy markets due to increased use of biofuels in the transportation 
sector, and changes in fossil fuel markets due to increased fuel (primarily natural gas) used in the 
ethanol production sector.  EPA is still developing the modeling approach to capture these 
energy sector indirect effects and some preliminary analysis is presented in Section 2.5.   
 
In comparing renewable and alternative fuels to the petroleum fuel that they replace we 
have made the assumption that the amount of conventional fuel no longer consumed – that is, 
displaced – as a result of the use of the replacement renewable or alternative fuel is equal on an 
energy basis.  This assumes that vehicle energy efficiency will not be affected by the presence of 
renewable fuels (i.e., efficiency of combusting one Btu of ethanol is equal to the efficiency of 
combusting one Btu of gasoline).  Therefore, for every Btu of ethanol produced there is a 
corresponding decrease of a Btu of gasoline use, and associated quantity of crude oil is not 
extracted or processed to make this gasoline.  Some studies have shown that because of the 
increased octane content of ethanol (and specifically E85) vehicle efficiency may actually be 
slightly improved with use of E85 vs. gasoline.  This would imply that a Btu of ethanol would 
actually displace slightly more that a Btu of gasoline because of improved engine efficiency.  
However, these studies are not conclusive enough for us to include in our analysis at this point.  
This is something we will be considering for the final rule and may add as a sensitivity case.   
 
This type of modeling also does not allow for behavioral changes that may be occur, 
called “rebounding effect”.  A world wide reduction of oil price could result from the increased 
use of renewable fuels (as discussed in Chapter 5.2).  To the extent world fuel prices are 
decreased, demand and consumption would tend to increase; this impact of reduced cost of 
driving is sometimes referred to as a rebound effect.  The result could be less than a Btu of 
gasoline displaced for each gallon of ethanol produced.  We have not yet conducted the modeling 
to quantify the magnitude of this effect or factored it into our life cycle analysis.  However, we 
looking into options to consider this impact in the final rule analysis as discussed in Section 2.5. 
 
2.3.2.3 Environmental Flows Considered 
 
The life cycle analysis discussed here evaluates the impacts of increased renewable fuel 
use on greenhouse gas emissions.  EISA specifies a definition of greenhouse gases to include in 
the analysis: 
 
The term ‘greenhouse gas’ means carbon dioxide, hydrofluorocarbons, methane, 
nitrous oxide, perfluorocarbons, sulfur hexafluoride.  The Administrator may include 
any other anthropogenically emitted gas that is determined by the Administrator, 
after notice and comment, to contribute to global warming.   
 
EISA also specifies that the mass values for all greenhouse gases are adjusted to account 
for their relative global warming potential. 
 
The relative global warming contribution of emissions of various greenhouse gases is 
dependant on their radiative forcing, atmospheric lifetime, and other considerations.  For 
example, on a mass basis, the radiative forcing of CH4 is much higher than that of CO2, but its 
263 
effective atmospheric residence time is much lower.  The relative warming impacts of various 
greenhouse gases, taking into account factors such as atmospheric lifetime and direct warming 
effects, are reported on a ‘CO2-equivalent’ basis as global warming potentials (GWPs).  The 
GWPs used in this analysis were developed by the UN Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change (IPCC) as listed in their Second Assessment Report, and are shown in Table 2.3-3.  
Second assessment report values are used to be consistent with worldwide reporting of GHG 
emissions.   
 
Table 2.3-3.  
Global Warming Potentials for Greenhouse Gases 
Greenhouse Gas GWP 
CO2 1 
CH4 21 
N2O 310 
 
Greenhouse gases are measured in terms of CO2-equivalent emissions, which result from 
multiplying the GWP for each of the three pollutants shown in the above table by the mass of 
emissions for each pollutant.  The sum of impacts for CH4, N2O, and CO2, yields the total 
effective GHG impact.   Other GHGs like HFCs, PFCs and SF6 are not released in significant 
amounts over the renewable or petroleum fuel baselines and are therefore not tracked in this 
analysis.  Other non-GHG climate impacts like albedo (light reflectance), land surface 
roughness, hydrologic and energy flux, and loss of forest aerosols while potentially an important 
aspect of climate impacts associated with land use change are currently outside the scope of this 
analysis.   
 
Other environmental flows besides GHG are also considered in our analysis of this 
rulemaking, criteria and toxic air pollutants are modeled and results are described in Chapter 3 of 
the (D)RIA.  Water use and impacts are also considered and are described in Chapter 6 of the 
(D)RIA.   
 
2.3.2.4 Data Quality 
 
Life cycle analysis is a data intensive process and the results are affected by data quality.  
Data quality may be defined by specific characteristics that describe both quantitative and 
qualitative aspects of data, as well as the methods used to collect and integrate those data into the 
analysis.  The quality of data used can be characterized by how well the geographic, technical 
and temporal aspects of the data match the goals and scope of the analysis in question.   
 
The quality of the data used in this analysis was classified based on its geographic, 
technical and temporal relevance to the goals of the study as follows:   
 
Geographic coverage – this analysis was conducted without any regard to the 
geographic attributes of where emissions or energy use occurs.  The benefits of this 
proposed rule represent global reductions in GHG emissions and energy use, not just 
those occurring in the U.S.  For example, the savings associated with reducing overseas 
crude oil extraction and refining are included here, as are the international emissions 
264 
associated with producing imported ethanol.  Data for agricultural sector impacts include 
both U.S. and international defaults.  Agricultural commodity production in other 
countries was based on data specific to those areas (e.g., fertilizer production in other 
countries).  Land use change was specifically modeled in different countries, impacts of 
land use change were based on factors representing sub-country level, for areas where 
data was not available averages were used.  
 
Technology coverage – this analysis was modeling industries that do not exist yet – 
cellulosic ethanol and renewable diesel for example.  Therefore assumptions based on 
existing information and modeling were made to represent these industries rather than 
relying on existing facility data.  Even for industries that currently exist there is expected 
to be a range of technology development over time.  For this analysis we have made our 
best projections for what the industry may look like by 2022.  There is expected to be 
considerable variation in the technologies used, for example combined heat and power 
and corn oil fractionation in a dry mill ethanol plant.  To account for this we have looked 
at different fuel technology pathways as shown in Section 2.6.7.   
 
Temporal coverage – this analysis considered impacts in 2022.  Therefore we modeled 
future data; we projected ethanol production in 2022 based on process models – 
consistent with cost analysis used in this proposed rulemaking.  For example, this 
assumed that future plants will be more energy efficient then current plants.  Agricultural 
sector models also represented 2022 values including improvements in yields and 
cropping patterns.   
 
2.3.2.5 Uncertainty Analysis 
 
While EPA believes the methodology presented here represents a robust and scientifically 
credible approach, we recognize that some calculations of GHG emissions are relatively straight-
forward, while others are not.  The direct, domestic emissions are relatively well known.  These 
estimates are based on well-established process models that can relatively accurately capture 
emissions impacts.  For example, the energy and GHG emissions used by a natural gas-fired 
ethanol plant to produce one gallon of ethanol can be calculated through direct observations, 
though this will vary somewhat between individual facilities.  The indirect domestic emissions 
are also fairly well understood, however these results are sensitive to a number of key 
assumptions (e.g., current and future corn yields).  We address uncertainty in this area by testing 
the impact of changing these assumptions on our results.  Finally, the indirect, international 
emissions are the component of our analysis with the highest level of uncertainty.  For example, 
identifying what type of land is converted internationally and the emissions associated with this 
land conversion are critical issues that have a large impact on the GHG emissions estimates.  We 
address this uncertainty by using sensitivity analyses to test the robustness of the results based on 
different assumptions.  We also identify areas of additional work that will be completed prior to 
the final rulemaking.  For example, while we utilized an approach using comprehensive 
agricultural sector models and recent satellite data to determine the emissions resulting from 
international land use impacts, we are also considering an alternative methodology (the analyses 
using GTAP) that estimates changes in land use based on the relative land use values of 
cropland, forest, and pastureland.    
265 
 
Despite the uncertainty associated with international land use change, we would expect 
that at least some international land use change to occur as demand for crop land increases as a 
result of this rule. Furthermore, the conversion of crop land will lead to GHG emission from land 
conversion that must be accounted for in the calculation of lifecycle GHG emissions.  We 
believe that uncertainty in the effects and extent of land use itself is not a reason for not 
accounting for land use change emissions. Although there are uncertainties associated with these 
estimates, it would be less scientifically credible to ignore the potential land use change 
altogether. 
 
There are several ways of specifically dealing with uncertainty in this analysis.  One 
approach would be to perform statistical analysis, applying distribution curves to each input and 
run Monte Carlo analysis to determine a range of results.  While this may be the most 
intellectually pleasing approach in theory, there are several significant barriers to this approach.  
Most significantly, it is difficult to determine scientifically-defensible probability distribution 
functions for all (or even the most significant) input variables.  Applying functions that are not 
well understood may serve to misstate uncertainty.  Furthermore, an analysis that treats all 
variables independently would not capture the fact that there are links between inputs with 
potentially conflicting impacts on results (e.g., higher fertilizer use linked to higher yields).  To 
do this correctly, we need to determine the covariance matrix of all variables, or risk further 
obscuring the degree of true uncertainty in the analysis. 
 
Another examine these uncertainties is to identify variables with greatest impact on 
overall results and apply sensitivity analysis.  This is the approach we have taken, for example, 
looking at a range of ethanol plant energy use and type of process fuel as well as ranges of land 
use change factors.  In this way we bound the results with high and low cases.  The challenge in 
a complicated analysis with so many variables, of course, is to ensure that we have identified the 
most significant ones, and that our choices of low and high cases accurately encompass the range 
of possible outcomes.  We note that further research on key variables will allow for a more 
robust assessment of these impacts in the future.   
 
2.4 Baseline Gasoline and Diesel Fuel 
 
2.4.1 Modeling Approach 
 
EISA specified the baseline petroleum gasoline and diesel fuel that renewable fuels would be 
compared to for assessing their performance in comparison to the thresholds.   
 
The term ‘baseline lifecycle greenhouse gas emissions’ means the average lifecycle 
greenhouse gas emissions, as determined by the Administrator, after notice and 
opportunity for comment, for gasoline or diesel (whichever is being replaced by the 
renewable fuel) sold or distributed as transportation fuel in 2005. 
 
The approach to estimate life cycle GHG emissions associated with baseline petroleum-
based gasoline and diesel fuel was to use the GREET model.  Life cycle energy use and 
associated emissions for petroleum-based fuels in GREET is calculated based on an energy 
266 
efficiency metric for the different processes involved with petroleum-based fuels production.  
The energy efficiency metric is a measure of how many Btus of input energy are needed to make 
a Btu of product.  GREET has assumptions on energy efficiency for different finished petroleum 
products as well as for different types of crude oil. 
 
GREET also has assumptions on the mix of energy sources used to provide the energy 
input which determine GHG emissions.  The GHG emissions associated with petroleum fuels are 
based on the emissions from producing and combusting the input energy sources (with non-
combustion sources added in where applicable).   
 
The following sections describe the GREET assumptions for different petroleum-based 
fuels production processes and final products.   
 
2.4.2 Crude Oil Extraction 
 
GREET has assumptions for different types of crude oil extraction, conventional crude 
and oil sands crude.  The values for conventional crude oil are assumed to represent average 
crude oil extraction, including domestic and foreign production and onshore, offshore and 
enhanced oil recovery processes.  Oil sands recovery was used in this analysis to represent 
Canadian oil sands recovery.  The assumptions for each type of crude oil extraction are shown 
here.   
 
Conventional crude oil extraction is assumed to have an energy efficiency metric of 98%.  
This means that every one mmBtu of crude oil produced requires 1,020,408 Btu of energy input.  
One mmBtu of that input is crude oil feedstock (from the ground) that ends up in the final 
product and therefore only 20,408 Btu of additional process energy is required.  Table 2.4-1 
shows the breakout of the energy sources used to provide the additional process energy.   
 
Table 2.4-1.  Conventional Crude Oil Production 
Process Fuel Share of Input Energy 
(%) 
Energy use 
(Btu/mmBtu of fuel throughput) 
Crude oil 1.0% 204 
Residual oil 1.0% 204 
Diesel fuel 15.0% 3,057 
Gasoline 2.0% 408 
Natural gas 61.9% 12,635 
Electricity 19.0% 3,872 
Feed loss 0.1% 28 
Total: 100% 20,408 
 
 The GHG emissions from conventional crude oil extraction are calculated by multiplying 
the Btus of the different types of energy inputs by emissions factors for combustion of those fuel 
sources.  The emission factors for the different fuel types are from GREET based primarily on 
assumed carbon contents of the different process fuels.  The emissions from producing electricity 
are also taken from GREET and represent average U.S. grid electricity production emissions.  In 
addition to process energy GHG emissions, GREET also assumes there are also GHG emissions 
267 
from associated flaring of natural gas at the oil well, the assumption is 16,800 Btu of natural gas 
flared per mmBtu of crude oil produced.  The GHG emissions of flared natural gas are again 
based on emissions factors for natural gas combustion.  GREET also assumes some methane 
fugitive emissions from crude oil extraction and processing, the assumption is 13.15 g of 
methane per mmBtu of crude oil produced.   
 
Similar to the assumptions for conventional crude oil extraction, GREET has assumptions 
on oil sands crude oil extraction.  Oil sands can be either mined or recovered in situ - meaning in 
place, GREET has assumptions for both processes.  The oil sands recovery processes include 
both extraction (surface or in situ) and separation systems to remove bitumen from sand and 
water.   
 
Surface mining of oil sands involves open-pit mining techniques.  About two metric tons 
of oil sands must be dug up, moved and processed to produce one barrel of oil.  In situ recovery 
is used for bitumen deposits buried too deeply for mining to be practical.  Cyclic steam 
stimulation (CSS) and steam-assisted gravity drainage (SAGD) are in situ recovery methods, 
which include thermal injection through vertical or horizontal wells.  The following Tables show 
the energy efficiency metric and assumed energy sources used in oil sands extraction.  GHG 
emissions from the oil sands extraction process are based on applying emission factors to the 
different energy inputs.   
 
Table 2.4-2.  Oil Sands Recovery: Bitumen Extraction – Surface Mining 
Energy Efficiency 94.8% 
Process Fuel Share of Input Energy 
(%) 
Energy use 
(Btu/mmBtu of fuel throughput) 
Diesel fuel 0.6% 329 
Natural gas 82.3% 45,132 
Electricity 17.1% 9,377 
Feed loss 0.03% 14 
Total: 100% 54,852 
 
Table 2.4-3.  Oil Sands Recovery: Bitumen Extraction – In-Situ Production 
Energy Efficiency 84.3% 
Process Fuel Share of Input Energy 
(%) 
Energy use 
(Btu/mmBtu of fuel throughput) 
Natural gas 97.2% 181,011 
Electricity 2.8% 5,214 
Feed loss 0.01% 14 
Total: 100% 186,239 
 
Once oil sands are extracted through either the surface mining or in situ process they are 
further processed for transportation.  The energy efficiency metric and assumed energy input 
sources for the bitumen upgrading as shown in Table 2.4-4.   
 
 
 
268 
Table 2.4-4.  Oil Sands Recovery: Bitumen Upgrading 
Energy Efficiency 98.6% 
Process Fuel Share of Input Energy 
(%) 
Energy use 
(Btu/mmBtu of fuel throughput) 
Natural gas 97.1% 13,787 
Electricity 2.8% 397 
Feed loss 0.1% 14 
Total: 100% 14,198 
 
In addition to the GHG emissions from the process energy used in the upgrading process 
GREET also assumes hydrogen is needed as an input to the upgrading process.  GHG emissions 
from hydrogen production, based on GREET defaults are included in the emissions of bitumen 
upgrading.  GREET assumes 84,187 Btu of hydrogen used per mmBtu of oil sand crude 
produced through surface mining and 32,364 Btu of hydrogen used per mmBtu of oil sand crude 
produced through the in situ process.   
 
Emission factors from GREET were used for bitumen extracted in-situ, bitumen extracted 
by surface mining, and light crude oil extraction.  Emission factors from McCann (1999) were 
used to calculate GHG emissions from Heavy Oil and Venezuela Extra Heavy Oil crude oil 
extraction categories by considering the incremental processing emissions relative to the average 
of the light crudes analyzed by McCann.  The McCann report provided estimates of processing 
emissions for different conventional crude and heavy crude types.  Instead of using McCann 
GHG values directly we used these results to determine a scaling factor for the heavy crudes 
compared to the conventional crude types.  We applied this approach because it was unclear 
what was including in the processing emissions in the McCann report and we wanted to put the 
values on a consistent basis with the GREET results.  We then applied this scaling factor to the 
GREET conventional crude emissions to represent emissions from heavy crude production.  The 
results of the crude oil production differentiation are shown below in Table 2.4-5.   
 
Table 2.4-5. 
Scaling factors Used to Calculate Heavy Crude Extraction GHG Emissions 
Crude Production Emissions (gCO2e/mmBtu LHV of fuel produced) 
  
Canadian 
Light 
Brent North 
Sea 
Saudi 
Light 
Average 
"conventional" 
Heavy 
Oil 
Venezuela Extra 
Heavy Oil 
Production 
Emissions 6,617 5,081 7,746 6,482 6,962 15,524 
Scaling Factor     1.07 2.40 
 
The importation of heavy crude oil and extra heavy crude oil in the U.S. comprises a 
relatively small but growing fraction of current total crude oil imports.  Heavy crude oils are 
generally of higher density and higher viscosities compared to lighter crude oils and similarly, 
are not as readily extracted from reserves.  The American Petroleum Institute’s “API Gravity” is 
commonly used to delineate light, medium, heavy and extra heavy crude oils.  Although 
definitions can vary slightly, the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) categorizes light crude oil as 
having an API gravity of at least 22° and viscosity less than 100 centipoise (cP).477  Heavy oil, 
by contrast, is defined as an “asphaltic, dense, and viscous oil” with an upper API limit of 22° 
and viscosity between 100 – 10,000 cP.  Heavy oil with an API less than 10° is defined as extra-
269 
heavy oil.  Natural bitumen -- also referred to in the literature as oil sand, tar sand, oil-
impregnated sand, asphaltic sand, rock asphalt, bituminous rock, and bitumen-bearing rock -- 
have a similar API range as extra-heavy oils but have viscosities greater than 10,000 cP.  
 
To determine the mix of crudes used in 2005 to produce the gasoline and diesel baseline 
required by EISA, EPA has analyzed the types of crude oils used in the U.S. by examining crude 
import data from the Energy Information Administration data for 2005 reported by refineries.478 
The amount of crude imports reported by refineries with API less than or equal to 22° -- or heavy 
oil – was approximately 2.9 million barrels per day (mmbd) in 2005 out of the 15.2 mmbd 
refinery net input in the U.S. estimated by EIA. Figure 2.4-1 below displays the break-down of 
U.S. heavy crude imports by country. 
 
Figure 2.4-1. U.S. Imports of Heavy Crude Oil in 2005 (API of 22° or less) 
2005 Heavy Oil Imports (<=22.0)
Source: EIA Form 814 Data
-
200,000
400,000
600,000
800,000
1,000,000
1,200,000
Me
xic
o
Ve
ne
zu
ela
Ca
na
da
Ec
ua
do
r
Bra
zil
Ch
ad
No
rw
ay
Ru
ss
ia
Un
ite
d K
ing
do
m
Ku
wa
it
An
go
la
Sa
ud
i A
rab
ia
Ind
on
es
ia
Gu
ata
m
ala
Ch
ina Pe
ru
Co
lum
bia
Nig
eri
a
Ma
lay
sia
Om
an
Arg
en
tin
a
Bo
livi
a
bbl/day
B
ar
re
ls
 
pe
r 
Da
y
 
 
Note that this is an under-estimate of the actual heavy crude oil, extra heavy crude oil, or 
bitumen used by U.S. refineries since a fraction of these crudes are upgraded at the country of 
origin and/or diluted with diluents (gas condensate, natural gas liquids or light crude) and 
transported to the U.S.  These upgraded crude oils would then appear as imports with an API 
greater than 22° (i.e. light or medium crude oil).  EPA has identified that crude oil from 
Venezuela and Canada would likely have the most upgrading of extra heavy crude oil or bitumen 
to synthetic crude, or syncrude, due to the nature of the reserves and current information 
regarding the crude oil types extracted.  The International Energy Agency estimates that in 2005, 
Venezuela produced approximately 565,000 bpd of syncrude from its extra heavy oil reserves in 
the Orinoco oil belt.479  An analysis of the production output from the four members of the 
Orinoco Belt Strategic Association shows that roughly three-fourths of the upgraded syncrude 
has an API greater than 22°.480  Thus, out of the 3 mmbd of crude oil produced in Venezuela, 
approximately 19% was syncrude (i.e. 14% with API greater than 22° and 5% with API less than 
22%).  Applying these splits to the U.S. import data would result in roughly 145,000 bpd of 
syncrude from extra heavy oil, 715,000 heavy oil, and 684,000 light (or conventional) crude oils. 
270 
This split would still likely underestimate the extra heavy oil/syncrude used by the U.S. since 
Venezuela tends to ship a greater fraction of its heavier crude oils to U.S. refineries that are 
specifically configured to handle heavier crude oils.  
 
Estimates on the types of crude oil imported from Canada were also adjusted based on 
available information. Canadian production information for 2005 was obtained from statistical 
information from the Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers.481 Production of crude oil in 
Canada totaled 2.35 mmbd in 2005, with 35% of the volume comprised of light crude oil, 22% 
heavy crude oil, 23% from bitumen or synthetic crude obtained via surface mining, and 19% 
from bitumen produced from in-situ methods.  Surface mining comprised over half of the 
Canadian bitumen extraction, but use of in-situ techniques are now growing at a faster rate due to 
the lower availability of surface bitumen and improvements in in-situ techniques.   
 
Domestic production of heavy oil was not included in the EIA import data analyzed by 
the EPA.482 To account for this, various estimates were used from different sources. In 2005, we 
estimate that roughly 475,000 bpd of heavy oil was produced in the U.S. with the vast majority 
produced in California.  
 
Collectively, the various sources and approach were used to develop a fraction weighted 
estimate of the crude oil types used in the U.S. for calculating the 2005 gasoline and diesel 
baseline.  Note that this does not include crude-type breakdowns for finished products imported 
into the U.S. from overseas (e.g. Europe) or exported and consumed overseas, which may change 
the fractions slightly.  Out of the 15.3 mmbd of crude oil reported to be used in the U.S. in 
2005483, approximately 5% was composed of bitumen-based syncrude (mainly from Canada), 
1% of extra heavy crude oil based syncrude (mainly from Venezuela), and 23% heavy crude oil, 
as shown in Figure 2.4-2.  
 
271 
Figure 2.4-2. Percent of U.S. Crude Oil by Source 
U.S. Crude Oil Consumption
5% 1%
23%
72%
-
2.00
4.00
6.00
8.00
10.00
12.00
Bitumen-based
syncrude
Extra heavy oil-based
syncrude
Heavy crude oil Light or medium crude
oil 
m
illi
o
n
 
ba
rr
e
ls
 
pe
r 
da
y 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
.
 
 
 
 
 
.
 
 
The emission factors for the 2005 baseline were adjusted based on the above weighing 
for the different types of crude oil.   
 
2.4.3 Crude Transport 
 
Transport of crude oil to the U.S. was based on GREET defaults which are shown in the 
following figure 2.4-3.  The figure indicates the percent of the different types of crude oil used 
(Canada and Mexico is assumed to include the Canadian oil sands imports) and associated modes 
of transportation and miles traveled for each mode.  The GHG emissions are based on emission 
factors for each type of vehicle including capacity, fuel economy, and type of fuel used.   
 
272 
Figure 2.4-3.  Crude Oil Transportation Assumptions 
7.0% 7.0%
2,100
35.0%
1.0%
500
50.0% 50.0%
5,500 92.0%
750
8.0%
750 0.0%
8.0% 800
0.0%
800
US Terminal
Petroleum 
Refinery
Domestic: 
Alaska
Domestic: 
US 48 States
Imported: 
Canada and 
Mexico
Imported: 
Offshore 
Countries
Ocean Tanker
Pipeline
Rail
Ocean Tanker
Pipeline
Barge
Rail
 
 
2.4.4 Refining 
 
The GHG emissions associated with petroleum refining can also be calculated based on 
the energy efficiency of the refinery and the type of process energy fuel sources sued.  However, 
the refinery is producing a number of different petroleum-based products including different 
transportation fuels.  Therefore, the total energy use and emissions from the refinery needs to be 
allocated to the different products.   
 
The basis for the overall refinery energy efficiency in GREET are numerous Linear 
Programming model runs representing energy use in a typical refinery.  Different refinery 
configurations with different slates of products produced will have different energy efficiencies.  
For calculating baseline GHG emissions associated with gasoline and diesel fuel we are 
assuming an average U.S. refinery so defaults in GREET are reasonable for our analysis.   
 
Allocation of the total refinery energy use and emissions to the different products can be 
done in a number of ways.  Total energy use and emissions can be allocated based on the energy, 
mass, or economic value of the different output products.  Alternately, energy use and emissions 
can be based on first breaking out total refinery energy use to the different refinery sub-processes 
(e.g., distillation, cracking, alkylation, isomeration, desulfurization), and then allocating energy 
from each sub process to the different products, for example 100% of alkylation used for 
gasoline.  This type of sub process allocation would require level of detail that was beyond the 
scope of this analysis.  Therefore, we used the GREET default allocation which in general 
allocated 60–65% of total refining process fuel use to gasoline production, 18–22% to diesel 
production, and the remaining 13–22% to other petroleum products. 
 
The refinery modeling runs and the allocation to different products results in the energy 
efficiency values for different types of gasoline and diesel fuel shown in Table 2.4-6. 
 
273 
Table 2.4-6.  Refinery Energy Efficiency 
Transportation Fuel Type Energy Efficiency 
Conventional Gasoline 87.7% 
Reformulated Gasoline Feedstock 87.2% 
Low Sulfur Diesel Fuel 87% 
 
The following table shows the process fuel breakout and energy use for each 
transportation fuel.   
 
Table 2.4-7.  Refinery Energy Use 
Energy use (Btu/mmBtu of fuel throughput) Process Fuel Share of Input 
Energy 
(%) 
Conventional 
Gasoline 
RFG 
Feedstock 
Low Sulfur Diesel 
Fuel 
Residual oil 3.0% 4,208 4,404 3,595 
Natural gas 30.0% 42,075 44,037 35,946 
Coal 13.0% 18,233 19,083 15,577 
Electricity 4.0% 5,610 5,872 4,793 
Refinery still 
gas 
50.0% 70,125 73,395 59,910 
Total: 100% 140,251 146,789 119,821 
 
The GHG emissions from refining are calculated by multiplying the Btus of the different 
types of energy inputs by emissions factors for combustion of those fuel sources.  The emission 
factors for the different fuel types are from GREET based primarily on assumed carbon contents 
of the different process fuels.  The emissions from producing electricity are also taken from 
GREET and represent average U.S. grid electricity production emissions.  In addition to process 
energy GHG emissions, GREET also assumes there are also non-combustion GHG emissions 
associated with petroleum refining.  These emissions are also allocated to the different fuels 
based on the same energy efficiency ratios used to allocate energy use.  The non-combustion 
CO2 emissions amount to 1,172 g CO2 per mmBtu of conventional gasoline, 1,214 g CO2 per 
mmBtu of RFG blendstock, and 1,088 g CO2 per mmBtu of low sulfur diesel fuel.   
 
To represent baseline gasoline we considered the types of gasoline used in 2005.  Based 
on EIA data on sales of gasoline to end users in 2005, 57.4% was conventional gasoline, 28.4% 
was reformulated gasoline and 14.2% was Californian reformulated gasoline.  The California 
reformulated gasoline is represented in GREET as reformulated with slightly different 
assumptions about crude transport distances.  We also considered imported finished product vs. 
domestically produced gasoline.  In 2005 according to EIA data, 6.0% of conventional gasoline 
used was imported and 7.7% of reformulated gasoline was imported.  Imported gasoline was 
modeled the same as domestic for refinery emissions except conventional crude was used to 
represent crude oil production impacts, instead of domestic mix.  To represent baseline diesel 
fuel use we use a similar analysis and assume 100% low-sulfur diesel fuel and 8.0% is imported 
finished product.   
 
2.4.5 Fuel Transport 
 
274 
Transport of the finished petroleum product was also included in the baseline values for 
gasoline and diesel fuel.  Transport included from refinery to bulk terminal and from bulk 
terminal to retail location.  Transport of imported finished product was also includes and was 
assumed to be transported by ocean tanker 2,600 miles to the U.S.  Once in the U.S. both 
domestic and imports were assumed to be transported by the following modes and the following 
distances as shown in Tables 2.4-8 and 2.4-9.   
 
Table 2.4-8.  Gasoline Transport Assumptions 
Refinery to Bulk Terminal Bulk Terminal to Refueling Station 
Mode Percent Distance Percent Distance 
Ocean Tanker 17 1,500 0 N/A 
Barge 4 520 0 N/A 
Pipeline 72 400 0 N/A 
Rail 7 800 0 N/A 
Truck 0 N/A 100 30 
 
Table 2.4-9.  Diesel Fuel Transport Assumptions 
Refinery to Bulk Terminal Bulk Terminal to Refueling Station 
Mode Percent Distance Percent Distance 
Ocean Tanker 12 1,500 0 N/A 
Barge 6 520 0 N/A 
Pipeline 72 400 0 N/A 
Rail 7 800 0 N/A 
Truck 0 N/A 100 30 
 
The GHG emissions from transport of gasoline and diesel fuel are based on GREET 
default emission factors for each type of vehicle including capacity, fuel economy, and type of 
fuel used.   
 
2.4.5 Petroleum Fuel 2005 Baseline Well-To-Tank GHG Emissions 
 
The results of each of the life cycle stages for the petroleum fuels are combined to 
generate a well-to-tank life cycle GHG value for 2005 gasoline and diesel fuel as shown in Table 
2.4-10.  Tailpipe combustion emissions for the two fuels are described in Section 2.7.   
 
Table 2.4-10.  
Petroleum Fuel Baseline Well-To-Tank GHG Emissions 
(g/mmBtu of fuel) 
 
CH4 N2O CO2 CO2-eq. 
Diesel Fuel 106 0.25 15,074 17,381 
Gasoline 107 0.27 16,762 19,102 
 
 
 
275 
2.5 Secondary Energy Sector Impacts Modeling 
 
2.5.1 Indirect Energy Sector Impacts From Renewable Fuel Consumption 
 
We attempted to use the Energy Information Agency’s National Energy Modeling 
System (NEMS) to estimate indirect impacts on energy use associated with increased renewable 
fuel consumption.  NEMS is a modeling system that simulates the behavior of energy markets 
and their interactions with the U.S. economy by explicitly representing the economic decision-
making involved in the production, conversion, and consumption of energy products.  NEMS 
should model the secondary impacts that greater renewable fuel use may have on the prices and 
quantities of other sources of energy, and the greenhouse gas emissions associated with these 
changes in the energy sector.  For example, the use of natural gas at corn ethanol production 
plants could increase the price of natural gas, and thus encourage the use of other energy sources 
in other sectors of the economy.  Due to time constraints, we did not include indirect energy 
sector impacts in the lifecycle GHG results for the proposed rule.  Below we explain the 
preliminary results, and outline our plans to refine this analysis for the final rule. 
 
We successfully used NEMS to simulate the RFS2 fuel volumes for this rulemaking, and 
the projections from that effort were used in our energy security results, and other analyses for 
the proposed rule.  However, we had difficulties isolating volume changes for specific renewable 
fuel types.  When we attempted to model the fuel-specific volume scenarios that were used for 
FASOM and FAPRI analysis of the agricultural sector (See Section 2.3.2 for a description of the 
FASOM and FAPRI fuel-specific scenarios), we had trouble designing model runs that held the 
other fuel volumes constant.  For example, when we tried to use NEMS to model an increase in 
corn ethanol consumption from 12.4 to 15 billion gallons, the volumes of cellulosic ethanol 
consumption also changed.  We could not use model results with unstable cellulosic ethanol 
production to estimate the secondary energy sector impacts of corn ethanol, because cellulosic 
ethanol plants export electricity to the grid, which has significant energy sector impacts that 
could not be assigned to corn ethanol. 
 
To effectively model a scenario where only corn ethanol consumption increases we 
departed from the volume scenarios that were used for the other analyses in this rule.  Table 2.5-
1 shows renewable fuel volumes for two NEMS scenarios that successfully varied corn ethanol 
consumption and held cellulosic ethanol consumption constant. 
 
A set of NEMS-EPA cases was created to isolate the secondary impacts of greater use of 
corn ethanol (Low Corn and High Corn cases).  Modifications were made in order to create 
differences in corn ethanol while keeping unchanged the other biofuels (such as cellulosic 
ethanol and biodiesel) between the cases.  A larger difference in corn ethanol than that of the 
Reference to EISA cases was desired so that the change was more significant relative to the 
convergence tolerance of the model. 
 
In the Low Corn case, the RFS credit was reduced for non-advanced biofuels (i.e. corn 
ethanol) and the cost of new corn ethanol plants was increased in order to reduce projected corn 
ethanol production.  The Control Corn case includes a higher RFS requirement for total biofuels 
to give credit to corn ethanol above 15 billion gallons as well as a reduction in the cost of new 
276 
corn ethanol plants.  Both cases also include modifications to the cost of biodiesel from soy 
beans as a device that keeps the biodiesel production only at the minimum EISA level in both 
cases.  We modified the RFS requirements such that the cellulosic requirement would be met and 
be binding in both cases and reduced the advanced biofuels requirements to equal that of the 
cellulosic.  Both changes were made to minimize the change in other biofuels between the two 
cases.  The cases also eliminate biomass-to-liquids (which was included in the AEO2008 but not 
included in any of the EPA cases) 
 
Table 2.5-1.  Fuel Volumes for NEMS Corn Ethanol Scenario (Billions of Gallons 
Consumed Per Year) 
Lower Corn 
Ethanol Case Control Case Difference
Lower Corn 
Ethanol Case Control Case Difference
  Corn Ethanol 10.5 15.2 4.8 4.1 15.6 11.5
  Cellulosic Ethanol 3.0 3.0 0.0 12.5 12.5 0.0
  Imported Ethanol 1.5 2.2 0.7 1.2 3.0 1.8
  Exported Ethanol 1.0 0.7 -0.3 1.2 0.5 -0.7
  Biodiesel 1.0 1.0 0.0 1.0 1.0 0.0
Total Biofuels 16.9 22.0 5.1 20.0 32.5 12.6
2017 2022
 
 
We took the difference in energy consumption in the Control Case and the Low Corn 
ethanol cases shown in Table 2.5-1.  In the scenarios shown in Table 2.5-1 new ethanol plants 
built after 2015 use natural gas exclusively for energy.  To isolate the indirect energy sector 
impacts not included in the rest of our lifecycle analysis we excluded changes in energy use for 
biofuel refining, agriculture, petroleum refining, and gasoline and diesel use for transportation.  
In other words, we used the NEMS analysis to project how an increase in corn ethanol 
consumption would affect energy consumption in the residential, commercial, and non-refining 
industrial sectors.  Table 2.5-2 shows how energy consumption in these sectors changed between 
the Control Case and the lower corn ethanol case. 
 
277 
Table 2.5-2.  Projected Indirect Impacts From Corn Ethanol Production on Energy Use by 
Energy Source in the Residential, Commercial, and Non-Refining Industrial Sectors 
(Quadrillion Btu) 
Lower Corn 
Ethanol Case Control Case Difference
Lower Corn 
Ethanol Case Control Case Difference
Liquid Fuels 14.585 14.587 0.002 14.653 14.683 0.030
    Liquified Petroleum Gases 2.489 2.489 0.000 2.397 2.396 -0.001
    E85 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000
    Motor Gasoline 0.423 0.423 0.000 0.422 0.421 0.000
    Jet Fuel 3.955 3.955 0.000 4.283 4.283 0.000
    Kerosene 0.124 0.124 0.000 0.125 0.125 0.000
    Distillate Fuel Oil 2.582 2.582 -0.001 2.541 2.540 -0.001
    Residual Fuel Oil 1.567 1.568 0.001 1.569 1.574 0.006
    Petrochemical Feedstocks 1.433 1.433 0.000 1.357 1.357 0.000
    Liquid Hydrogen 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.002 0.002 0.000
    Other Petroleum 2.010 2.012 0.002 1.958 1.984 0.026
Natural Gas 23.270 23.274 0.003 22.867 22.813 -0.054
Coal 24.641 24.642 0.001 26.410 26.501 0.092
Nuclear Power 8.487 8.484 -0.003 9.194 9.158 -0.036
Hydropower 2.985 2.983 -0.001 3.009 3.007 -0.003
Traditional Biomass 2.569 2.569 0.000 2.786 2.786 -0.001
Other Renewable Energy 1.786 1.785 -0.001 2.023 2.023 0.000
Other 0.180 0.180 0.000 0.175 0.175 0.000
Total 78.503 78.504 0.001 81.119 81.146 0.027
2017 2022
 
 
 We applied energy consumption emissions factors to estimate the GHG impacts of the 
results shown in Table 2.5-2.  We estimated the GHG impacts in terms of GHG emissions 
impacts per Btu of additional corn ethanol consumption.  The results in Table 2.5-2 imply an 
increase in GHG emissions of 1,356 g/mmBtu in 2017, and an increase in GHG emissions of 
9,290 g/mmBtu in 2022.  A large part of these GHG results can be attributed to an increase in 
coal consumption and a decrease in nuclear energy consumption projected by NEMS.  If we hold 
nuclear energy consumption constant (i.e. assume that control case nuclear power consumption 
equals nuclear power consumption in the lower corn ethanol case), the GHG impacts are an 
increase of 437 g/mmBtu in 2017 and an increase of 5,117 g/mmBtu in 2022. 
 
 We did not include the results of this NEMS analysis in our life cycle GHG estimates for 
the proposed rule.  For the final rule we intend to continue exploring the use of NEMS to 
estimate the indirect energy sector impacts of renewable fuel consumption.  To use the NEMS 
model for this purpose, we would like to gain a better understanding of why the energy sector 
impacts vary between years, and of why NEMS is projecting decreases in nuclear power as a 
result of ethanol production. 
 
2.5.2 Indirect Impacts on Petroleum Consumption For Transportation 
 
EPA recognizes that with the increase in demand for biofuels from the RFS2 program 
there will be secondary impacts on oil markets. For example, an increase in the use of biofuels 
will result in lower U.S. demand for imported oil. Lower U.S. imported oil demand will cause 
the world oil price to modestly decline, and result in an increase in oil consumption outside of 
the U.S. (referred to here as the “international oil takeback effect”).  In addition, with the greater 
use of biofuels in the U.S., we are estimating that the cost of transportation fuels in the U.S. will 
increase. This increase in the costs of U.S. transportation fuels will likely lower the domestic 
278 
demand for oil beyond the direct substitution of biofuels for gasoline and diesel. The response of 
U.S. oil demand to price is referred to here as the “rebound effect.”  From an overall standpoint, 
total global oil demand is the result of the two combined effects, decreases in U.S. oil demand 
(from the “rebound effect”) and increases in oil demand outside of the U.S. (from the 
“international oil takeback effect”). These effects work in opposite directions to influence the 
overall change in global oil demand. Besides providing a complete picture of oil market impacts 
of the RFS2 program, this issue is also important because secondary impacts on oil demand from 
the RFS2 program, assuming that they can be reliably determined, should be factored into the 
lifecycle greenhouse gas emissions estimates provided for in Chapter Two of the RIA.   
 
Estimates of the “international oil takeback effect” and, to a lesser extent, the “rebound 
effect” are difficult to quantify. Take the case of the “international oil takeback effect.” While a 
decline in the world oil price is likely to increase world oil consumption, oil consumption 
patterns vary significantly across different regions of the world (i.e., Southeast Asia, South 
America). As a result, each region may have a different demand response to a change in the 
international price of crude oil.  For example, in Europe, the price of crude oil comprises a much 
smaller portion of the overall fuel prices seen by consumers than in the U.S. since Europeans pay 
significantly more fuel tax than their U.S. counterparts.  A decline in the price of crude oil is 
likely to have a smaller impact on prices at the pump and therefore a lesser impact on demand.  
In many other countries, particularly developing countries such as China and India, oil is used 
more widely in industrial and electricity generation applications, although the energy picture in 
China and India is evolving rapidly.  In addition, many countries around the world subsidize 
their oil consumption. It is not clear how oil consumption would change due to changes in the 
market price of oil with the current pattern of subsidies. Further, a lower international oil price 
might encourage consumption of oil, but a country might also deploy programs and policies to 
discourage its own oil consumption, which would have the net effect of lowering oil 
consumption to some level less than otherwise would be expected. The factors listed above 
illustrate the difficulty in trying to estimate the overall impact of a reduction in world oil price on 
oil consumption outside of the U.S.  
 
Even for the U.S., there is some controversy about the impact of a change in the price of 
oil on domestic U.S. oil consumption. Since approximately two-thirds of the U.S. oil use is 
concentrated in the U.S. transportation sector, most discussion of the so called “rebound effect” 
revolves around the impact of a change in driving in response to a change in the price of 
transportation fuels.  Many factors influence the magnitude of the U.S. rebound effect, including 
how fuel cost increases are passed through to prices at the pump for consumers, the composition 
of adult drivers, the level of urbanization, income levels, and the amount of congestion. 
 
In any case, the Agency recognizes that both the “international oil takeback effect” and 
the “rebound effect” are important to estimate and we are examining methodologies for 
quantifying them for the final rule.  For example, for the “international oil takeback effect”, EPA 
is asking ORNL to explore an approach based upon a review of the international energy 
economics literature to see if a set of bottom-up estimates of oil demand elasticities by world 
regions (i.e., Southeast Asia, South America) and oil-using sectors (i.e., transportation and non-
transportation) can be developed and used to address this issue. If the bottom-up estimates can be 
279 
developed, they will help inform the development by ORNL of an integrated petroleum/biofuels 
market tool to examine fuel market issues associated with the RFS2 program.      
 
EPA recognizes that with the increase in demand for biofuels from the RFS2 program 
there will be secondary impacts on oil markets.  For example, an increase in the use of biofuels 
will result in lower U.S. demand for imported oil.  Lower U.S. imported oil demand will cause 
the world oil price to modestly decline, and result in an increase in oil consumption outside of 
the U.S. (referred to here as the “international oil takeback effect”).  In addition, with the greater 
use of biofuels in the U.S., we are estimating that the cost of transportation fuels in the U.S. will 
increase.  This increase in the costs of U.S. transportation fuels will likely lower the domestic 
demand for oil beyond the direct substitution of biofuels for gasoline and diesel. T he response of 
U.S. oil demand to price is referred to here as the “rebound effect.”  From an overall standpoint, 
total global oil demand is the result of the two combined effects, decreases in U.S. oil demand 
(from the “rebound effect”) and increases in oil demand outside of the U.S. (from the 
“international oil takeback effect”).  These effects work in opposite directions to influence the 
overall change in global oil demand.  Besides providing a complete picture of oil market impacts 
of the RFS2 program, this issue is also important because secondary impacts on oil demand from 
the RFS2 program, assuming that they can be reliably determined, should be factored into the 
lifecycle greenhouse gas emissions estimates described here.   
 
 Estimates of the “international oil takeback effect” and, to a lesser extent, the “rebound 
effect” are difficult to quantify.  Take the case of the “international oil takeback effect.”  While a 
decline in the world oil price is likely to increase world oil consumption, oil consumption 
patterns vary significantly across different regions of the world (i.e., Southeast Asia, South 
America).  As a result, each region may have a different demand response to a change in the 
international price of crude oil.  For example, in Europe, the price of crude oil comprises a much 
smaller portion of the overall fuel prices seen by consumers than in the U.S. since Europeans pay 
significantly more fuel tax than their U.S. counterparts.  A decline in the price of crude oil is 
likely to have a smaller impact on prices at the pump and therefore a lesser impact on demand.  
In many other countries, particularly developing countries such as China and India, oil is used 
more widely in industrial and electricity generation applications, although the energy picture in 
China and India is evolving rapidly.  In addition, many countries around the world subsidize 
their oil consumption. It is not clear how oil consumption would change due to changes in the 
market price of oil with the current pattern of subsidies.  The factors listed above illustrate the 
difficulty in trying to estimate the overall impact of a reduction in world oil price on oil 
consumption outside of the U.S.  
 
 Even for the U.S., there is some controversy about the impact of a change in the price of 
oil on domestic U.S. oil consumption. Since approximately 70 percent of the U.S. oil use is 
concentrated in the U.S. transportation sector, most discussion of the so called “rebound effect” 
revolves around the impact of a change in driving in response to a change in the price of 
transportation fuels.  Many factors influence the magnitude of the U.S. rebound effect, including 
how fuel cost increases are passed through to prices at the pump for consumers, the composition 
of adult drivers, the level of urbanization, income levels, and the amount of congestion. 
 
280 
 In any case, the Agency recognizes that both the “international oil takeback effect” and 
the “rebound effect” are important to estimate and we are examining methodologies for 
quantifying them for the final rule.  For example, the most straightforward approach would be to 
utilize an elasticity estimate of global oil demand with respect to the international oil price and 
use this estimate to calculate the “international oil takeback effect”.  However, a global estimate 
would not capture regional or country specific demand responses, which as indicated above 
could be very different.  Alternatively, as another approach for estimating the “international oil 
takeback effect”, EPA is asking ORNL to explore an approach based upon a review of the 
international energy economics literature to see if a set of bottom-up estimates of oil demand 
elasticities by world regions (i.e., Southeast Asia, South America) and oil-using sectors (i.e., 
transportation and non-transportation) can be developed and used to address this issue.  If the 
bottom-up estimates can be developed or a global demand elasticity can be agreed upon, they 
will help inform the development by ORNL of an integrated petroleum/biofuels market tool to 
examine fuel market issues associated with the RFS2 program.   
 
 
2.6 Biofuels Analysis 
 
2.6.1 Modeling Approach 
 
As mentioned in Section 2.2, to address some of the issues with our RFS life cycle 
modeling for biofuels we have updated or methodology to include the use of agricultural sector 
comprehensive economic models.   
 
Our methodology involves the use of the FASOM model to determine domestic 
agriculture sector-wide impacts of increase biofuel production and the FAPRI model to 
determine international changes in crop production, and changes in total crop acres due to 
changes in U.S. exports from increased domestic biofuel production.  Agricultural sector GHG 
emissions are included in FASOM, FAPRI results were converted to GHG emissions based on 
GREET defaults and IPCC emission factors.  Biofuel process energy use and associated GHG 
emissions were based on process models for the different pathways considered.  Feedstock and 
co-product transportation GHG emissions were based on GREET defaults.   
 
In order to determine the impacts associated with biofuels, based on these comprehensive 
agricultural sector models, we compared two similar scenarios in both models.  Both agricultural 
sector models were run with two similar volumes of the specific fuel in question, other fuel 
volumes were held constant to isolate the impacts of specific fuel.  Volumes considered are 
shown in Section 2.3.   
 
Total impacts of the change in biofuel volumes can be calculated by taking the difference 
in total GHG emissions from the two scenarios considered.  Per gallon (or mmBtu) impacts can 
be calculated by dividing total GHG emission changes by the increase in volume of fuel 
represented in the scenarios.  Therefore, the results presented in this proposed rulemaking 
represent per mmBtu “average marginal” impact of the change in fuel volumes considered.   
 
 
281 
 
2.6.2 Domestic Agriculture 
 
The GHG emissions associated with the domestic agricultural sector were based on the 
FASOM modeling and were calculated either through use of direct FASOM output or by 
applying emissions factors to the output.  FASOM was run with the reference case and policy 
case volumes of bifuels shown in Table 2.3-1.  Model output included the total amount of 
fertilizer, chemicals and fuels used on farms for the entire domestic agricultural sector by type of 
fuel, gasoline, diesel fuel, electricity, and natural gas under both fuel volume cases.   
 
2.6.2.1 Domestic Crop Inputs 
 
FASOM modeling is based on input assumptions for the major field crops across 11 
different regions.  More detail on the FASOM model can be found in Chapter 5 of the (D)RIA.  
For example FASOM has input data on yields, amounts of fertilizer, chemicals, and energy use 
needed to grown corn in each of the different regions.  These inputs are based on USDA historic 
data and are also projected into the future.  The FASOM modeling however, represents an 
average for a given region and does not account for changes in production inputs or yields based 
on marginal acres or land use patterns (e.g., simultaneous corn production).  Some of the key 
input assumptions are shown in Chapter 5 of the (D)RIA.   
 
Based on input data for each individual crop and associated costs of production and 
projected prices, the model predicts how the total U.S. agricultural sector will change with 
increased feedstocks used for biofuel production.  The results for total agricultural sector inputs 
of the different fuel scenarios considered are shown in Table 2.6-1 through Table 2.6-4.  
 
Table 2.6-1. 
Change in Domestic Agricultural Sector Inputs In 2022 From Corn Ethanol Production 
 
Calc Units 
12.4 Bgal Corn 
Ethanol 
15 Bgal Corn 
Ethanol Difference 
Difference 
as a % of 
Low Volume 
Case 
Total N use Tons 13,579,165 13,656,663 77,497 0.57% 
Total P2O5 use Tons 3,133,112 3,169,185 36,073 1.15% 
Total K2O use Tons 4,071,676 4,099,299 27,624 0.68% 
Total Lime Use Tons 11,010 11,017 6 0.06% 
Herbicide Use Tons 208,026 210,343 2,317 1.11% 
Pesticide Use Tons 41,232 41,168 -64 -0.15% 
Total Diesel Fuel use gal 2,741,271,104 2,747,445,994 6,174,890 0.23% 
Total Gasoline use gal 365,527,816 360,839,070 -4,688,746 -1.28% 
Total Electricity Use kWh 203,558,361 204,268,096 709,735 0.35% 
Total Natural Gas Use Btu 6.9E+13 6.5E+13 -3.6E+12 -5.22% 
 
282 
Table 2.6-2. 
Change in Domestic Agricultural Sector Inputs In 2022 From Soybean Biodiesel 
Production 
 
Calc Units 
0.4 Bgal 
Soybean 
Biodiesel 
0.7 Bgal 
Soybean 
Biodiesel Difference 
Difference 
as a % of 
Low Volume 
Case 
Total N use Tons 13,754,243 13,656,663 -97,581 -0.71% 
Total P2O5 use Tons 3,173,639 3,169,185 -4,454 -0.14% 
Total K2O use Tons 4,116,977 4,099,299 -17,678 -0.43% 
Total Lime Use Tons 11,056 11,017 -39 -0.35% 
Herbicide Use Tons 210,670 210,343 -328 -0.16% 
Pesticide Use Tons 41,551 41,168 -383 -0.92% 
Total Diesel Fuel use gal 2,747,066,027 2,747,445,994 379,967 0.01% 
Total Gasoline use gal 360,233,446 360,839,070 605,625 0.17% 
Total Electricity Use kWh 204,138,103 204,268,096 129,994 0.06% 
Total Natural Gas Use Btu 6.9E+13 6.5E+13 -3.5E+12 -5.15% 
 
 
Table 2.6-3. 
Change in Domestic Agricultural Sector Inputs In 2022 From Corn Stover Ethanol 
Production 
 
Calc Units 
0 Bgal Corn 
Stover Ethanol 
7.6 Bgal Corn 
Stover Ethanol Difference 
Difference 
as a % of 
Low 
Volume 
Case 
Total N use Tons 13,398,157 13,656,663 258,506 1.93% 
Total P2O5 use Tons 3,040,127 3,169,185 129,057 4.25% 
Total K2O use Tons 3,461,168 4,099,299 638,131 18.44% 
Total Lime Use Tons 11,150 11,017 -134 -1.20% 
Herbicide Use Tons 209,968 210,343 375 0.18% 
Pesticide Use Tons 41,266 41,168 -97 -0.24% 
Total Diesel Fuel use gal 2,769,975,459 2,747,445,994 -22,529,464 -0.81% 
Total Gasoline use gal 363,019,719 360,839,070 -2,180,649 -0.60% 
Total Electricity Use kWh 204,417,097 204,268,096 -149,000 -0.07% 
Total Natural Gas Use Btu 6.6E+13 6.5E+13 -7.2E+11 -1.09% 
 
 
283 
Table 2.6-4. 
Change in Domestic Agricultural Sector Inputs In 2022 From Switchgrass Ethanol 
Production 
 
Calc Units 
1.1 Bgal 
Switchgrass 
Ethanol 
5.7 Bgal 
Switchgrass 
Ethanol Difference 
Difference 
as a % of 
Low 
Volume 
Case 
Total N use Tons 13,656,663 13,789,870 133,207 0.98% 
Total P2O5 use Tons 3,169,185 3,282,355 113,170 3.57% 
Total K2O use Tons 4,099,299 4,167,733 68,434 1.67% 
Total Lime Use Tons 11,017 10,525 -491 -4.46% 
Herbicide Use Tons 210,343 205,014 -5,329 -2.53% 
Pesticide Use Tons 41,168 39,478 -1,690 -4.11% 
Total Diesel Fuel use gal 2,747,445,994 2,723,351,266 -24,094,728 -0.88% 
Total Gasoline use gal 360,839,070 352,830,473 -8,008,597 -2.22% 
Total Electricity Use kWh 204,268,096 203,888,367 -379,729 -0.19% 
Total Natural Gas Use Btu 6.5E+13 6.1E+13 -3.9E+12 -5.96% 
 
The amounts shown in Tables 2.6-1 through 2.6-4 were combined with GREET defaults 
for GHG emissions from production of fertilizer and chemicals to get change in emissions.  Fuel 
use emissions included both the upstream emissions associated with production of the fuel as 
well as combustion emissions, also from GREET.  Emissions from electricity production 
represented average U.S. grid electricity production.   
 
As seen in Tables 2.6-1 through 2.6-4 fertilizer and chemical use for the most part 
increases with increased corn ethanol volumes, reflecting more corn production and associated 
fertilizer and chemical use.  However, energy use for the most part is decreasing.  This reflects 
the fact that crop production and agricultural patters are changing due to increase use of corn for 
ethanol.  Corn production is increasing for example but the production of other crops is 
decreasing, the decreased energy use from less production of other crops outweighs the increase 
of energy use from increased corn production.  There is also some shifting production of crops to 
different regions with different impacts associated with production which influences total 
agricultural sector fertilizer and energy use.   
 
In contrast to the corn ethanol volume increase scenario, for increased soybean biodiesel 
production, fertilizer and chemical use for the most part is decreasing.  This reflects the lower 
inputs required for soybeans compared to corn, specifically for nitrogen fertilizer.  Energy use 
changes for the soybean biodiesel scenario is similar to the corn ethanol case reflecting changes 
from crop production shifting.   
 
The corn stover ethanol scenario shows increases in fertilizer inputs reflecting the 
nutrient replacement assumptions described previously.  The absolute changes are higher then 
the corn ethanol case reflecting the larger overall volume change assumed.  Energy use is 
decreased due to some crop shifting, the added value of the corn stover makes growing corn 
more profitable and there is a small acreage change from this.  Also, the stover removal 
284 
assumptions change the type of management practices for corn growing, which impacts energy 
use.   
 
Switchgrass case changes reflect changes from crop shifting and the different rates of 
input for different crops of chemicals, fertilizers and energy use.   
 
Figure 2.6-1 shows the total crop acres planted assumed in the different scenarios.  As 
can be seen the increased use of feedstock for biofuel does not have a significant impact on the 
total agricultural sector acres planted.  This is also reflected in the small overall differences in 
fertilizer and energy use compared to the total amounts used as shown in the previous tables.   
 
Figure 2.6-1.  Projected Domestic Crop Acres in 2022 
U.S. Crop Acres in 2022
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
Control Case 12.4 Bgal Corn
Ethanol
0.4 Bgal Soybean
Biodiesel
0 Bgal Corn Stover
Ethanol
5.7 Bgal
Switchgrass
Ethanol
M
ill
io
n
s
 
o
f A
c
re
s
Other
SwitchGrass
Sugarcane
Sugarbeet
Soybeans
Sorghum
Silage
Rice
Oats
Hay
Wheat
Cotton
Corn
Barley
 
 
Figure 2.6-2 shows a more detail breakdown of the changes in crop acres for the different 
field crops for the different scenarios considered.  As can be seen with the corn ethanol scenario 
corn production is increasing as are oats and barley, while other crop acre and production is 
decreasing.  Specifically, soybean acres decrease, reflecting more corn grown on soybean acres.  
Rice acres also decrease which has impacts on direct GHG emissions from the agricultural 
sector, as described below.  Also, there are typically significant amounts of energy required for 
rice drying.  Decreased rice production means less energy needed for drying which is a large part 
of the reduced agricultural sector energy use shown in Tables 2.6-1 through 2.6-4.   
 
285 
Figure 2.6-2.  Absolute Change in Domestic Crop Acres in 2022 
Change in U.S. Crop Acres in 2022
- Relative to the Control Case -
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
 
 
Ba
rle
y
 
 
Co
rn
 
(C
o
rn
+
 S
ila
ge
)
 
 
Co
tto
n
 
 
H
ay
 
 
Oa
ts
 
 
R
ic
e
 
 
So
rg
hu
m
 
 
So
yb
e
a
n
s
 
 
Su
ga
rb
ee
t
 
 
Su
ga
rc
a
n
e
 
 
Sw
itc
hg
ra
ss
 
 
W
he
at
 
 
Ot
he
r C
ro
ps
 
 
To
ta
l
C
ro
pl
an
d
 
 
To
ta
l
Pa
st
u
re
 
 
C
R
P 
La
n
d
M
ill
io
n
s
 
o
f A
c
re
s
12.4 Bgal Corn Ethanol 0.4 Bgal Soybean Biodiesel 0 Bgal Corn Stover Ethanol 5.7 Bgal Switchgrass Ethanol
 
 
In order to put the acreage change results on a more comparative basis between the 
different fuel scenarios considered, Figure 2.6-3 shows the change in domestic crop acres in 
terms of acreage change per gallon of fuel produced.   
 
286 
Figure 2.6-3. Per Gallon Change in Domestic Crop Acres in 2022 
Change in U.S. Crop Acres in 2022
- Relative to the Control Case -
-2.0
-1.0
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
 
 
Ba
rle
y
 
 
C
or
n
 
(C
o
rn
+
 
Si
la
ge
)
 
 
C
o
tto
n
 
 
H
ay
 
 
Oa
ts
 
 
R
ic
e
 
 
So
rg
hu
m
 
 
So
yb
ea
ns
 
 
Su
ga
rb
e
e
t
 
 
Su
ga
rc
a
n
e
 
 
Sw
itc
hg
ra
ss
 
 
W
he
a
t
 
 
Ot
he
r C
ro
ps
 
 
To
ta
l
Cr
o
pl
a
n
d
 
 
To
ta
l
Pa
st
u
re
 
 
CR
P 
La
nd
A
c
re
s
 
pe
r 
Th
ou
s
a
n
d 
G
a
llo
n
s
 
(E
th
a
n
o
l E
qu
iv
a
le
n
t)
12.4 Bgal Corn Ethanol 0.4 Bgal Soybean Biodiesel 0 Bgal Corn Stover Ethanol 5.7 Bgal Switchgrass Ethanol
 
 
In addition to the GHG emissions associated with fertilizer and chemical production and 
fuel production and use there are several other non fossil fuel combustion related GHG sources 
of emissions from the agricultural sector that would be impacted by the increased use of corn for 
ethanol and associated changes to the agricultural sector.  FASOM provides directly the GHG 
emissions from these additional sources.   
 
2.6.2.2 Domestic N2O Emissions 
 
An important GHG impact from the agricultural sector is releases of N2O emissions.  
N2O can be released from a number of different N input sources including inorganic fertilizer, 
nitrogen fixing crops, crop residues, and manure management and be released either directly or 
indirectly through N leaching offsite.  Figure 2.6-4 highlights some of the major sources of 
agricultural N2O emissions.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
287 
Figure 2.6-4. Agricultural Sources of N2O Emissions 
 
 
 
This issue has become increasingly important in the context of biofuels production based 
on a recent paper by Paul Crutzen et al484.  The paper examines a top-down method for 
calculating N2O emissions and compares that to the standard IPCC bottom-up approach.  The 
conclusion is that it is not appropriate to just consider the direct N2O releases but that all sources 
of N2O are important.  The Paper recognizes that top down estimates are not necessarily 
inconsistent with IPCC’s bottom-up range when all direct and indirect agricultural sources are 
considered, highlighting the importance of “indirect” N2O emissions.   
 
Therefore, for our modeling we capture all the sources of N2O emissions shown in Figure 
2.6-4.  This section discusses direct and indirect emissions from synthetic fertilizer, N fixing 
crops, and crop residues, livestock and residue burning emissions are discussed in other sections, 
as are international N2O emissions.   
 
FASOM estimates direct and indirect emissions from synthetic fertilizer, N fixing crops, 
and crop residues based on the amount of fertilizer used and different regional factors to 
represent the percent of N applied that result in N2O emissions.   This approach is consistent with 
IPCC guidelines for calculating N2O emissions from these sources.   
 
In order to have a better representation of the N2O emissions from agricultural 
production, EPA is working with Colorado State University (CSU) to use the DAYCENT model 
to update the N2O factors in the FASOM model.  CSU will obtain initial projections of land use 
trends from FASOM to simulate a suite of domestic U.S. land use and crop management changes 
associated with potential biofuel production between 2007 and 2030.  CSU will use the 
DAYCENT model to simulate direct N2O emissions in croplands as well as the N losses 
associated with leaching, volatilization and surface runoff of water from land use and cropping 
pattern changes.  Leaching, volatilization and surface runoff losses will be used to estimate the 
indirect emissions of N2O with IPCC default factors.   
 
288 
Separate DAYCENT simulations will be conducted for each of the 63 agricultural 
regions included in the FASOM analysis.  In each region, the contractor will simulate land use 
conversions from grassland and forestland, as well as changes in existing cropping rotations that 
are needed to meet the biofuel market demand according to initial FASOM results.  Several 
scenarios may be addressed in the analysis.  
 
Specifically, CSU will provide several key refinements for a re-analysis of land use and 
cropping trends and GHG emissions in the FASOM assessment, including: 
 
• Direct N2O emissions based on DAYCENT simulations with an accounting of all N 
inputs to agricultural soils, including mineral N fertilizer, organic amendments, symbiotic 
N fixation, asymbiotic N fixation, crop residue N, and mineralization of soil organic 
matter.  Contractor will provide the total emission rate on an acre basis for each simulated 
bioenergy crop in the 63 regions, and also a disaggregation by N source. 
 
• Indirect N2O emissions on a per acre basis using results from DAYCENT simulations of 
volatilization, leaching and runoff of N from each bioenergy crop included in the analysis 
for the 63 regions, combined with IPCC factors for the N2O emission associated with the 
simulated N losses. 
 
Current N2O emission calculations from FASOM are from three main sources of emissions, 
fertilizer application (including direct emissions and indirect emissions from N leaching), 
Emissions from N fixing crops, and emissions associated with residues and N in the residue.  
Total N2O emissions for the different fuels analyzed are presented in Table 2.6-5. 
 
Table 2.6-5. Change in N2O Emissions in 2022 from Different Fuel Scenarios 
Source Units Corn 
Ethanol 
Soybean 
Biodiesel 
Corn Stover 
Ethanol 
Switchgrass 
Ethanol 
N Fert Application ‘000 tons 
CO2-eq. 
442 -524 1,562 848 
Emissions from N 
fixing crops 
‘000 tons 
CO2-eq. 
-1,157 899 130 -2,033 
Emissions from 
Crop residue  
‘000 tons 
CO2-eq. 
-218 279 -33 -809 
Domestic Net N2O 
Emissions 
‘000 tons 
CO2-eq. 
-933 654 1,659 -1,994 
 
The changes in N2O emissions from the different scenarios reflect the crop pattern, and 
management practice changes between the different fuel volumes considered.  For example, 
increased corn ethanol production results in more corn and less soybean acres, this is reflected in 
more N2O emissions from increased nitrogen fertilizer and lower N2O emissions from N fixing 
crops.  Swichgrass ethanol production results in similar land use changes, less N fixing crops.  
Soybean biodiesel has the opposite effect, more soybean acres and less other crops.  As 
discussed previously, these results do not consider any changes in crop inputs for example 
increased nitrogen fertilizer input to make up for lost soybean nitrogen fixing.   
 
289 
2.6.2.3 Domestic Livestock Emissions 
 
Livestock production and management also contribute significant non combustion GHG 
emissions from the agricultural sector.  GHG emissions from livestock are from two main 
sources enteric fermentation and manure management.  Enteric fermentation produces CH4 
emissions as part of the normal digestive processes in animals.  During digestion, microbes 
resident in an animal’s digestive system ferment food consumed by the animal.  This microbial 
fermentation process, referred to as enteric fermentation, produces CH4 as a by-product.  The 
amount of CH4 produced and excreted by an individual animal depends primarily upon the 
animal’s digestive system, and the amount and type of feed it consumes.  Ruminant animals 
(e.g., cattle, buffalo, sheep, goats, and camels) are the major emitters of CH4 because of their 
unique digestive system.   
 
The FASOM modeling reflects changes in livestock enteric fermentation emissions due 
to changes in livestock herds.  For example, as more corn is used in producing ethanol the price 
of corn increases, this drives changes in livestock production costs and demand.  The FASOM 
model predicts reductions in livestock herds as shown in Table 2.6-6.  IPCC factors for different 
livestock type are applied to herd values to get GHG emissions.   
 
Table 2.6-6.  Percent Change in Domestic Livestock in 2022 from Different Fuel Scenarios 
Livestock 
Type 
Corn Ethanol Soybean 
Biodiesel 
Corn Stover 
Ethanol 
Switchgrass 
Ethanol 
Dairy -0.52% 0.04% 0.03% -0.81% 
Beef -0.48% -0.23% -0.10% -0.48% 
Poultry -0.16% 0.00% 0.00% -0.98% 
Swine -1.63% -0.15% -0.26% -1.04% 
 
Enteric fermentation emissions are impacted by type and quality of feed.  As described in 
Chapter 5 the mix of types of feed used will change based on the increased use of corn in ethanol 
and changes to corn prices.  This change in feed type is not reflected in enteric fermentation 
emissions shown here.  The direction of this change would be likely be additional reductions in 
enteric fermentation emissions due to the fact that use of ethanol co-products DDGS as feed have 
been found to reduce enteric fermentation emissions.  We plan to include these CH4 reductions 
as part of the final rule analysis. 
 
The management of livestock manure can produce anthropogenic CH4 and N2O 
emissions.  CH4 is produced by the anaerobic decomposition of manure.  N2O is produced as part 
of the nitrogen cycle through the nitrification and denitrification of the organic nitrogen in 
livestock manure and urine.  The type of manure management methods will impact the amount 
of GHG emissions produced.  FASOM calculates these manure management emissions based on 
IPCC default factors for emissions factors from the different types of livestock and management 
methods.  Manure management emissions are projected to be reduced as a result of lower 
livestock herd values.   
 
 
 
290 
2.6.2.4 Domestic Rice Production Emissions 
 
Another source of non combustion GHG emissions from the agricultural sector is CH4 
emissions from rice production.  Most of the world’s rice, and all rice in the United States, is 
grown on flooded fields.  When fields are flooded, aerobic decomposition of organic material 
gradually depletes most of the oxygen present in the soil, causing anaerobic soil conditions.  
Once the environment becomes anaerobic, CH4 is produced through anaerobic decomposition of 
soil organic matter by methanogenic bacteria.  Some of this CH4 is transported from the 
submerged soil to the atmosphere primarily by diffusive transport through the rice plants.  Minor 
amounts of CH4 also escape from the soil via diffusion and bubbling through floodwaters.   
 
As with other sources of emissions different management methods and other factors 
(such as soil type and amounts of fertilization) will impact CH4 emissions from rice production.  
FASOM predicts methane emissions from rice production based on IPCC factors.  Rice methane 
emissions are projected to decrease due to a decrease in rice acres as shown in Table 2.6-7.   
 
Table 2.6-7. 
Percent Change in Domestic Rice Emissions in 2022 from Different Fuel Scenarios 
 Corn 
Ethanol 
Soybean 
Biodiesel 
Corn Stover 
Ethanol 
Switchgrass 
Ethanol 
Rice Methane Emissions 
(‘000 tons CO2-eq.) -352 -355 -38 -457 
 
2.6.2.5 Domestic Residue Burning Emissions 
 
An additional minor source of GHG emissions from agricultural residue burning is also 
included in this analysis.  Field burning of crop residues is not considered a net source of CO2, 
because the carbon released to the atmosphere as CO2 during burning is assumed to be 
reabsorbed during the next growing season.  Crop residue burning is, however, a net source of 
CH4 and N2O, which are released during combustion.  Field burning is not a common method of 
agricultural residue disposal in the United States.  The primary crop types whose residues are 
typically burned in the United States are wheat, rice, sugarcane, corn, barley, soybeans, and 
peanuts.  FASOM is predicting a minor reduction in GHG emissions from residue burning due to 
reductions in crop production with residues that are typically burned.   
 
2.6.2.6 Domestic Agriculture Sector Results (excluding land use change) 
 
Table 2.6-8 provides an overview of the total GHG emissions impacts from the domestic 
agricultural sector based on the results of the FASOM modeling in terms of absolute changes 
between the GHG emissions from the different volume scenarios considered.  Results are also 
presented on a per mmBtu basis by dividing total GHG changes by the mmBtu change in volume 
of biofuel produced between the different scenarios.  Land use change impacts are discussed in 
Section 2.6.5.   
 
291 
Table 2.6-8. 
Domestic Agriculture GHG Emission Changes in 2022 from Different Fuel Scenarios 
 Corn Ethanol 
Soybean 
Biodiesel 
Corn Stover 
Ethanol 
Switchgrass 
Ethanol 
Emission Source 
Tonnes 
CO2-eq. 
g/MMBtu 
CO2-eq. 
Tonnes 
CO2-
eq. 
g/MMBtu 
CO2-eq. 
Tonnes 
CO2-eq. 
g/MMBtu 
CO2-eq. 
Tonnes 
CO2-eq. 
g/MMBtu 
CO2-eq. 
On-Farm Combustion -218,314 -1,105 -228,655 -5,147 -299,049 -518 -578,771 -1,641 
Fuel Production Upstream -29,726 -151 -31,032 -698 -62,305 -108 -108,720 -308 
Farm Chemical Production / 
Transport Upstream 
305,681 1,548 -296,291 -6,669 1,228,269 2,127 369,162 1,047 
Livestock Change 
-
1,061,886 
-5,377 -181,679 -4,089 -90,825 -157 -
1,047,699 
-2,970 
Rice Production Changes -352,374 -1,784 -354,897 -7,988 -37,899 -66 -456,840 -1,295 
Fertilizer Application /  
Soil N2O Emissions 
-933,136 -4,725 654,440 14,730 1,658,579 2,872 -
1,994,025 
-5,653 
Residue Burning 3,127 16 1,851 42 326 1 -34,647 -98 
Total: 
-
2,286,628 
-11,579 -436,263 -9,820 2,397,095 4,150 -
3,851,541 
-10,920 
 
As can be see in Table 2.6-8 the net GHG impact of increased biofuel production on the 
U.S. agriculture sector is in general a reduction in GHG emissions.  This is driven primarily by 
indirect or secondary impacts such as decreases in energy use from crop shifting, reductions in 
livestock GHG emissions due to higher corn prices, etc.  The exception for this reduction is the 
corn stover ethanol case that shows an increase in domestic agricultural sector GHG emissions.  
This is mainly due to the fact that the corn stover case has less indirect impacts in comparison 
with other feedstocks.   
 
Overall the small impact in the domestic agricultural sector is due to the indirect effects 
and demand changes, specifically demand changes in U.S. exports.  For example, the sources of 
corn used in ethanol production in the FASOM model are shown in Figure 2.6-5.  Some of the 
additional corn comes from increased corn production, however the increase in corn acres is 
mostly offset by reductions in other crop acres as shown in figure 2.6-3.  Some of the corn used 
for ethanol comes from decreased corn used for feed.  As ethanol produces the co-product DDGS 
this partially offsets the use of corn directly as feed.  The reduction in livestock herds also lowers 
the use of corn for feed.   
 
292 
Figure 2.6-5. Source of Corn for Ethanol 
Source for Change in Corn Usage in 2022
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
1
Other Use
Corn in Feed
Corn Exports
Corn Production
 
 
However, as seen from Figure 2.5-5, one of the biggest sources of corn used for the 
increased ethanol production is projected to come from reductions in corn exports.  Therefore, 
the domestic agricultural sector impacts are only a portion of the total impacts due to increased 
ethanol production in the U.S.  The change in corn and other crop exports will have impacts on 
the international agricultural sector that need to be accounted for when determining life cycle 
GHG impacts of biofuel production in the U.S.   
 
2.6.3 Export Comparison between FASOM and FAPRI 
 
In order to estimate the impact on international agricultural sector GHG emissions the 
FAPRI model was run with domestic biofuel volume scenarios similar to the analysis conducted 
with FASOM.  The model provided changes in international production of corn, soybeans, and 
other crops to replace lost U.S. exports.   
 
The impact on the international agricultural sector is highly dependent on the U.S. export 
assumptions.  As we are using the FASOM model to represent domestic agricultural sector 
impacts with an assumed export picture, the international agricultural sector impacts should be 
based on a consistent set of export assumptions.  Therefore we worked with both models to build 
in a consistent set of assumptions in order to have an equivalent basis for modeling domestic and 
international impacts.   
293 
 
One of the key differences we worked to reconcile was based on the different time frames 
considered in the models.  As discussed in Section 5.1.1, FASOM is a long term econometric 
model, while FAPRI captures more short term impacts.  Therefore, we worked to put some of the 
supply and demand elasticities on a more consistent basis, specifically the export response and 
livestock demand and feed use.  We also coordinated on some of the key input assumptions in 
the two models as follows: 
 
• Current crop yields and projected increases for corn and soybeans based on 
USDA baseline projections.  These drive the amount of land required and price 
and demand response of the different commodities in the different fuel scenarios. 
 
• Ethanol yield and co-product use values, this impacts how much commodity is 
needed to produce a certain quantity of fuel as well as how co-products help to 
offset feed use and overall change in crop and livestock production. 
 
• CRP acre assumptions, we limited CRP acres such that 32 mill acres would 
remain in CRP.  We also worked to have consistent set of assumptions for when 
and where CRP acres would be used across both models.   
 
As a result, the total changes in projected export impacts shown in Figure 2.6-6 are 
relatively consistent across both models with the possible exception of impacts related to 
increased biodiesel production.   
 
294 
Figure 2.6-6. 
Comparison of FASOM and FAPRI Total Change in U.S. Exports in 2022 for Different 
Fuel Scenarios 
Change in U.S. Exports
-12.00
-10.00
-8.00
-6.00
-4.00
-2.00
0.00
2.00
4.00
FASOM FAPRI FASOM FAPRI FASOM FAPRI FASOM
Switchgrass Ethanol Corn Ethanol Biodiesel
Corn Residue
Ethanol
Ch
a
n
ge
 
(m
ill
io
n
 to
n
s
) Soybeans
SoybeanOil
SoybeanMeal
Sorghum
Rice
Wheat
Cotton
Corn
Barley
 
 
One of the issues with the comparison is that the fuel volumes considered in FASOM and 
FAPRI were not exact for the switchgrass ethanol case as discussed in Section 2.3.  Therefore it 
is more appropriate to compare results in terms of export changes on a per gallon of energy 
equivalent basis.  This also facilitates a comparison across the different fuels in terms of a per 
gallon impact.  Figure 2.6-7 shows the export change impact on a per gallon equivalent basis.   
 
295 
Figure 2.6-7. 
Comparison of FASOM and FAPRI Per Gallon Equivalent Change in U.S. Exports in 2022 
for Different Fuel Scenarios 
Change in U.S. Exports per Million Gallons of Biofuel
-14000
-12000
-10000
-8000
-6000
-4000
-2000
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
FASOM FAPRI FASOM FAPRI FASOM FAPRI FASOM
Switchgrass Ethanol Corn Ethanol Biodiesel (Ethanol Equivalent)
Corn Residue
Ethanol
To
ns
 
pe
r 
M
ill
io
n
 G
a
llo
n
s
 
o
f E
th
an
o
l
Soybeans
SoybeanOil
SoybeanMeal
Sorghum
Rice
Wheat
Cotton
Corn
Barley
 
 
The differences in switchgrass exports are primarily driven by how the different models 
have considered switchgrass acres.  FAPRI does not specifically model cellulosic ethanol 
feedstocks so the additional switchgrass acres were based on CRP acres in FAPRI.  FASOM 
specifically models switchgrass and competition with other crops.  Therefore, FAPRI domestic 
crop competition and associated export changes are not as large as those predicted in FASOM.   
 
Compared to other crops, FASOM and FAPRI differ more in their predicted impact on 
soybean export volumes.  FASOM assumes more biodiesel will come from new soybean acres 
(but total domestic acres are relatively constant as other crops offset the increase in soybean 
acres).  In comparison, FAPRI contains more types of oil, and has a more elastic demand in the 
soybean oil market.  In addition, the FAPRI model allows for some corn oil fractionation from 
DDGs, which can be used as a substitute for soybean oil.   
 
For the analysis conduced and presented here we have used both the FASOM and FAPRI 
results as-is with no adjustments.  Because the impact on international land use could be 
significantly different if we had used the FASOM export prediction rather than the FAPRI 
prediction, we intend to further refine the models with the goal of having export response more 
closely aligned for the final rule.   
 
As the corn residue ethanol production has negligible export change impacts, it is 
assumed that there are no international emissions impacts associated with increased corn stover 
296 
ethanol production in the U.S.  However, we have modeled the impact of increased production of 
Brazilian sugarcane ethanol for use in the U.S. market.  The FAPRI model has been used to 
determine the international impacts of Brazilian sugarcane ethanol production.  The increase in 
Brazilian sugarcane ethanol production is assumed to have no impacts on domestic U.S. 
agriculture emissions.   
 
2.6.4 International Agriculture 
 
Based on this analysis FAPRI provides detail on the type of crops and how much would 
be produced due to changes in domestic biofuel production as well as international production 
e.g., sugarcane ethanol in Brazil.  These results can be used to generate GHG emissions from the 
international agricultural sector similar to what was done to determine domestic US agriculture 
GHG emission changes.   
 
2.6.4.1 International Crop Input and GHG Impacts 
 
The FAPRI model does not directly provide an assessment of the GHG impacts of 
changes in international agricultural practices (e.g., changes in fertilizer load and fuels usage).  
However, it does predict changes in crop area and production by crop type and by country.  We 
therefore determined international fertilizer and energy use based on international data collected 
by the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the United Nations and the International 
Energy Agency (IEA).   
 
We take the FAPRI provided activity data on changes in crop acres by crop and by 
country and multiply by rate factors of fertilizer input in mass/acre for the different crops by 
country to determine tons of fertilizer changes.  Fertilizer data is taken from the Food and 
Agricultural Organization's Fertistat database, which reports fertilizer use by crop and by 
country, for a single year between 1988 and 2004485.  Herbicide and pesticide use data is 
calculated in the same manner.  We then use the GREET factors for emissions from production 
of agricultural chemicals to determine upstream GHG impacts of fertilizer, and chemical 
production by country and sum across countries to get total impact of each fuel scenario.  Table 
2.6-9 provides the total change in fertilizer and chemical use for the different fuel scenarios.   
 
Table 2.6-9. International Change in Fertilizer and Chemical Use in 2022 from Different 
Fuel Scenarios (total tons) 
Input Corn 
Ethanol 
Soybean 
Biodiesel 
Switchgrass 
Ethanol 
Brazilian Sugarcane 
Etanol 
N Application 80,492 3,627 18,167 134,842 
P Application 47,663 9,495 12,774 112,862 
K Application 38,606 8,640 7,549 155,311 
Herbicide 
Application  
230 57 72 524 
Pesticide 
Application 
382 58 111 663 
 
297 
Foreign agriculture energy use was calculated slightly differently.  We collected data 
from IEA on total CO2 emissions from fuel combustion in the agricultural sector by country486.  
We also collected data on total electricity and heat used in the agricultural sector by country, 
which was combined with emissions factors for electricity and heat production by country to 
develop GHG emissions from electricity and heat used in agriculture by country.  These total 
GHG emissions were only combustion related so we scaled them up to represent full life cycle 
GHG emissions from fuel production, based on U.S. fuel and electricity production ratio of 
combustion to full life cycle emissions.  Total GHG emissions from energy use in the 
agricultural sector by country were then divided by the total agricultural land by country from 
FAO's FAOSTAT land area data, to get a per acre GHG emission from energy use for agriculture 
by country.  In this way, energy consumption and GHG emissions per area is the same for all 
crops in each country.  We then multiply the total crop acre change activity data by country from 
the FAPRI results by the energy use GHG emission factors by acre by country to determine 
change in GHG emissions for the different fuel scenarios, by country data is summed to get total 
impact by fuel scenario.  Table 2.6-10 provides the total change in agricultural energy use GHG 
emissions for the different fuel scenarios.   
 
Table 2.6-10. 
International Change in Agricultural Energy Use GHG Emissions in 2022 from Different 
Fuel Scenarios (total metric tons CO2-eq.) 
 Corn 
Ethanol 
Soybean 
Biodiesel 
Switchgrass 
Ethanol 
Brazilian Sugarcane 
Etanol 
Agricultural Sector 
Energy Use GHG 
Emissions 
618,311 109,552 205,926 338,743 
 
We used the historical trends based on these FAO and IEA data to project chemical and 
energy use in 2022.  We intend to review input changes required to increase yields for the final 
rule.  For example, if changes in farming practices or seed varieties will have significantly 
different impacts on fertilizer use internationally.   
 
2.6.4.2 International N2O Emissions 
 
For international N2O emissions we consider both direct and indirect emissions from 
synthetic fertilizer application, crop residue N, and manure management.  Manure management 
emissions are discussed in the following section.  Direct and indirect emissions from synthetic 
fertilizer application and crop residues are calculated based on IPCC guidance as shown in Table 
2.6-11487. 
 
298 
Table 2.6-11. Calculations of N2O Emissions from Synthetic Fertilizer and Crop Residues 
Direct N2O Emissions     
Direct Emissions (Overall Equation) 
 
Equation 
 Emissions = 
(N additions to soils from mineral fertilizer + N 
additions to soils from crop residues) × EF 
 
EF for N additions from mineral fertilizer and crop 
residues = 0.01 kg N2O-N / kg N added 
N Additions from Mineral Fertilizers 
  
 N additions to soils from mineral fertilizers = 
kg fertilizer N applied to soils (i.e., change in 
fertilizer N applications from Table 2.6-9) 
N Additions from Crop Residues 
  
 N additions to soils from crop residues = 
above-ground residue dry matter × Crop Area × 
[N content of aboveground residues + ratio of 
belowground residues to harvested yield for crop 
× N content of belowground residues] 
 
where, 
  
 
Above-ground residue dry matter and N additions 
to soils from crop residues = Taken from IPCC default values by crop 
Indirect N2O Emissions 
    
Note that for indirect emissions, the calculation of N applied to soils from fertilizers or crop residues is the same 
as for direct emissions 
Indirect Emissions from Volatilization 
 
Equation 
 Emissions = 
N additions to soils from mineral fertilizers × N lost 
through volatilization × EF 
 
N lost (from synthetic fertilizer additions) through 
volatilization = 0.1 (kg NH3–N + NOx–N) / kg N applied 
 EF for N lost through volatilization = 
0.010 kg N2O–N / (kg NH3–N + NOX–N 
volatilised) 
Indirect Emissions from Leaching/Runoff 
 
Equation 
 Emissions = 
(N additions to soils from mineral fertilizers + N 
additions to soils from crop residues) × N lost 
through leaching or runoff × EF 
 N lost through leaching/runoff (from all N sources) = 0.3 N losses by leaching or runoff / kg N addition 
 EF for N lost through leaching/runoff = 0.0075 kg N20-N / kg N leaching or runoff 
 
 
Based on the equations in Table 2.6-11 and the activity data from the FAPRI results on 
total crop acre and production changes by crop by country we determined to total change in N2O 
emissions for the different fuel scenarios, shown in Table 2.6-12.  As noted above, we are also 
working with Colorado State University to update these factors as part of the final rule analysis.   
 
Table 2.6-12. International Change in N2O Emissions in 2022 from Different Fuel Scenarios 
(total metric tons N2O) 
 Corn 
Ethanol 
Soybean 
Biodiesel 
Switchgrass 
Ethanol 
Brazilian Sugarcane 
Etanol 
Direct and Indirect 
N2O Emissions 
1,901 104 446 2,642 
 
 
 
299 
2.6.4.4 International Livestock Change GHG Impacts 
 
Similar to domestic livestock impacts associated with an increase in biofuel production, 
internationally the FAPRI model predicts changes in livestock production due to changes in feed 
prices.  The GHG impacts of these livestock changes, enteric fermentation and manure 
management GHG emissions, were included in our analysis.  Unlike FASOM, the FAPRI model 
does not have GHG emissions built in and therefore livestock GHG impacts were based on 
activity data provided by the FAPRI model (e.g., number and type of livestock by country) 
multiplied by IPCC default factors for GHG emissions.  Tables 2.6-13 through 2.6-16 show the 
changes in livestock by region predicted by the FAPRI model in 2022 for each of the fuel 
scenarios considered.   
 
Table 2.6-13. 
Changes in International Livestock by Region in 2022 for the  
Corn Ethanol Scenario (‘000 Head) 
 Dairy Cattle Hog Sheep Poultry 
North America 
(Canada) -3.0 61.2 -307.8 0.0 700.7 
Western Europe -1.1 -28.7 -9.9 0.0 733.8 
Eastern Europe 0.1 18.3 -51.6 0.0 3,528.7 
Oceania 3.6 196.0 -4.3 35.4 1,342.1 
Latin America -105.0 -377.4 36.0 0.0 2,072.8 
Asia -46.6 964.3 -72.6 -702.2 1,477.3 
Africa and Middle 
East -214.8 -37.3 0.0 0.0 -312.1 
Indian Subcontinent -0.1 -31.2 0.0 0.0 26.2 
Total -366.8 765.1 -410.3 -666.9 9,569.4 
 
Table 2.6-14. 
Changes in International Livestock by Region in 2022 for the  
Soybean Biodiesel Scenario (‘000 Head) 
 Dairy Cattle Hog Sheep Poultry 
North America 
(Canada) 0.3 1.3 64.2 0.0 -130.6 
Western Europe -0.2 16.5 -26.9 0.0 504.8 
Eastern Europe 0.0 -1.5 8.5 0.0 -1,017.0 
Oceania 0.2 -4.7 -2.4 -37.9 -631.0 
Latin America -4.1 -66.9 10.5 0.0 -4,131.9 
Asia 11.4 -27.4 27.4 137.7 -696.5 
Africa and Middle 
East -12.0 6.4 0.0 0.0 -51.6 
Indian Subcontinent 0.0 4.8 0.0 0.0 -625.7 
Total -4.3 -71.4 81.3 99.8 -6,779.6 
 
300 
Table 2.6-15. 
Changes in International Livestock by Region in 2022 for the 
 Switchgrass Ethanol Scenario (‘000 Head) 
 Dairy Cattle Hog Sheep Poultry 
North America 
(Canada) 0.4 -2.7 37.3 0.0 -99.0 
Western Europe 0.1 3.4 0.0 0.0 -57.8 
Eastern Europe 0.0 -2.4 10.2 0.0 -435.4 
Oceania -0.5 -11.1 0.4 -3.1 -108.6 
Latin America 10.4 31.0 4.6 0.0 -81.9 
Asia 6.7 1,742.5 124.9 91.6 182.2 
Africa and Middle 
East 21.4 2.3 0.0 0.0 90.1 
Indian Subcontinent 0.0 5.5 0.0 0.0 12.0 
Total 38.5 1,768.5 177.3 88.5 -498.4 
 
Table 2.6-16. 
Changes in International Livestock by Region in 2022 for the 
 Brazilian Sugarcane Ethanol Scenario (‘000 Head) 
 Dairy Cattle Hog Sheep Poultry 
North America 
(Canada) -0.2 2.7 -32.2 0.0 81.8 
Western Europe -0.1 -2.1 -0.6 0.0 90.1 
Eastern Europe 0.0 1.7 -8.3 0.0 417.5 
Oceania 0.2 -4.7 0.2 1.8 26.7 
Latin America -10.1 -40.7 -3.7 0.0 -1,889.6 
Asia -3.8 -32.2 -31.1 -66.7 -136.8 
Africa and Middle 
East -13.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 4.4 
Indian Subcontinent 0.0 26.3 0.0 0.0 -172.8 
Total -27.0 -48.9 -75.8 -64.9 -1,578.7 
 
The enteric fermentation GHG impacts of the changes in livestock for each fuel scenario 
were calculated based on applying regional default factors for enteric fermentation CH4 
emissions by livestock type.  These factors are shown in Table 2.6-17.  
 
Table 2.6-17.  Enteric Fermentation Emission Factors 
Enteric Fermentation 
(kg CH4/head - year) Dairy Cattle Swine Sheep 
North America 121 53 1.5 8 
Western Europe 109 57 1.5 8 
Eastern Europe 89 58 1.5 8 
Oceania 81 60 1 5 
Latin America 63 56 1 5 
Asia 61 47 1 5 
Africa and Middle East 40 31 1 5 
Indian Subcontinent 51 27 1 5 
 
301 
Manure management GHG impacts of the changes in livestock for each fuel scenario 
were calculated based on applying regional default factors for manure management CH4 and 
N2O emissions by livestock type.  Manure management CH4 emission factors are shown in Table 
2.6-18, manure management N2O values were based on default IPCC nitrogen produced per 
livestock type and IPCC default manure management practices by region.   
 
Table 2.6-18.  Manure Management Methane Emission Factors 
Manure Management (kg 
CH4/head - year) Dairy Cattle Swine Sheep Poultry 
North America 78 2 23.5 0.28 0.02 
Western Europe 51 15 15.5 0.28 0.02 
Eastern Europe 27 13 6.5 0.28 0.02 
Oceania 29 2 18 0.15 0.02 
Latin America 1 1 1 0.15 0.02 
Asia 18 1 4 0.15 0.02 
Africa and Middle East 1.5 1 2 0.15 0.02 
Indian Subcontinent 5 2 4 0.15 0.02 
 
 
2.6.4.5 International Rice Production GHG Impacts 
 
To estimate rice emission impacts internationally, we used the FAPRI model to predict 
changes in international rice production as a result of the increase in biofuels demand in the U.S. 
Since FAPRI does not have GHG emissions factors built into the model, we applied IPCC 
default factors by country.   
 
Calculating emissions from rice cultivation, per the IPCC 2006 guidelines, requires the 
following data: area of rice harvested, an emissions factor, and planting to harvesting season 
length.  Area of rice harvested by country was provided by the FAPRI results.  The default IPCC 
emission factors were used scaled for each cropping regime: irrigated, rainfed lowland, upland 
and deepwater by country.  Rice cultivation season lengths were available from the International 
Rice Research Institute (IRRI)488. 
 
2.6.4.6 International Crop Residue Burning 
 
International crop residue burning and specifically changes in residue burning emissions 
from changes in U.S. biofuel policy were not specifically included in this analysis.  We did 
incorporate emissions from land clearing for crop production as discussed in Section 2.6.5.  
Changes in crop production and acres by country could lead to some changes in international 
residue burning emissions and we will examine methods of incorporating these impacts for the 
final rule.   
 
2.6.4.7 International Agriculture Sector Results (excluding land use change) 
 
Table 2.6-19 provides an overview of the total GHG emissions impacts from the 
international agricultural sector based on the results of the FAPRI modeling in terms of absolute 
changes between the GHG emissions from the different volume scenarios considered.  Results 
302 
are also presented on a per mmBtu basis by dividing total GHG changes by the mmBtu change in 
volume of biofuel produced between the different scenarios.  Land use change impacts are 
discussed in Section 2.6.5.   
 
Table 2.6-19. 
International Agriculture GHG Emission Changes in 2022 from Different Fuel Scenarios 
 Corn Ethanol Soybean Biodiesel 
Switchgrass 
Ethanol 
Brazilian Sugarcane 
Ethanol 
Emission Source 
Tonnes 
CO2-eq. 
g/MMBtu 
CO2-eq. 
Tonnes 
CO2-
eq. 
g/MMBtu 
CO2-eq. 
Tonnes 
CO2-eq. 
g/MMBtu 
CO2-eq. 
Tonnes 
CO2-eq. 
g/MMBtu 
CO2-eq. 
Farm Energy Use Emissions 618,311 3,131 109,552 3,064 205,926 842 338,743 1,785 
Farm Chemical Production / 
 Transport Upstream Emissions 
301,148 1,525 26,567 743 70,073 287 595,078 3,136 
Livestock Changes GHG Emissions 210,309 1,065 -75,984 -2,125 2,666,036 10,906 -189,238 -997 
Rice Production GHG Emissions 365,322 1,850 69,645 1,948 228,504 935 134,861 711 
Fertilizer / Soil N2O Emissions 589,342 2,984 32,256 902 138,339 566 819,096 4,317 
Total: 2,084,432 10,555 162,036 4,532 3,308,879 13,536 1,698,540 8,952 
 
 
2.6.5 Land Use Change GHG Impacts 
 
Our lifecycle GHG estimates include emissions from domestic and international land use 
changes that may occur as a result of increased renewable fuels demand in the U.S.  To estimate 
land use change GHG emissions we had to answer five key questions.   
 
Questions we need to address in this analysis: 
1. How much land is converted? 
2. Where does land use change occur? 
3. What types of land are converted? 
4. What are the GHG emissions from that land conversion? 
5. How do we account for the time dimension of land use change GHG releases? 
 
This Section describes our approach for answering these questions about land use change.  
We use FASOM to predict the total amount of cropland expansion in the U.S.  FASOM has land 
use interaction specifically built into the model that is used to predict the types of land converted 
in the U.S.  We used the FAPRI model to project international cropland expansion in response to 
increased U.S. biofuel consumption.  The FAPRI model projects the area and amount of 
additional crop production by crop and country.  FAPRI does not, however, project which types 
of land would be cleared to make room for additional cropland, or where within in each country 
or region cropland expansion would likely take place.  To fill this information gap we used 
satellite data provided by Winrock International Incorporated (from now on referred to as 
Winrock), that shows recent trends in land use change from 2001 to 2004.  To determine the 
GHG impacts of the land use changes we applied GHG emissions factors prepared by Winrock 
to the land use changes projected by the combination of FAPRI and satellite data.  We then used 
a net present value of GHG emissions to account for the variable time profile of land use change 
emissions.   
303 
 
2.6.5.1 How Much Land Is Converted 
 
The main question regarding the amount of new land needed to meet an increasing 
demand for biofuels hinges on assumptions about the intensification of existing production 
versus expansion of production to other lands.  This interaction is driven by the relative costs and 
returns associated with each option, but there are other factors as described in the following 
sections.   
 
2.6.5.1.1 Co-Product Use 
 
One factor determining the amount of new crop acres required under an increased biofuel 
scenario is the treatment of co-products.  For example, distillers grains (DGs) are the major co-
product of dry mill ethanol production that is also used as animal feed.  Therefore, using the DGs 
as an animal feed to replaces the use of corn tends to offset the loss of corn to ethanol 
production, and reduces the need to grow additional corn to feed animals.  As the renewable 
fuels industry expands, the handling and use of co-products is also expanding.  There is some 
uncertainty associated with how these co-products will be used in the future (e.g., whether it can 
be reformulated for higher incorporation into pork and poultry diets, whether it will be dried and 
shipped long distances, whether fractionation will become widespread).   
 
Both our FASOM and FAPRI models account for the use of DGs in the agricultural 
sector.  The FASOM and FAPRI models both assume that a pound of co-product would displace 
roughly a pound of feed.  DG replacement is driven by how much DG can be included in animal 
feed, this so called inclusion rate differs by type of animal.  The inclusion rate in turn impacts 
what percent of the DG produced will be used in which animal feed market.  Finally the DG will 
substitute for different alternative feed products in different animal diets.   
 
USDA reports that typical inclusion rates are 30-40 percent for beef cattle, 20-25 percent 
for dairy, 20 percent for hogs and 15 percent for poultry.489  Furthermore, the same report 
indicates that a pound of DG will replace a pound of corn in beef rations, 0.45 pounds of corn in 
dairy rations, 0.85 pounds of corn in hog rations and 0.55 pounds of corn in poultry rations, with 
the remaining pound per pound replacing soybean meal.  Based on these assumptions and also 
that the majority of DG is used in the beef cattle market FASOM assumes that one pound of DG 
will offset 0.9 pounds of corn and 0.1 pound of soybean meal.   
 
The FAPRI model uses a slightly different set of assumptions for DG inclusion rates490.  
Beef cattle feed ration has the highest inclusion rate at 41 to 50%, the maximum inclusion rate 
for dairy follows at 26 to 30%, for hogs 20%, and for poultry 20%.  Furthermore FAPRI assumes 
that DG will replace corn in beef and dairy cattle rations at 0.97 pound per pound, followed by 
pork at 0.89 pound per pound, and then poultry at 0.79 pound per pound.  Displacement of 
soybean meal as a source of protein is 0.03 pound per pound of DG for beef and dairy cattle, 
0.11 for pork, and 0.21 for poultry.  FAPRI accounts for DG exports so that not all of the DG 
produced in the domestic ethanol market is used in the U.S. animal feed sector.  Of the amount 
that is used in the U.S., FAPRI assumes that the use of DG in animal feed is highest in the beef 
cattle sector (61% share), followed by the dairy sector (21%), and then pork (9%) and poultry 
304 
(9%) sectors.  Based on all these assumptions FAPRI calculates that a pound of DG used 
replaces 0.95 pounds of corn and 0.05 pounds of soybean meal.   
 
A recent paper by Argonne National Laboratory491 estimates that 1 pound of DGs can 
displace more then a pound of feed due to the higher nutritional value of DGs compared to corn.  
However, the Argonne replacement ratios do not take into account the dynamic least cost feed 
decisions faced by livestock producers.  The actual use of DGs will depend on the maximum 
inclusion rates for each type of animal (based on the digestibility of DGs), the displacement ratio 
for each type of animal (based on DGs energy and protein content), and the adoption rate (based 
on the feed value relative to price).   
 
Furthermore, as world vegetable oil prices increase, dry mill ethanol producers will have 
an incentive to extract the corn oil from the DGs.  This step changes the nutritional content of the 
DGs, which results in a different replacement rates than the ones currently used in FAPRI or 
FASOM or described by Argonne.   
 
We plan to evaluate and incorporate a least cost feed rationing approach for the final rule 
in both the FASOM and FAPRI modeling systems.  This will include assumptions about 
inclusion rates and displacement ratios, including considering additional replaced feed inputs 
such as urea as a protein source.   
 
2.6.5.1.2 Crop Yields 
 
Assumptions about yields and how they may change over time can also influence land 
use change predictions.  Domestic yields were based on USDA projections, extrapolated out to 
2022.  In 2022, we estimate that the U.S. average corn yield will be approximately 180 
bushels/acre (a 1.6% annual increase consistent with recent trends) and average U.S. soybean 
yields will be approximately 50 bushels per acre (a 0.4% annual increase).OOOOOO  Using the 
FASOM model, we conducted a sensitivity analysis on the impact of higher and lower yields in 
the U.S.  Details on this scenario are included in DRIA Chapter 5.1.  International yields changes 
are also based on the historic trends.  The FAPRI model contains projected yields and yield 
growths that are generally lower in other countries compared to the U.S.  For example, corn 
yields in Argentina are assumed to be approximately 140 bu/acre in 2022 (a 0.8% annual 
increase).  Corn yields in Brazil are assumed to be 68 bu/acre in 2022 (a 1.1% annual increase).   
 
The FASOM and FAPRI models currently do not take into account changes in 
productivity as crop production shifts to marginal acres or the impact of price induced yield 
changes on land use change.  We would expect these two factors could work in opposite 
directions and therefore would serve to offset each other’s impacts.  Marginal acres in fully 
developed agricultural systems are expected to have lower yields, because most productive acres 
are already under cultivation.  This may not be the case in developing systems where prime 
agricultural lands are not currently in full production due to, for example, lack of supporting 
infrastructure.  Changes in agricultural inputs (e.g., fertilizer, pesticides) can also change crop 
yield per acre.  Higher commodity prices might provide an incentive to increase production in 
existing acres.  If the costs of increasing productivity on existing land were minimal relative to 
                                                 
OOOOOO
 Note that these same assumptions apply in both the reference case and the control cases. 
305 
the value of the increased production, then agricultural landowners would presumably adopt 
these productivity-enhancing actions under the reference case.  Although it is reasonable to 
assume a trend wherein some productivity-enhancing practices may become profitable if 
commodity prices are high enough, it is not clear that farmers would find significant increases in 
production/acre profitable.  If crop yields either domestically or international are significantly 
impacted by higher commodity prices driven by general increase in worldwide demand, this 
could affect our assessment of land use impacts and the resulting GHG emissions due to 
increased biofuel demand in the U.S.  However, as described in Chapter 5, the change in 
commodity prices associated with the increase in U.S. biofuel as a result of the EISA mandates 
are very small and likely not large enough to induce significant increased yield changes.   
 
2.6.5.1.3 Land Conversion Costs 
 
The assumed cost associated with different types of land conversion can also play a key 
role in determining how much land will be converted.  In FASOM, the decision to convert land 
from pasture or forest to cropland is based on whether the landowner can increase the net present 
value of expected returns through conversion (including any costs of conversion).  Among other 
things, the decision to convert land depends on regional yields, costs, and other factors affecting 
profitability and on the returns to alternative land uses.  In other words, FASOM assumes that 
land conversion is based on maximizing profits rather than minimizing costs.   
 
FASOM allows acres to convert between different types of crops without incurring 
conversion costs.  Crop land is allowed to move from the pasture land inventory into the crop 
land category and backwards; however, there are replacement costs for forage as well as 
conversion costs of moving between land uses.  Conversion costs from pasture to crop are 
expected to be generally lower than conversion costs from forest to crop, because forest 
conversion requires an investment to clear stumps, level, and otherwise prepare the land for 
planting.  Conversion cost will also depend on the type of forest land converted and the value of 
the lumber or other products removed.  The land quality factors such as topography or soil 
characteristics generally restrict some lands to only be in forest.  Likewise, growing conditions 
render some lands unsuitable for forest uses at all, particularly in the drier plains areas and would 
thus only be suitable for some agricultural uses.  For land moving from forest to agriculture, the 
net present value of land in agriculture must exceed returns to a rotation in forestry plus the 
future value of forested land by the investment cost to transfer land plus any hurdle cost (this 
term is currently set to zero).  In both land transfer cases, the land moves between sectors until 
the markets equilibrate and the net present value plus the investment and market wedges are 
equal across the sectors for lands on the margin.  Land movement does not occur if the 
differences in the land returns are less than the hurdle cost plus the land transformation 
investment costs. 
 
FAPRI does not explicitly model land conversion costs, however the international 
production supply curves used by the FAPRI model implicitly take into account conversion 
costs.  FAPRI's supply curves are based on historical responses to price changes, which take into 
account the conversion costs of land, based on expected future returns associated with land 
conversion.  Thus, we believe that our assessments of international land use changes are based 
on economic land-use decisions.   
306 
 
2.6.5.1.4 Total Area of Land Converted 
 
With the previous considerations of co-product use, yield, and cost of conversion we ran 
the FASOM and FAPRI models with the volume scenarios described in Table 2.3-1 to determine 
impacts on additional cropland acres required.  The FASOM results were used to represent 
domestic land use change and FAPRI results were used to determine international land use 
change. 
 
FASOM domestic land use change was described in Section 2.6.2.1.  Table 2.6-20 shows 
the FASOM land use change results for the different fuel scenarios considered. 
 
Table 2.6-20. Domestic Cropland Increase in 2022 for Different Fuel Scenarios 
Scenario Total Cropland Increase 
(million acres) 
Normalized Cropland Increase 
(acre/mmBtu) 
Corn Ethanol 0.3 0.0017 
Soybean Biodiesel 0.2 0.0044 
Corn Stover Ethanol 0.0 0 
Switchgrass Ethanol 1.3 0.0038 
 
The FAPRI model predicted cropland shifting internationally due to changes in U.S. 
exports for the different fuel volume scenarios considered.  Not all export losses are made up 
with production there are shifts in crops and decrease in demand also occur.  Figure 2.6-8 shows 
absolute internationally crop production pattern changes and Figure 2.6-9 shows per gallon crop 
pattern changes due to the changes in U.S. exports.   
 
307 
Figure 2.6-8. 
Absolute International Crop Acre Changes in 2022 by Crop for Different Fuel Volume 
Scenarios 
International Cropland Use Change by Crop in 2022
-1.0
0.0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
W
he
at
Co
tto
n
Co
rn
So
rg
hu
m
Ba
rle
y
So
yb
e
a
n
R
a
pe
se
e
d
Su
n
flo
w
e
r
Pa
lm
Pe
a
n
u
t
R
ic
e
Su
ga
rb
ee
t
Su
ga
rc
a
n
e
To
ta
l
M
ill
io
n
s 
o
f A
cr
es
Corn Only Volume Scenario Biodiesel Only Volume Scenario
Sugarcane Imports Only Volume Scenario Switchgrass Only Volume Scenario
 
 
308 
Figure 2.6-9. 
Per Gallon International Crop Acre Changes in 2022 by Crop for Different Fuel Volume 
Scenarios 
International Cropland Use Change by Crop per Thousand Gallons of Biofuel in 2022
-0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
W
he
at
Co
tto
n
Co
rn
So
rg
hu
m
Ba
rle
y
So
yb
ea
n
R
ap
es
ee
d
Su
n
flo
w
er
Pa
lm
Pe
an
u
t
R
ic
e
Su
ga
rb
ee
t
Su
ga
rc
an
e
To
ta
l
A
cr
es
 
pe
r 
Th
ou
sa
n
d 
G
al
lo
n
s 
o
f B
io
fu
el
 
(E
th
an
o
l E
qu
iv
al
en
t)
Corn Only Volume Scenario Biodiesel Only Volume Scenario Sugarcane Imports Only Volume Scenario Switchgrass Only Volume Scenario
 
 
Table 2.6-21 shows the FAPRI land use change results for the different fuel scenarios considered 
 
Table 2.6-21. International Cropland Increase in 2022 for Different Fuel Scenarios 
Scenario Total Cropland Increase 
(million acres) 
Normalized Cropland Increase 
(acre/mmBtu) 
Corn Ethanol 4.4 0.0223 
Soybean Biodiesel 0.9 0.0246 
Switchgrass Ethanol 1.3 0.0054 
Brazilian Sugarcane Ethanol 3.7 0.0194 
 
The switchgrass ethanol scenario shows the least acreage change per gallon.  This is 
partly due to the fact that in 2022 switchgrass ethanol is assumed to have a high yields per acre.  
For example, corn ethanol yields in 2022 are assumed to be ~480 gal/acre, while switchgrass 
ethanol yields are assumed to be ~580 gal/acre.  The corn stover ethanol case is not assumed to 
have any land use change impacts.  The models also show that there are significant land use 
change impacts associated with increased sugarcane production in Brazil and change in Brazil 
exports.  Soybean biodiesel has lower gallons per acre production than other fuels (~75 gal/acre 
vs. 480 gal/acre for corn ethanol) that requires more land for crops.  However, biodiesel has a 
higher energy content then ethanol so on a per gallon basis offsets more petroleum fuel, which 
decreases the soybean biodiesel per Btu land use impact.   
 
 
 
 
309 
2.6.5.2 Where Does Land Use Change Occur 
 
The first step in determining what domestic and international land will be converted due 
to biofuels production is to determine to what extent the increased demand for biofuel feedstock 
will be met through increased U.S. agriculture production or reductions in exports.   
 
 This question has several implications.  For example, U.S. agriculture production is 
typically more energy and input intensive but has higher yields then agricultural production in 
other parts of the world.  This implies that increased production in the U.S. has higher input 
GHG emission impacts but lower land use change impacts compared to oversees production.  In 
addition, the types of land where agriculture would expand would be different in the U.S. vs. 
other parts of the world.   
 
 As noted previously, EPA’s analysis relies on FASOM predictions to represent changes 
in the U.S. agricultural sector, including land use, and on FAPRI to predict the resulting 
international agricultural sector impacts including the amount of additional cropland needed 
under different scenarios.  The impact on the international agricultural sector is highly dependent 
on the U.S. export assumptions.  As shown in Section 2.6.3, coordination of assumptions 
between FASOM and FAPRI has generated a consistent export picture response from both the 
FASOM and FAPRI model for the majority of biofuel and feedstock scenarios considered.   
 
FASOM and FAPRI also show similar domestic land use change response, shifting out of 
one crop to another.  Figure 2.6-10 shows the comparison of FASOM and FAPRI domestic crop 
acre changes for the different fuel scenarios.  As with the export response the biodiesel case 
shows the biggest difference between the two results, for some of the same reasons as described 
previously.  For the corn and switchgrass ethanol scenarios, the models show the same type of 
response with FAPRI showing slightly higher overall net acreage response.   
 
310 
Figure 2.6-10. 
Comparison of FASOM and FAPRI Domestic Crop Acre Change in 2022 for Different 
Fuel Scenarios 
Change in U.S. Acres per Thousand Gallons of Biofuel
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
FASOM FAPRI FASOM FAPRI FASOM FAPRI FASOM FAPRI
Corn Ethanol Only Volume
Scenario
SoyOil Biodiesel Only Volume
Scenario
Switchgrass Ethanol Only Volume
Scenario
Corn Stover
Ethanol Only
Volume
Scenario
Sugarcane
Ethanol Imports
Only Volume
Scenario
A
c
re
s
 
pe
r 
Th
o
u
s
a
n
d 
Ga
llo
n
s
 
(E
th
a
n
o
l E
qu
iv
a
le
n
t)
  Other Crops (CARD)
  Other Crops (FASOM)
  Wheat
  Switchgrass
  Sugarcane
  Sugarbeet
  Soybeans
  Sorghum
  Rice
  Oats
  Hay
  Cotton
  Corn (Corn + Silage)
  Barley
 
 
Due to the wide range of carbon and biomass properties associated with land in different 
parts of the world, the location of crop conversion is also important to our lifecycle analysis.  For 
example, an acre of forest in Southeast Asia stores a much larger quantity of carbon than an acre 
of forest in Northern Europe.  The FAPRI model provides estimates of the acreage change by 
country and crop that result from a decrease in U.S. exports due to the increase in U.S. biofuel 
demand.  These estimates are based on historic responsiveness to changes in prices in other 
countries.  Implicit in these supply curves are the costs associated with converting new land to 
crop production and the relative competitiveness of each country to increase production based on 
production costs, yields, transportation costs, and currency fluctuations.  FAPRI also includes in 
its baseline projections of future population growth, GDP growth, and other macroeconomic 
changes.  FAPRI also takes into account the fact that not all U.S. exports will need to be made up 
in international production, as there is a small decreases in demand due to shifts in crop 
production and higher prices.   
 
Figure 2.6-11 shows the absolute acres of crop conversion internationally by country and 
Figure 2.6-12 shows the per gallon changes from the FAPRI modeling for the different fuel 
scenarios.  Brazil is seen to be significant in terms of representing a large portion of international 
crop expansion from changes in U.S. exports, as well as from production of sugarcane ethanol 
311 
production.  However, other countries have significant crop expansion as well, specifically India 
and Nigeria.   
 
Figure 2.6-11. 
Absolute International Crop Acre Changes in 2022 by Country for Different Fuel Volume 
Scenarios 
International Cropland Use Change by Country in 2022
-0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
Ar
ge
nt
in
a
Br
az
il
In
di
a
M
al
ay
si
a
In
do
ne
si
a
Ph
ilip
pi
n
es
Ch
in
a
M
ex
ic
o
Ru
ss
ia EU
Ni
ge
ria
O
th
er
 
Af
ric
a
O
th
er
 L
at
in
Am
er
ic
a
Re
st
 
of
 
W
or
ld
To
ta
l I
n
te
rn
at
io
na
l
M
ill
io
n
s 
o
f A
cr
es
Corn Only Volume Scenario Biodiesel Only Volume Scenario
Sugarcane Imports Only Volume Scenario Switchgrass Only Volume Scenario
 
 
312 
Figure 2.6-12. 
Per Gallon International Crop Acre Changes in 2022 by Country for Different Fuel 
Volume Scenarios 
International Cropland Use Change by Country in 2022
-0.50
0.00
0.50
1.00
1.50
2.00
Arg
en
tin
a
Bra
zil
Ind
ia
Ma
lay
sia
Ind
on
es
ia
Ph
ilip
pin
es
Ch
ina
Me
xic
o
Ru
ss
ia EU
Nig
eri
a
Ot
he
r A
fric
a
Ot
he
r L
ati
n 
Am
er
ica
Re
st 
of 
No
n-
US
 W
or
ld
To
tal
 
Int
er
na
tio
na
l
Ac
re
s 
pe
r 
Th
o
u
sa
n
d 
G
al
lo
n
s 
o
f B
io
fu
el
 
(E
th
an
o
l E
qu
iv
al
en
t)
Corn Only Volume Scenario Biodiesel Only Volume Scenario Sugarcane Imports Only Volume Scenario Switchgrass Only Volume Scenario
 
 
2.6.5.3 What Type of Land is Converted 
 
2.6.5.3.1 Domestic Land Use Conversion 
 
The FASOM model includes competition between land types, agriculture, pasture, and 
forest land.  The interaction is based on providing the highest rate of return across the different 
land types.  Therefore domestically we have the ability to explicitly model what types of land 
would be converted to increased agriculture based on the rates of return for different land types 
for the 63 regions in FASOM.  For this draft proposal we incorporated the agricultural 
component of the FASOM model, but not the forestry component.  Therefore, we assumed that 
all additional cropland predicted by FASOM domestically comes from pasture.  As we 
incorporate the forestry model for the final rule analysis we would expect to see more interaction 
between the forestry and agriculture sector such that there may be conversion of forest to 
agriculture based on additional cropland needed. While we do not know if forest will be 
converted to crop land or the extent that this might occur, if domestic forests were converted to 
cropland, we would expect domestic GHG emissions would increase.  This work will be 
incorporated for our final rule.   
 
2.6.5.3.2  International Land Use Conversion 
313 
 
Since FAPRI does not contain information on what type of land would be converted into 
crop land, we worked with Winrock, to address this question.  Using satellite data from 2001-
2004, Winrock provided a breakdown of the types of land that have been converted into crop 
land for a number of key agriculturally producing regions.  We used this information about 
recent land use trends to estimate which types of land would be cleared in each of region to 
accommodate cropland expansion.  Below we provide details about the data sources and methods 
we used for these calculations. 
 
2.6.5.3.2.1  International Land Use Conversion Data Sources 
 
Change in land use and land cover (LU/LC) was estimated at the country and state level 
using MODIS satellite imagery (1 km resolution pixels) for the years 2001 and 2004 for all 
countries.  MODIS imagery was chosen for this analysis due to its global coverage and 
homogenous classification scheme that allows direct comparison across time and space.  MODIS 
(Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer) is a sensor that offers a unique combination 
of features: it detects a wide spectral range; it takes measurements at three spatial resolutions 
(levels of detail); it takes measurements all day, every day; and it has a wide field of view.  
MODIS is one of several sensors carried on both the Terra and Aqua satellites, managed by 
NASA.  Terra was launched in December 1999 and Aqua was launched in May 2002.  Both 
satellites complete a north to south orbit of the Earth in less than 2 days.  The land cover dataset 
published by the USGS used in this analysis, MODIS/Terra Land Cover Type Yearly L3 Global 
1km SIN Grid (MOD12Q1) version 4, comes from the Terra satellite.PPPPPP 
 
The MOD12Q1 data are compiled from several sources to create a yearly global land 
cover map.  Inputs to the MODIS/Terra Land Cover Type Yearly L3 Global 1km SIN Grid 
include: 
 
1. Land/water mask that restricts classification to land regions and shallow water 
regions 
2. The MODIS Land Bands (1-7) 
3. Spatial texture derived from Band 1 
4. Directional reflectance information  
5. MODIS Enhanced Vegetation Index (EVI)  
6. Snow cover 
7. Land surface temperature 
8. Terrain elevation information 
 
These data are composited over a 32-day cycle and values for land classification, change 
detection and mixture modeling are assigned by algorithms using decision tree and artificial 
neural network classifiers.  Land cover classes are processed by continent.  The 32 day products 
are used to produce the yearly globally-consistent, multi-temporal MOD12Q1 database on a 1-
km grid.   
 
                                                 
PPPPPP
 The official MOD12Q1 version 4 data were publicly released at the EDC DAAC on April 16, 2004. It can be 
found at http://edcdaac.usgs.gov/modis/mod12q1v4.asp 
314 
The algorithm development and validation efforts for the Land Cover Product are based 
on a network of test sites developed to represent major global biomes and cover types.  Sites for 
which temporal sequences of Thematic Mapper (TM) and AVHRR data, coupled with fine-
resolution land cover and vegetation data, are available, especially in North and South America 
(Belward 1999).  According to the MODIS land team validation website, the accuracy of the 
IGBP land cover product, version 3, is 75-80 percent globally; 70-85 percent by continental 
regions; and in individual classes ranges from 60 in closed shrubland to 90 percent for barren or 
sparse land cover.QQQQQQ  This analysis used version 4 of the MODIS/Terra Land Cover Type 
Yearly L3 Global 1km SIN Grid which is published as being validated to Stage 1.  A Stage 1 
validation means that the product accuracy has been estimated using a small number of 
independent measurements obtained from selected locations and time periods and ground-
truth/field program effort.  There are no published reports as to the accuracy of version 4 but it 
would be safe to assume it is no worse than version 3 and in all likelihood better.   
 
Two tools are used by the MODIS land team to assess data quality; confusion matrixes 
and aggregations of confidence values.  The confusion matrixes describe how well the training 
sites are classified when they are unknown by the classifier, and so provide information on the 
accuracy of the classification process as applied to the training site database.  The confidence 
values are generated by the classifier and indicate how well the pattern of spectral and temporal 
variation in annual observations of each pixel fits the examples of training data provided to the 
classifier. They may be treated as probabilities of correct classification, given the input training 
data. 
 
Within the classification process, errors are generated when the classification algorithm 
selects the wrong class.  With respect to a particular class, errors of omission occur when pixels 
of that class are assigned wrong labels; errors of commission occur when other pixels are 
wrongly assigned the label of the class considered.  These errors occur when the signal of a pixel 
is ambiguous, perhaps as a result of spectral mixing, or when the signal is produced by a cover 
type that is not accounted for in the training process.  These errors are a normal part of the 
classification process.  They can be minimized, but not voided entirely.  Although they cannot be 
identified on a pixel-by-pixel basis due to processing constraints, they can be characterized in a 
statistical sense. 
 
Although other global land cover products are available (such as the Global Land Cover 
2000 dataset), the purpose of this analysis was to analyze change in land use and cover over 
time. Thus we chose to use the MODIS imagery because it adheres to a uniform 17-category 
IGBP classification scheme at both time periods (2001 and 2004), allowing for direct comparison 
over multiple regions and years.  
 
MODIS data are published using the International Geosphere Biosphere Programme 
(IGBP) global land cover categories, a list of 17 cover classes (Table 2.6-22).  The IGBP land 
cover list includes eleven classes of natural vegetation, three classes of developed and mosaic 
lands, and three classes of non-vegetated lands.  The natural vegetation units distinguish 
evergreen and deciduous, broadleaf and needle-leaf forests, mixed forests, where mixtures occur; 
                                                 
QQQQQQ
 The MODIS land team validation website can be accessed at 
http://landval.gsfc.nasa.gov/ProductStatus.php?ProductID=MOD12 
315 
closed shrublands and open shrublands; savannas and woody savannas; grasslands; and 
permanent wetlands of large areal extent.  The three classes of developed and mosaic lands 
distinguish among croplands, urban and built-up lands, and cropland/natural vegetation mosaics. 
Classes of non-vegetated land cover units include snow and ice; barren land; and water bodies. 
 
Table 2.6-22.  Original IGBP and Modified Classification Schemes for MODIS Land Cover 
Imagery for the Years 2001 and 2004. 
IGBP Land cover class
Modified land 
cover class 
(this analysis) IGBP Class Explanation
Water Bodies Excluded
Evergreen Needleleaf Forests Forest
Lands dominated by trees with a %canopy cover >60% and 
height >2m. Almost all trees remain green all year, canopy is 
never without green foliage.
Evergreen Broadleaf Forests Forest
Lands dominated by trees with a %canopy cover >60% and 
height >2m. A;most all trees remain green all year. Canopy 
is never without green foliage.
Deciduous Needleleaf Forests Forest
Lands dominated by trees with a % canopy cover >50% and 
height exceeding 2m. Consists of seasonal needleleaf tree 
communitieis with an annual cycle of leaf-on and leaf-off 
periods.
Deciduous Broadleaf Forests Forest
Lands dominated by trees with a %canopy cover >60% and 
height exceeding 2m. Consists of seasonal broadleaf tree 
communities with an annual cycle of leaf-on and leaf-off 
periods.
Mixed Forests Forest
Lands dominated by trees with a %canopy cover >60% and 
height >2m. Consists of tree communities with interspersed 
mixtures or mosaics of the other four forest cover types. 
None of the forest types exceeds 60% of landscape.
Closed Shrublands Shrubland
Lands with woody vegetation <2m tall and with shrub canopy 
cover >60%. The shrub foliage can be either evergreen or 
deciduous.
Open Shrublands Shrubland
Lands with woody vegetation <2m tall with shrub canopy 
cover between 10-60%. The shrub foliage can be either 
evergreen or deciduous.
Woody Savannas Savanna
Lands with herbaceous and other understory systems and 
canopy cover of 30-60%. Height >2m.
Savannas Savanna
Lands with herbaceous and other understory systems and 
canopy cover of 10-30%. Height >2m.
Grasslands Grassland
Lands with herbaceous types of cover. Tree and shrub cover 
is less than 10%.
Permanent Wetlands Excluded
Croplands Cropland
Lands covered with temporary crops followed by harvest and 
a bare soil period (e.g., single and multiple cropping 
systems). Note that perennial woody crops will be classified 
as the appropriate forest or shrub land cover type.
Urban and Built-Up Excluded
Cropland/Natural Vegetation 
Mosaic Excluded
Permanent Snow and Ice Excluded
Barren or Sparsely Vegetated Excluded
Unclassified Excluded
 
 
316 
The IGBP land cover categories were not designed for use with MODIS specifically.  
Rather, the classification system was first published with the IGBP Global Land Cover Map 
(DISCover v 1.0) in 1997.  This dataset was derived at 1 km resolution from the Advanced Very 
High Resolution Radiometer (AVHRR) sensor on board several NOAA satellites and the 17 land 
cover classes are based on biophysical properties.   
 
We first reclassified the land use and land cover categories included in the original 
MODIS imagery into five general classes: cropland, forest, grassland, savanna and shrubland 
(See Table 2.6-22). As the MODIS land cover maps used for this analysis are coarse resolution 
(1-km, equivalent to a pixel area of 100 hectares) and classified into broad land cover categories, 
the spectral characteristics of the finer classes may be similar to each other in many cases and 
thus land use conversions among them could be ambiguous.  Other categories in the MODIS 
imagery that fell outside these five land cover classes (e.g., urban/built-up land) were excluded 
from the analysis. An example of the imagery before and after reclassification is shown for 
Argentina (top) and Brazil (bottom) in Figure 2.6-23. 
 
317 
Figure 2.6-23.   
Comparison of Original MODIS Classification (left) and Reclassification Used for This 
Analysis (right) for Two Sample Countries:  Argentina (Top) and Brazil (Bottom). 
 
 
 
Argentina
Peru
Bolivia
Colombia
Paraguay
uya
na
Uruguay
 
Argentina
Peru
Bolivia
Colombia
Paraguay
G
uya
na
Uruguay
 
 
 
After we had reclassified the two map products, change analyses were conducted by 
comparing the land cover map from 2001 with that for the same location at 2004.  A new dataset 
for each country, now referred to as land change data, was produced that showed how the 
original land cover categories within each state and country changed, if at all, and into what new 
category the change occurred—often referred to as a land cover change matrix.   
318 
 
Comparing two products directly is not the best way to analyze change in LU/LC, as 
errors in the interpretation of the first map can be compounded when compared to a second map. 
The ideal way is to conduct a change analysis directly and interpret the change.  However, a 
direct change analysis requires a major effort to not only perform the change detection but to also 
interpret what the change is (from what to what).  A comparison of the two LU/LC maps to 
obtain change is not the most desirable approach but it is the only approach available given the 
products that exist.  Furthermore, very few countries have LU/LC products that have been 
prepared using change detection techniques for full change detection in all LU/LC classes. 
 
Even with the best available imaging technology, we found that the areas of some of the 
LU/LC classes and their changes are somewhat ambiguous.  In an attempt to shed light on the 
causes of these ambiguities, we first compared the area of forest cover for the 2004 MODIS 
product with that given in the FAO FRA 2005 report (See Table 2.6-24.492  Several anomalies in 
the two data sets are evident: 
 
-- All countries report greater area of forest in the FRA 2005 report than we obtained 
from the MODIS product, except for the three south east Asian countries of Indonesia, Malaysia, 
and Philippines. 
 
-- The greater area of forest reported by FRA 2005 is to be expected as FAO requires 
countries to report area of all wooded lands with a canopy cover of 10% or higher, whereas the 
MODIS product defines forests with a canopy cover greater than 50-60%.  For example, FRA 
2005 gives almost 478 million ha of forest for Brazil –this includes not only the Amazonian and 
Atlantic forests, but also a range of woody savanna/shrublands that have a canopy cover of 
>10%.  In our analysis, these woody savannas and shrublands are purportedly reported as a 
separate class, resulting in an area of forest of about 406 million ha. The reasons for the greater 
forest cover reported under FRA 2005 versus the MODIS estimate for the other countries are 
likely to be the same as for Brazil. 
 
-- For Indonesia, Malaysia, and the Philippines, the MODIS product results in 
considerably greater forest area than reported by FRA 2005.  This suggests that the large areas of 
plantation, perennial tree crops (e.g. rubber and palm oil plantations), and the woody formations 
are classed as forest under the MODIS algorithm. 
 
319 
Table 2.6-24. 
Country-Level MODIS Forest Area Cover Data and Forest Cover  
Reported in FAO FRA 2005 
Country MODIS 2004 Forest Area 
(ha) 
FAO FRA2005 Forest Area 
(ha) 
Argentina 23,566,147 33,021,000 
Brazil 402,472,52+ 477,698,000 
China 149,007,347 197,290,000 
India 31,807,808 67,701,000 
Indonesia 150,652,300 88,495,000 
Malaysia 28,309,936 20,890,000 
Philippines 15,952,945 7,162,000 
 
There are other ambiguities in the MODIS data.  For some countries forest area appeared 
to increase (Brazil, China, Malaysia) or show little change (Indonesia, Philippines) in the period 
2001-2004, and the rest had a loss in forest cover as is often expected.  However, Table 2.6-25 
shows the net change, and just because total area appears to change little or even increase it does 
not mean that forests are not being cleared.  The value of the MODIS data is that transitions 
between all LU/LC classes can be estimated for the period 2001-2004.  For example, Table 2.6-
25 shows that 341,186 hectares of land were converted from forest to cropland in Brazil from 
2001 to 2004.  
 
Table 2.6-25.  Area of Main LU/LC Classes in Brazil in 2001 and 2004 Based on MODIS 
Data 
BRAZIL 2004       
2001 Cropland Forest Grassland Mixed Savanna Shrub 
Total 
Hectares 
2001 
Cropland 9,477,369 249,901 919,366 4,346,228 8,529,974 116,682 23,639,519 
Forest 341,186 379,059,490 1,408,111 1,500,199 15,947,827 1,136,045 399,392,858 
Grassland 1,472,851 1,453,441 9,152,627 2,576,107 22,384,406 1,456,720 38,496,152 
Mixed 4,918,777 1,813,684 2,064,084 21,433,207 25,956,386 211,126 56,397,265 
Savanna 6,004,819 18,614,978 12,295,754 21,595,617 214,505,969 4,698,914 277,716,052 
Shrub 304,374 1,281,032 2,190,966 440,100 16,752,860 7,296,200 28,265,531 
Total 
Hectares 
2004 22,519,377 402,472,526 28,030,907 51,891,458 304,077,422 14,915,687 823,907,377 
 
MODIS also provides intra-country LU/LC changes by state or administrative unit.  For 
example, using MODIS data Table 2.6-26 shows where forest to cropland conversion took place 
in Brazil between 2001 and 2004. 
 
320 
Table 2.6-26.   
Forest to Crop Conversion in Brazil between 2001 and 2004 based on MODIS data 
Country State
Share of Forest to 
Crop Conversion
Brazil Acre 0.0%
Alagoas 2.0%
Amapa 0.6%
Amazonas 0.1%
Bahia 3.5%
Ceara 0.2%
Distrito Federal 0.0%
Espirito Santo 0.7%
Goias 4.1%
Maranhao 1.1%
Mato Grosso 3.2%
Mato Grosso Do Sul 11.5%
Minas Gerais 4.1%
Para 1.6%
Paraiba 0.3%
Parana 31.2%
Pernambuco 1.5%
Piaui 0.1%
Rio De Janeiro 0.2%
Rio Grande Do Norte 0.1%
Rio Grande Do Sul 15.4%
Rondonia 0.0%
Roraima 0.1%
Santa Catarina 2.9%
Sao Paulo 14.5%
Sergipe 0.8%
Tocantins 0.2%
All Brazil 100.0%
 
 
 
2.6.5.3.2.2 Calculating the Type and Location of Land Use Change 
 
We used the MODIS LU/LC data described above to estimate what types of land would 
be cleared to make room for cropland expansion, and where within countries that land 
conversion would occur.  The steps in this calculation are described below, with Brazil as the 
primary example. 
 
2.6.5.3.2.2.1 What Type of Land is Converted to Cropland by Region 
 
Table 2.6-27 shows the percentage of land type converted to cropland according to the 
MODIS data.  We used these percentages to calculate a weighted average of the types of land 
converted into cropland.  For example, if FAPRI predicts that 1 additional acre of cropland will 
be brought into production in Brazil, we used the Winrock data to estimate that 4% on average of 
that acre will come from forest, 18% of that acre will come from grassland, 74% of that land will 
come from Savanna, and 4% of that land will come from shrubland. 
321 
 
Table 2.6-27.  Types of Land Converted to Cropland by Country 
COUNTRY Forest Grassland Savanna Shrub 
Argentina 8% 40% 45% 8% 
Brazil 4% 18% 74% 4% 
China 17% 38% 23% 21% 
EU 27% 16% 36% 21% 
India 7% 7% 33% 53% 
Indonesia 34% 5% 58% 4% 
Malaysia 74% 3% 19% 3% 
Nigeria 4% 56% 36% 4% 
Philippines 49% 5% 44% 3% 
South Africa 10% 22% 53% 15% 
 
2.6.5.3.2.2.2 In Which States or Administrative Regions Does the Land Conversion Occur 
 
We also used the MODIS data to estimate where the land conversions would occur within 
countries or regions.  Table 2.6-28 shows where in Brazil cropland was added, and what type of 
land was cleared in each state.  This is important information because an acre of cropland in the 
State of Amazonas, for example, sequesters substantially more carbon than an acre of forest in 
Sao Paulo.  As you can see in Table 2.6-28, recent forest to cropland conversion has been far 
more common in Sau Paulo than Amazonas.  Therefore, an estimate of land use change 
emissions in Brazil that does not weight forest to cropland conversion by the States where it 
would likely occur would tend to overestimate emissions per acre of crop expansion.   
 
322 
Table 2.6-28. 
Land Conversion to Cropland in Brazil from 2001 to 2004 by Land Type and State  
Based on MODIS Data 
Forest Grassland Savanna Shrubland
Cropland Cropland Cropland Cropland
Country State
Brazil Acre 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0%
Alagoas 2.0% 2.3% 0.8% 1.1%
Amapa 0.6% 0.0% 0.0% 0.1%
Amazonas 0.1% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0%
Bahia 3.5% 13.4% 7.6% 24.9%
Ceara 0.2% 0.4% 0.3% 1.5%
Distrito Federal 0.0% 0.2% 0.2% 0.2%
Espirito Santo 0.7% 1.3% 1.2% 0.4%
Goias 4.1% 7.5% 11.5% 6.6%
Maranhao 1.1% 0.9% 0.6% 1.4%
Mato Grosso 3.2% 12.0% 8.9% 10.2%
Mato Grosso Do Sul 11.5% 11.6% 9.0% 3.6%
Minas Gerais 4.1% 7.6% 15.7% 10.5%
Para 1.6% 0.2% 0.2% 0.1%
Paraiba 0.3% 2.3% 0.9% 3.9%
Parana 31.2% 10.5% 8.4% 5.7%
Pernambuco 1.5% 3.6% 1.6% 5.2%
Piaui 0.1% 0.3% 0.3% 1.4%
Rio De Janeiro 0.2% 0.8% 2.8% 2.6%
Rio Grande Do Norte 0.1% 1.5% 0.6% 2.5%
Rio Grande Do Sul 15.4% 6.9% 6.7% 2.7%
Rondonia 0.0% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0%
Roraima 0.1% 0.3% 0.1% 1.0%
Santa Catarina 2.9% 0.7% 0.5% 0.9%
Sao Paulo 14.5% 13.4% 21.0% 11.6%
Sergipe 0.8% 1.7% 0.4% 1.1%
Tocantins 0.2% 0.5% 0.6% 0.7%
All Brazil 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0%
Start Category (2001)  
End Category (2004)  
 
 
We used the data summarized in Tables 2.6-27 and 2.6-28 to estimate where and what 
types of land in Brazil would be cleared per acre of cropland expansion.  This calculation was 
can be summarized with the following formula: 
 
Land clearing per acre crop expansion by land-type and State = CEL * CELS, where: 
CEL = share of crop expansion from land-type L; 
CELS = share of crop expansion from land-type L in State S; 
L = forest, shrubland, savanna, or grassland 
S = one of the 26 Brazilian States 
 
Using this calculation we estimated the land use changes per acre of cropland expansion 
in Brazil shown in Table 2.6-29.  We repeated this calculation for the other nine countries that 
we have MODIS data for. 
 
323 
Table 2.6-29.   
Projected Hectares of Land Conversion in Brazil Per Acre of Cropland Expansion by Land 
Types and State Based on MODIS data 
Forest Grassland Savanna Shrubland
Cropland Cropland Cropland Cropland
Country State
Brazil Acre 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Alagoas 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00
Amapa 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Amazonas 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Bahia 0.00 0.02 0.06 0.01
Ceara 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Distrito Federal 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Espirito Santo 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00
Goias 0.00 0.01 0.08 0.00
Maranhao 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Mato Grosso 0.00 0.02 0.07 0.00
Mato Grosso Do Sul 0.00 0.02 0.07 0.00
Minas Gerais 0.00 0.01 0.12 0.00
Para 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Paraiba 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00
Parana 0.01 0.02 0.06 0.00
Pernambuco 0.00 0.01 0.01 0.00
Piaui 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Rio De Janeiro 0.00 0.00 0.02 0.00
Rio Grande Do Norte 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Rio Grande Do Sul 0.01 0.01 0.05 0.00
Rondonia 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Roraima 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Santa Catarina 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Sao Paulo 0.01 0.02 0.16 0.00
Sergipe 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Tocantins 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
All Brazil 0.04 0.18 0.74 0.04
Start Category  
End Category  
 
 
2.6.3.2.2.3. Land Conversions Beyond Cropland Expansion 
 
 As described above, we used the FAPRI model to project how much cropland expansion 
would occur in each country, and MODIS satellite data provided by Winrock to estimate where 
and what types of land would be cleared within each country or region to make room for the new 
cropland.  Table 2.6-30 shows that in many countries cropland has been added in areas that were 
previously categorized as grassland or savanna.  In consultation with Winrock, we determined 
that lands categorized as grassland or savanna according to IGPB classification could be used as 
pasture for livestock grazing.  Therefore, if we used the land use change projections in Table 10-
7 as our end point we would be projecting significant losses of actively managed pastureland.  
However, it may be unreasonable to project pasture losses unless we also projected comparable 
overall declines in livestock production, and/or comparable increases in pasture intensification.  
For example, this use of pastureland would not necessarily result in shifting of livestock in Brazil 
as intensification of livestock production is already occurring and would result in more land 
being available for crop production.  For example, cattle pre acre increased by 10% from 2001-
324 
2005, one estimate suggests almost 50 million acres of pastureland could become available in 
Brazil due to more efficient use of land for cattle.  However, this pastureland intensification is 
occurring regardless of the increased crop production in the base case and we are examining a 
change from future projected base case so it is not strictly applicable to assume increase 
pastureland intensification over the base case.  Therefore, in order to achieve equilibrium in land 
use demands, we added a certain amount of “pasture replacement” land use change to our total 
land use change estimates. 
 
For our central estimate of land use change for the proposed rule we assumed that 
actively managed pasture converted to cropland would have to be replaced with new pasture 
acreage, thereby capturing some of the domino effect associated with converting productive land 
into crop land.  We used land cover information from the GTAP database to estimate the 
proportion of grassland and savanna that is actively managed as pasture in each country (See 
Table 10-8). 
 
Table 2.6-30.  Percent of Grassland and Savanna that is Actively Managed for Livestock 
Grazing by Region Based on Data from GTAP Database 
COUNTRY
Unmanaged Savanna and 
Grassland (hectares)
Managed Pasture 
(hectares)
Percent of Savanna and 
Grassland Managed for Pasture
Argentina 77,716,560 96,452,176 55.4%
Brazil 101,991,992 181,046,752 64.0%
China 42,534,708 286,370,272 87.1%
European Union 14,529,446 64,005,559 81.5%
India 12,806,170 11,798,180 48.0%
Indonesia 7,704,545 2,462,572 24.2%
Malaysia 0 292,900 100.0%
Nigeria 24716916 18762928 43.2%
Phillipines 0 131,755 100.0%
South Africa 19132926 77293112 80.2%
SOURCE: GTAP Land Cover Data (2000-2001)
 
 
 Table 2.6-30 shows that 64 percent of grassland and savanna is Brazil is actively 
managed for livestock grazing.  Figure 2.6-13 illustrates how we used this information to 
estimate land use change in Brazil associated with replacing pasture that was converted to 
cropland.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
325 
Figure 2.6-13.  Brazil Land Use Change Flow Chart with Cropland Expansion and 
Managed Pasture Replacement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
When a hectare of cropland is added in Brazil, 0.74 hectares of savanna and 0.18 hectares 
of grassland is plowed to make room for planting.  We assumed that 64 percent of that grassland 
and savanna was supporting livestock grazing.  Therefore, 0.59 hectares of pasture is plowed 
under for every hectare of cropland expansion in Brazil.  We used the MODIS satellite data to 
estimate the shares of forest and shrubland that would then be cleared and converted to pasture 
land to replace the 0.59 hectares of pasture.  We used the state-by-state distribution of each of 
those conversions to estimate where in Brazil the pasture replacement would occur.  For 
example, we used the MODIS data’s state-by-state breakdown of where forest was converted to 
savanna in Brazil to estimate where forest would likely be converted to savanna to replace some 
of the lost pasture.  The per hectare emissions factors shown in Table 2.6-13 are the non-
discounted emissions over 80 years for each type of land conversion.  These emissions factors 
are discussed in detail below.   
 
A complete summary of projected land use change in Brazil per hectare of cropland 
expansion is provided in Table 2.6-31.  Notice that the land use changes under step one, cropland 
expansion, is exactly the same as Table 2.6-29.  The difference is that the complete summary of 
land use change in Brazil includes the pasture replacement step explained above and in Figure 
2.6-13.  We used the same methodology to calculate land use change for the other nine countries 
that we had MODIS satellite data for.  Land use change summaries for all ten countries are 
available in spreadsheets and on the docket for this proposed rulemaking. 
 
To calculate the total area of land use changes in Brazil, we simply took the product of 
the total area of crop expansion projected by FAPRI and the land use changes per hectare 
summarized in Table 2.6-31.  For an increase in U.S. corn ethanol consumption from 12.4 to 15 
billion gallons in 2022 (i.e. the difference between our reference case and our primary volume 
STEP ONE – CROPLAND EXPANSION
Cropland
Savanna
Forest
Grassland
Shrubland
74%
201 MTCO2eq/ha
111 MTCO2eq/ha
285 MTCO2eq/ha
148 MTCO2eq/ha
18%
4%
4%
Shrubland
97 MTCO2eq/ha
Forest
635 MTCO2eq/ha
Forest
593 MTCO2eq/ha
Shrubland
65 MTCO2eq/ha
64% * 39% = 25%
64% * 61% = 39% 
64% * 49% = 31%
64% * 51% = 33%
STEP TWO – MANAGED PASTURE REPLACEMENT
326 
case), FAPRI projected 747,000 hectares of crop expansion in Brazil in 2022.  A summary of 
total 2022 Brazil land use change associated with this corn ethanol scenario is provided in Table 
2.6-X.  2.8, below, discusses the impacts of our pasture replacement assumptions on the final 
lifecycle GHG results, and presents a sensitivity analysis of our pasture replacement 
assumptions. 
 
Table 2.6-32.  Summary of Brazil Land Use Change with Managed Pasture Replacement 
 
Start Category Forest Grassland Savanna Shrubland Forest Shrubland Forest Shrubland
End Category Cropland Cropland Cropland Cropland Grassland Grassland Savanna Savanna
Country State
Brazil Acre 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Alagoas 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Amapa 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Amazonas 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Bahia 0.00 0.02 0.06 0.01 0.00 0.02 0.02 0.06
Ceara 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.03
Distrito Federal 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Espirito Santo 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Goias 0.00 0.01 0.08 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01
Maranhao 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.02 0.01
Mato Grosso 0.00 0.02 0.07 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.04 0.01
Mato Grosso Do Sul 0.00 0.02 0.07 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00
Minas Gerais 0.00 0.01 0.12 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.01 0.02
Para 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.03 0.00
Paraiba 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.02
Parana 0.01 0.02 0.06 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.02 0.00
Pernambuco 0.00 0.01 0.01 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.02
Piaui 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.01
Rio De Janeiro 0.00 0.00 0.02 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Rio Grande Do Norte 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.02
Rio Grande Do Sul 0.01 0.01 0.05 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.00
Rondonia 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00
Roraima 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01
Santa Catarina 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00
Sao Paulo 0.01 0.02 0.16 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00
Sergipe 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Tocantins 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01
All Brazil 0.04 0.18 0.74 0.04 0.05 0.07 0.23 0.24
Hectares of Land Conversion per Hectare of Cropland Expansion
Step One: Cropland Expansion Step Two: Pasture Replacement
Replace Grassland Replace Savanna
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
327 
Table 2.6-33.  Total Brazil Land Use Change From Adding 747,000 Acres of Cropland, as 
Projected by the FAPRI Model for Increase in U.S. Corn Ethanol Consumption From 12.4 
to 15 Billion Gallons 
 
Start Category Forest Grassland Savanna Shrubland Forest Shrubland Forest Shrubland
End Category Cropland Cropland Cropland Cropland Grassland Grassland Savanna Savanna
Country State
Brazil Acre 0 8 39 0 74 4 2,407 5
Alagoas 630 3,156 4,399 316 220 258 717 891
Amapa 174 39 205 32 696 389 2,069 317
Amazonas 16 24 16 8 2,539 781 2,088 256
Bahia 1,107 18,206 41,789 6,966 2,877 13,174 16,595 44,016
Ceara 55 607 1,563 418 49 2,789 755 19,584
Distrito Federal 0 266 1,108 64 12 96 35 314
Espirito Santo 217 1,770 6,839 104 90 44 1,456 411
Goias 1,278 10,095 63,275 1,835 253 1,112 1,718 4,273
Maranhao 338 1,230 3,548 397 737 1,163 18,568 4,969
Mato Grosso 996 16,252 49,333 2,863 5,217 3,122 26,670 6,371
Mato Grosso Do Sul 3,608 15,717 49,598 1,001 2,268 964 6,867 2,190
Minas Gerais 1,296 10,269 86,582 2,926 1,514 3,990 7,921 14,424
Para 505 284 1,182 32 2,597 1,211 24,164 928
Paraiba 102 3,108 5,146 1,103 37 3,708 307 13,367
Parana 9,786 14,225 46,476 1,598 1,648 253 12,628 1,463
Pernambuco 486 4,834 8,689 1,444 237 4,204 1,763 18,257
Piaui 39 391 1,880 402 149 1,802 4,810 10,111
Rio De Janeiro 59 1,093 15,414 726 88 102 697 429
Rio Grande Do Norte 31 2,091 3,205 698 12 4,137 57 16,006
Rio Grande Do Sul 4,837 9,379 36,900 760 4,692 2,424 10,941 3,516
Rondonia 8 54 124 8 1,301 313 9,243 93
Roraima 24 422 670 268 1,751 2,568 1,735 6,962
Santa Catarina 898 896 2,819 251 1,742 235 7,967 1,326
Sao Paulo 4,559 18,143 115,807 3,256 984 444 6,097 2,288
Sergipe 251 2,271 2,399 315 257 278 473 360
Tocantins 78 613 3,189 201 1,853 3,177 3,509 7,829
All Brazil 31,375 135,441 552,194 27,990 33,895 52,740 172,259 180,954
Total Land Use Change in Brazil (Hectares)
Step One: Cropland Expansion Step Two: Pasture Replacement
Replace Grassland Replace Savanna
 
 
 
A key component of this analysis is that it treats all acres of crop expansion the same in 
an individual country.  So for example an additional acre of corn in Brazil will be assumed to 
result in the same land conversion as an additional acre of soybeans or sugarcane in Brazil.  
However, it is possible that different types of crop expansion would occur in different regions 
and thus have different impacts on land conversion.  For example, current areas where corn and 
soybeans are grown in Brazil are largely in the same regions in the south, however, there are 
areas further north where production of soybeans occur as shown in Figures 2.6-14 and 2.6-15, 
indicating that different types of crop production in Brazil would potentially have different 
impacts.   
 
328 
Figure 2.6-14.  Corn Production in Brazil 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.6-15.  Soybean Production in Brazil 
 
 
 
329 
The impact of this assumption on overall results is somewhat mitigated by the fact that 
each fuel scenario in the U.S., e.g., corn ethanol and soybean biodiesel will result in a mix of 
crop export changes and a mix of crop expansion internationally.  For example, increased corn 
ethanol production in the U.S. results in reduced exports of not just corn but other crops as well 
due to crop shifting in the U.S. agricultural sector.  Also the Winrock satellite data is based on a 
mix of crop expansion in different countries such that it is already reflecting increase in a mix of 
different crops.  However, this is an area that will be examined for the final rule analysis.   
 
2.6.5.3.3 GTAP Approach 
 
GTAP is an economy-wide general equilibrium model that was originally developed for 
addressing agricultural trade issues among countries. The databases and versions of the model 
are widely used internationally by a large modeling community.493  Since its inception in 1993, 
GTAP has rapidly become a common "language" for many of those conducting global economic 
analysis.  For example, the WTO and the World Bank co-sponsored two conferences on the so-
called Millennium Round of Multilateral Trade talks in Geneva.  Here, virtually all of the 
quantitative, global economic analyses were based on the GTAP framework. Over the past few 
years, a version of the model was developed to explicitly model global competition among 
different land types (e.g., forest, agricultural land, pasture) and different qualities of land based 
on the relative value of the alternative land-uses.  More recently, it was modified to include 
biofuel substitutes for gasoline and diesel. In simulating land use changes due to biofuels 
production, GTAP explicitly models land-use conversion decisions, as well as land management 
intensification.  For example, it allows for price-induced yield changes (e.g., farmers can 
reallocate inputs to increase yields when commodity prices are high) and considers the marginal 
productivity of additional land (e.g., expansion of crop land onto lower quality land as a result of 
the increased use of biofuels).  Most importantly, in contrast to other models, GTAP is designed 
with the framework of predicting the amount and types of land needed in a region to meet 
demands for both food and fuel production.  The GTAP framework also allows predictions to be 
made about the types of land available in the region to meet the needed demands, since it 
explicitly represents different land types within the model.   
 
The global modeling of land-use competition and land management decisions is 
relatively new, and evolving.494 GTAP does not yet contain cellulosic feedstocks in the model.  
In addition, GTAP does not currently contain unmanaged land, which could be a major factor 
driving current GTAP land use projections and is a significant potential source of GHG 
emissions.  We expect to update GTAP with cellulosic feedstocks and unmanaged land in time 
for the final rule.   
 
Our proposal is therefore based on the FAPRI/Winrock estimates.  Additional 
refinements will be made to the GTAP model between the proposal and final rule and we will 
include this information in the docket as it becomes available.   
 
2.6.5.4 What Are the GHG Emissions Associated with Different Types of Land Conversion 
 
2.6.5.4.1 Domestic Land Use Change Emissions 
 
330 
Domestic land use change GHG emissions are based on outputs of the FASOM model.  
As we are just using the agricultural portion of the FASOM model for this analysis the land use 
change GHG emissions are limited to changes in land use for existing crop and pasture land.  
Some of that crop land could currently be fallow and some of the pasture land could currently be 
unused.  However, no new crop or pasture land (beyond some Conservation Reserve Program 
(CRP) land due to legislative changes in the program) are added compared to current levels.  
Thus FASOM only models shifts in the use of this land.  
 
Changes in the agricultural sector due to increased crops used for biofuels have impacts 
on land use change in a number of ways.  FASOM explicitly models change in soil carbon from 
increased crop production acres and from different types of crop production.  FASOM also 
models changes in soil carbon from converting non crop land into crop production.  Land 
converted to crop land could include pasture land.   
 
Land conversion GHG emissions in FASOM include above ground carbon and soil 
carbon changes from land conversion and crop pattern changes.  The FASOM land conversion 
factors are based on factors from the DAYCENT/CENTURY models for different crops, 
management practices, and land conversion effects, e.g., converting pasture to crop production.  
Therefore, FASOM soil carbon changes capture not only converting new land into crop but also 
changes from existing cropland due to changing management practices or cropping patterns.  As 
part of the ongoing work with Colorado State University we are in the process of updating the 
soil and land conversion factors in FASOM based on new DAYCENT/CENTURY model runs.  
We plant to include these updates as part of the analysis for the final rule.   
 
2.6.5.4.2 International Land Use Change Emissions 
 
Land use change emissions factors were calculated by the non-profit organization 
Winrock International following 2006 IPCC AFOLU Guidelines.  Winrock’s staff is highly 
regarded for their years of experience and accomplishment in this field, including their work 
with the IPCC to develop the AFOLU Guidelines.  For the proposed rule, emissions factors were 
estimated for ten countries including Argentina, Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, 
Mexico, Philippines, EU and South Africa.  Emissions factors were based on the initial change in 
biomass stocks as well as changes in soil carbon stocks, non-CO2 emissions from biomass 
burning due to land clearing, and forgone forest sequestration.  In general, emission factors for 
all land use types were highest in the Southeast Asian countries of Malaysia, Indonesia and 
Philippines and lowest in Argentina and Nigeria.  This section describes the methods used to 
estimate GHG emissions from international land use change. 
 
2.6.5.4.2.1 Data sources used to estimate land use change GHG emissions factors 
 
 Forest Carbon Stocks: To calculate changes in biomass carbon stocks due to land use 
change, data were compiled at the state level to estimate carbon stocks of various land use types.  
Average forest carbon stocks per administrative unit in each country were extracted from spatial 
data layers developed for various regions of the world.  Estimates represent both above- and 
belowground biomass.  Data sources for each region are summarized below: 
 
331 
Argentina: A global map of forest carbon stocks developed by Gibbs et al. (2007) was 
used to estimate forest carbon stocks in Argentina. 
 
Asia: A map developed by Gibbs and Brown (2007) was used to estimate forest carbon 
stocks in the year 2000 in the Asian countries of Indonesia, Malaysia and Philippines. 
 
Mexico: A map developed by Harris and Brown (unpublished results) was used to 
estimate forest carbon stocks in Mexico.  The map was developed using similar methods 
to the products developed for Asia and Africa by Gibbs and Brown (2007, 2008), where 
potential biomass maps were developed based on various climatic and biophysical factors 
and were then degraded based on population density for the year 2000 to estimate actual 
forest biomass.  The biomass estimates were then expanded to account for roots based on 
factors given in Cairns et al. (1997) and then converted to carbon stocks (carbon = 
biomass*0.5). 
 
South America: A map of aboveground forest biomass was obtained from Saatchi et al. 
(200x), an example of which is shown in Figure 2.6-16.  The biomass estimates were first 
expanded to account for roots based on factors given in Cairns et al (1997) and then 
converted to carbon stocks (carbon = biomass*0.5). 
 
Figure 2.6-16.  Example of a Spatial Data Base for Forest Carbon Stocks 
 
 
Soil Carbon Emissions: Soil carbon emissions associated with land use change in 
different regions around the world were estimated using global soil carbon maps.  A digital soil 
carbon map of the world is available from the US Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources 
332 
Conservation Service, see Figure 2.6-17.  This map is based on a reclassification of the FAO-
UNESCO Soil Map of the World combined with a soil climate map.  The map shows little 
variation for soil C in the tropics with most areas showing a range in soil carbon of 40-80 t C/ha 
(4-8 Kg C/m2).  The soil organic carbon map shows the distribution of the soil organic carbon to 
30 cm depth.495  This data layer was chosen because land use change (e.g., tilling for cropland 
conversion) typically affects only the upper layers of the soil profile.  
 
Figure 2.6-17.  Estimates of Soil Organic Carbon to 30cm Deptha 
 
a
 The GIS data product has higher resolution than indicated here in the map (1 kg m-2 = 10 t C ha-1). 
 
Cropland Carbon Stocks: Carbon stocks on annual cropland were estimated as 5 metric 
tons of carbon per hectare (MT C ha-1), based on Table 5.9 of the IPCC AFOLU.  In Malaysia, 
carbon stocks for oil palm and rubber were estimated using values from Table 5.3 of the IPCC 
AFOLU (68 and 89 MT C ha-1, respectively). 
 
Grassland, Savanna and Shrubland Carbon Stocks: Above- and belowground biomass 
values for grassland, savanna and shrublands were obtained from a variety of sources, see Table 
10-11.  Biomass estimates were obtained from de Castro and Kauffman (1998) for the Brazilian 
vegetation gradient that spans campo limpo (pure grassland), campo sujo (a savanna with a 
sparse presence of shrubs), campo cerrado (a dominance of shrubs with scattered trees and a 
grass understory), cerrado sensu stricto (a dominance of trees with scattered shrubs and a grass 
understory) and cerradão (a closed canopy forest) (Coutinho 1978, Eiten 1972, Goodland & 
Pollard 1973).  Shrubland carbon stocks were estimated from the average of biomass values 
reported for cerrado aberto and cerrado denso.  Savanna carbon stocks were estimated from the 
biomass value reported for campo sujo. Grassland carbon stocks were estimated from the 
biomass value reported for campo limpo. 
 
Estimating carbon stocks in other countries for the grassland-savanna-shrubland 
continuum was slightly more problematic.  For all countries except Brazil (explained in the 
paragraph above), grassland carbon stocks were estimated for each administrative unit as the 
default value given in Table 6.4 of the IPCC AFOLU, where values are given as a function of 
temperature and moisture regime. 
 
333 
Very few carbon stock estimates were available for savanna and shrubland outside of 
Brazil.  Therefore, carbon stocks of these land cover types were estimated using a proportional 
approach based on the Brazil dataset, which indicates an increasing trend in carbon stocks from 
grassland Æ savanna Æ shrubland of 10.9 to 19.7 to 37.3 MT C ha-1, respectively, translating 
into a ratio of 1 to 1.8 to 3.4.  These ratios were applied to other countries for estimating carbon 
stocks in savanna and shrubland based on the estimated carbon stocks of grassland within each 
country.  One exception to the ratio approach was for the Southeast Asian countries of Indonesia, 
Malaysia and Philippines, where a shrubland biomass value of 85 MT ha-1 (42 MT C ha-1) was 
applied based on actual data reported in Grace et al. 2006 for a savanna woodland in Klong Hoi 
Khong, Thailand.  
 
Table 2.6-34. Estimated Carbon Stocks (MT C ha-1) for Grassland, Savanna and 
Shrubland in Each Country Analyzeda   
Country Grassland Savanna Shrubland 
Brazil 10.9 19.7 37.3 
India 4.1 – 7.6 7.4 – 13.6 13.9 – 25.7 
Malaysia 7.6 13.6 42.0 
Indonesia 7.6 13.6 42.0 
Philippines 7.6 13.6 42.0 
China 7.6 13.6 25.7 
Argentina 2.7 – 6.4 5.1 – 11.5 9.7 – 21.7 
Mexico 4.1 - 7.6 7.4 – 13.6 13.9 – 25.7 
a
 ranges are reported for countries in which carbon stocks varied by state 
 
 
2.6.5.4.2.2 Methods for Land Use Change GHG Emissions Factors Estimation 
 
For each state in each country, emission factors were calculated for various land cover 
conversions using data tables and equations from the 2006 IPCC AFOLU Guidelines and from 
other global data sets.  Emission factors account for changes in above- and belowground biomass 
carbon stocks, soil carbon stocks and lost forest sequestration.  Non-CO2 emissions were also 
accounted for, including methane (CH4) and nitrous oxide (N2O) emissions resulting from land 
clearing with fire and CH4 emissions resulting from rice cultivation. 
 
Changes in biomass carbon stocks: Initial changes in biomass carbon stocks on land 
converted to another land category (e.g., from forest to cropland) were calculated based on 
Equation 2.16 in the IPCC AFOLU: 
334 
 
∑ •−=Δ
i
BEFOREAFTERCONVERSION CFBBC ii )(
 
where: 
CONVERSIONCΔ
 = initial change in biomass carbon stocks on land converted to  
                           another land category, tonnes C ha-1 yr-1 
iAFTER
B
 = biomass stocks on land type I immediately after the conversion,  
                            tonnes d.m. ha-1 
iBEFOREB
 = biomass stocks on land type I before the conversion, tonnes d.m.  
                            ha-1 
CF  = carbon fraction of dry matter, tonne C (tonnes d.m.)-1 
i  = type of land use converted to another land-use category 
 
Initial changes in biomass carbon stocks reflect gross emissions rather than net emissions; 
harvested wood products, including long-term storage and retirement, were not considered in the 
analysis. Based on consultation with Winrock we determined that including IPCC default GHG 
credits for harvested wood products (HWPs) would have an insignificant impact on our estimates 
of land use change emissions, as there is limited evidence that trees cleared from converted 
forestland is converted to durable wood products.  The 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National 
Greenhouse Gas Inventories also states that (p 12.8) the HWP contribution can be reported as 
zero if the annual change in carbon in HWP stocks is judged insignificant.  Even if we assumed 
that forestland cleared from Brazil had 10m3 of timber/ha, which is likely an upper bound for 
many of the forests being cleared, this would translate to about 8tCO2/ha, or less than 2% of the 
total emissions from converting forest to cropland.  For completeness we may add harvested 
wood products to our analysis for the final rule.  
 
Winrock provided emissions factors for land conversion to perennial crops, but only 
emissions factors for conversion to annual crops were used for the proposed rule analysis.  We 
intend to differentiate between annual and perennial cropland expansion for the final rule. 
 
Changes in soil carbon stocks: Changes in soil carbon stocks on land converted to 
cropland were calculated based on Section 5.3.3.4 of the IPCC AFOLU.   
 
Soil carbon stocks after conversion to cropland were based on specific soil stock change 
factors for land use, management and inputs (FLU, FMG, FI, respectively) listed in Table 5.10 of 
the IPCC AFOLU.  (Relevant factors are listed in Table 10-12 of this report).  Stock change 
factors were selected for each land cover type (before and after conversion) and multiplied by 
reference soil carbon stocks.  Following the IPCC AFOLU guidelines, the total difference in 
carbon stocks before and after conversion was averaged over 20 years.  Thus the average annual 
change in soil carbon stocks due to land use conversion were calculated as: 
335 
 
20
)()(
,,,Re,,,Re afterIafterMGafterLUfbeforeIbeforeMGbeforeLUf FFFSOCFFFSOCSOC
•••−•••
=Δ
 
 
where: 
 
SOCΔ
  = average annual change in carbon stocks in top 30 cm of soil; t C ha-1 yr-1 
 
fSOCRe
 = reference carbon stocks in top 30 cm of soil; t C ha-1 
 FLU  = land use factor before or after conversion 
 FMG  = management factor before or after conversion 
 FI  = input factor before or after conversion 
 
 
As default values for stock change factors (FLU, FMG, FI) are all one for forest soils and 
non-degraded grassland soils, soil carbon stocks were assumed to remain unchanged for all 
conversion types (conversion to shrubland, savanna, perennial cropland) except conversion to 
cropland. Full tillage and medium inputs were assumed in all scenarios of cropland conversion.  
Consistent with IPPC default guidelines, soil carbon stock changes were spread equally over 20 
years. 
 
Table 6.5-35.  Relative Stock Change Factors (FLU, FMG, FI) for Different Management 
Activities Based on Tables 5.5 and 5.10 in 2006 IPCC AFOLU 
Factor value 
type Level 
Temperature 
Regime 
Moisture 
Regime 
IPCC 
default 
Land use (FLU) 
Native forest or 
grassland (non-
degraded) 
All All 1 
Dry 0.8 
Temperate/Boreal 
Moist 0.69 
Dry 0.58 
Tropical 
Moist/Wet 0.48 
Land use (FLU) Long-term cultivated 
Tropical montane n/a 0.64 
Land use (FLU) Paddy rice All All 1.1 
Land use (FLU) Perennial/tree crop All All 1 
Tillage (FMG) Full All All 1 
Input (FI) Medium All All 1 
 
Peat soil drainage:  Winrock provided emissions factors for peat drainage for countries 
where that is likely to occur, such as Indonesia, and Malaysia.  However, emissions from peat 
soil were not included in our analysis for the proposed rule.  Below is a description of the 
methodology Winrock used to provide factors for peat drainage, which we intend to use for the 
final rule. 
336 
 
For countries containing peat (organic) soils, emission factors were chosen that accounted 
for annual losses of CO2 due to peat drainage. Emission factors were based on a regional dataset 
from Southeast Asia that correlates peat drainage depth with annual peat CO2 emissions.  
Emission factors were estimated using this regional dataset rather than basing them on climate 
type (Table 5.6 of the IPCC AFOLU) because all countries included in the analysis that 
contained peat soils were located in Southeast Asia.  Thus the use of regional data was 
appropriate.  The emission factor for drained organic soils was estimated based on the following 
equation (from Hooijer et al. 2006): 
 
 
XY 91.0=
 
where: 
 Y = CO2 emissions from drained peat, MT CO2 ha-1 yr-1 
 X = drainage depth, cm 
 
Drainage depth was assumed as 80 centimeters, which is the minimum likely peat 
drainage estimate for conversion to croplands cited in Hooijer et al. (2006).  Thus the annual 
emission factor from drained peat soils was estimated as 80 x 0.91 = 72.8 MT CO2 ha-1 yr-1.  
 
Emission factors for draining peat soils were estimated for land use conversions 
originating from forest and grassland only, based on the assumption that in Southeast Asia, the 
only land cover types on peat are intact or degraded peat swamp forest or already drained and 
deforested peatland that has revegetated to Imperata grasslands. 
 
Lost forest sequestration: Over time, trees sequester carbon dioxide from the atmosphere 
and accumulate carbon as biomass.  When forests are converted to another land use, the trees that 
would have continued to grow are cut down and no longer act as carbon sinks.  Therefore, each 
year after a land use conversion has occurred the carbon that would have been sequestered in the 
growing trees is “lost”.  In an avoided emissions scenario, carbon benefits can be generated not 
only from preventing the immediate loss of biomass carbon stocks, but also from allowing 
carbon to accumulate over time in the vegetation that would have been cleared.   
 
Average annual biomass accumulation rates are given in Table 4.9 of the 2006 GL 
AFOLU and are specified according to ecological zone and continent.  These values were used to 
estimate the lost biomass accumulation of forests that were converted to another land use (Table 
2.6-36).  Average values were used where a range of values is listed.  Lost carbon accumulation 
was then assumed equal to the biomass accumulation value multiplied by the carbon fraction in 
dry matter (IPCC default = 0.47).  
 
The area of forest in each state was stratified by FAO ecozone and continent, and 
appropriate values from Table 2.6-36 were applied to calculate an average area-weighted value. 
As biomass accumulation rates in Table 4.9 of the 2006 GL AFOLU are separated into rates for 
forests less than and greater than a 20 year threshold, in this analysis all forests that were being 
converted were assumed to be >20 years in age. The average annual foregone sequestration is 
calculated as: 
337 
 
, ,
( )lostseq LUbefore i LUafter i
i
C Cseq CseqΔ = −∑
  
where:  
 
lostseqCΔ
= change in carbon sequestration in aboveground biomass; MT C ha-1 yr-1  
,LUbefore iCseq
= annual sequestration in aboveground biomass before conversion; MT C ha-
1
 yr-1 
,LUafter iCseq
= annual sequestration in aboveground biomass after conversion MT 
C ha-1 yr-1 
 i = type of land use converted to another land use category. 
 
Studies have estimated that new forests grow for 90 years to over 120 years.RRRRRR  More 
recent estimates suggest that old growth forests accumulate carbon for up to 800 years.SSSSSS  For 
this analysis we assumed that foregone sequestration would continue for 80 years, which is 
within the range supported by the scientific literature and the 2006 IPCC guidelines.  Section 2.8 
presents a sensitivity analysis of the length of foregone sequestration assumed. 
 
                                                 
RRRRRR
 See Greenhouse Gas Mitigation Potential in U.S. Forestry and Agriculture, EPA Document 430-R-05-006 for 
a discussion of the time required for forests to reach carbon saturation.   
SSSSSS
 Luyassert, S et al., 2008. Old-growth forests as global carbon sinks. Nature 455: 213-215.   
Link: http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v455/n7210/abs/nature07276.html 
338 
Table 2.6-36. 
Aboveground Net Biomass Growth in Natural Forests  
From Table 4.9 in IPCC AFOLU 
Domain
Ecological 
Zone Continent
Aboveground biomass 
growth (tonnes d.m. 
ha-1 yr-1)
Africa 3.1
South America 3.1
Asia (continental) 2.2
Asia (insular) 3.4
Africa 1.3
South America 2.0
Asia (continental) 2.0
Asia (insular) 3.0
Africa 1.8
South America 1.0
Asia (continental) 1.5
Asia (insular) 2.0
Africa 0.9
South America 1.0
Asia (continental) 1.3
Asia (insular) 1.0
Africa 1.0 - 1.5 
South America 0.4 - 1.4 
Asia (continental) 0.5 - 1.0 
Asia (insular) 1.0 - 3.0
North and South America 2.0
Asia (continental) 2.0
Asia (insular) 3.0
Africa 1.8
North and South America 1.0
Asia (continental) 1.5
Asia (insular) 2.0
Africa 0.9
North and South America 1.0
Asia (continental) 1.3
Asia (insular) 1.0
Africa 0.2 - 1.6
North and South America 0.4 - 1.4
Asia (continental) 1.0 - 2.2
Asia (insular) 1.0
Temperate 
continental 
forest
Asia, Europe, North 
America 0.5 - 7.5
Temperate 
mountain 
systems
Asia, Europe, North 
America 0.5 - 6.0
Boreal 
coniferous 
forest
Asia, Europe, North 
America 0.1 - 2.1
Boreal tundra 
woodland
Asia, Europe, North 
America 0.4
Boreal 
mountain 
systems
Asia, Europe, North 
America 1.0 - 1.1
Subtropical 
humid forest
Subtropical dry 
forest
Subtropical 
steppe
Subtropical 
mountain 
systems
Sub-tropical
Temperate
Boreal
Tropical 
mountain 
systems
Tropical
Tropical rain 
forest
Tropical moist 
deciduous 
forest
Tropical dry 
forest
Tropical 
shrubland
 
 
Non-CO2 emissions from land clearing: In countries where fire is used commonly as a 
land clearing practice for conversion to agriculture, non-CO2 emissions were estimated using 
339 
emission factors in Table 2.5 and Equation 2.27 of the IPCC AFOLU. Fire for land clearing was 
assumed to occur in all countries included in the analysis except China and Argentina. 
 
Non-CO2 emissions from land clearing with fire were estimated as: 
 
 
310−••••= effBfire GCMAL
  
Where: 
 
fireL
 = amount of greenhouse gas emissions from fire, MT of each GHG (i.e.,  
   CH4, N2O) 
 
A
 = area burnt, ha  
 
BM
 = mass of fuel available for combustion, MT ha-1.  
 
fC
 = combustion factor, dimensionless  
 
efG
 = emission factor, g kg-1 dry matter burnt 
 
The mass of fuel available for combustion was conservatively assumed to be equal to the 
above- and belowground biomass only; dead wood and litter pools were not included in the fuel 
load estimates.  
 
IPCC defaults were used for the forest combustion factor. Values from de Castro and 
Kaufmann (1998) were used for clearing other land cover types (grassland, savanna, shrubland). 
Combustion factors and emission factors used in this analysis are summarized in Table 2.6-37 
and 2.6-38 respectively. 
 
Table 2.6-37.  
Combustion Factor Values (Proportion of Pre-Fire Fuel Biomass Consumed) 
for Fires in a Range of Vegetation Types 
Vegetation Type Subcategory Value 
Primary tropical forest 0.32 
Primary open tropical 
forest 0.45 
Primary tropical moist 
forest 0.5 Primary tropical 
forest (slash and 
burn) 
Primary tropical dry 
forest - 
All primary tropical forests 0.36 
Shrubland  0.43 
Savanna  0.84 
Grassland  0.92 
 
 
 
 
 
340 
Table 2.6-38. 
Emission Factors (g kg-1 Dry Matter Burnt) Used in This Analysis  
for Biomass Burning From Table 2.5 of IPCC AFOLU 
Category CO2 N2O 
Savanna and grassland 1613 0.21 
Tropical forest 1580 0.2 
Extra tropical forest 1569 0.26 
 
2.6.5.4.2.3 Integrated Emissions Factors for Land Use Change 
 
In summary, emissions factors were estimated for each state for each land use conversion 
as metric tonnes CO2 equivalent.  All non-CO2 estimates were converted using IPCC SAR GWP 
factors: 
  
LUCriceLUCfireLUCseqlostLUCsoilLUCbiomassLUC EECCCEF ,,,_,, ++Δ+Δ+Δ=
 
where: 
EFi  = emission factor for converting one hectare of land to land use LUC; 
LUCbiomassC ,Δ
 = change in biomass carbon stocks as a result of land use change LUC; 
LUCsoilC ,Δ
 = change in soil carbon stocks (top 30 cm) as a result of land use change 
LUC; 
LUCseqlost
C
,
_
Δ
 = lost forest sequestration resulting from land use change (if applicable); 
LUCfireE ,
 = non-CO2 GHG emission associated with land clearing with fire (if 
applicable); 
 
The per hectare emissions factors used for the proposed rule are presented in Table 2.6-
39  The emissions factors in Table 2.6-39 are weighted by where land conversions are likely to 
take place within each country, based on the MODIS satellite data discussed above.  For 
example, the forest to cropland emissions factor for Brazil is weighted by where forest was 
converted to cropland in Brazil from 2001 to 2004, based on the data presented in Table 2.6-26.  
The MODIS satellite data suggests that in Brazil forest to grassland conversion tends to occur in 
regions with more carbon-rich forests than the areas that have more forest to cropland 
conversion.  This explains why, for example, the Brazil per hectare emissions factor for forest to 
grassland conversion is greater than the factor for forest to cropland conversion. The emissions 
factors in Table 2.6-39 are non-discounted emissions over 80 years. 
 
 As depicted in Figure 2.6-13 for Brazil, the per hectare emissions factors in Table 2.6-39 
were weighted by the shares of land types converted to cropland, and by the types of land cleared 
to replace pasture converted to cropland.  With the weighting approach discussed above, we 
derived land use change emissions factors per hectare of cropland expansion.  Table 2.6-40 
includes the country-level weighted average emissions factors (WAEFs) per hectare of cropland 
expansion that were used for the proposed rule central estimate.  The WAEFs in Table 2.6-40 are 
un-discounted emissions over 80 years. 
341 
Table 2.6-39.  Country-Level 80-Year Emissions Factors for Various Land Conversion 
Types (MTCO2eq / Hectare) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 2.6-40.  Country-Level Weighted Average Emissions Factors (WAEF) Per Hectare of 
Cropland Expansion (MTCO2eq / Hectare) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Forest Grassland Mixed Savanna Shrub
Cropland 285 39 42 81
Grassland 335 37
Savanna 319 22
Cropland 637 111 148 201
Grassland 635 97
Savanna 593 65
Cropland 587 56 85 121
Grassland 459 67
Savanna 447 67
Cropland 787 68 239 94 117
Grassland 534 54
Savanna 406 35
Cropland 610 65 65 94
Grassland 616 616
Savanna 583 29
Cropland 1069 107 127 233
Grassland 1124 126
Savanna 1026 104
Cropland 1169 124 141 253
Grassland 1128 126
Savanna 1082 104
Cropland 238 44 126 58 192
Grassland 227 143
Savanna 277 70
Cropland 994 84 108 217
Grassland 918 126
Savanna 887 104
Cropland 275 44 138 90 194
Grassland 270 144
Savanna 214 117
South Africa
From
Indonesia
Malaysia
Nigeria
Philippines
Brazil
China
European Union
India
Country / Region To
Argentina
Country / Region Cropland Expansion Pasture Replacement Total WAEF
Argentina 62 85 148
Brazil 164 188 352
China 168 112 280
European Union 262 101 363
India 119 82 201
Indonesia 449 149 598
Malaysia 908 230 1138
Nigeria 62 76 138
Philippines 541 420 961
South Africa 116 80 196
342 
2.6.5.4.2.3.4 What Are the Total GHG Emissions Associated With International Land Use 
Change 
 
 To determine the GHG impacts of the land use changes we applied GHG emissions 
factors based on data prepared by Winrock to the land use changes projected by the combination 
of FAPRI and satellite data.  Table 2.6-40 shows our emissions factors for ten countries.  The ten 
countries we have emissions factors for account for a majority of foreign cropland expansion 
projected by FAPRI.  Table 2.6-41 shows the share of projected cropland expansion in these ten 
countries in the FAPRI fuel-specific scenarios.  We are in the process of acquiring data for more 
countries to be used for he final rule. 
 
Table 2.6-41.Share of Projected Foreign Crop Expansion in the Ten Countries We Have 
Winrock Data Fora 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a
 We have Winrock emissions factors for: Argentina, Brazil, China, EU, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Nigeria, 
Philippines and South Africa 
 
 We used a weighted average emissions factor from the ten countries we have Winrock 
data for to estimate the GHG emissions from cropland expansion in countries not covered by 
Winrock data.  The country-level shares of crop expansion varied by fuel-specific scenario, so 
the weighted average emissions factor (WAEF) applied to missing countries also varied by 
scenario.  Table 2.6-42 shows the WAEF used for missing countries for each scenario.  The 
WAEF for missing countries is highest for the soy biodiesel scenario because FAPRI projects 
that U.S. soy biodiesel consumption encourages crop expansion in tropical countries with very 
large emissions factors for crop expansion, such as Malaysia and Philippines.  Crop expansion in 
these South East Asian oil palm exporting countries is large in the soy biodiesel scenario, 
because oil palm is a substitute for soy oil. 
 
Table 2.6-42.  Weighted Average Emissions Factors (WAEFs) Applied to Countries 
Without Winrock Data (MTCO2eq / Hectare Crop Expansion) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fuel-Specific Scenario Share of 2022 Foreign Crop Expansion
Corn Ethanol 63%
Imported Ethanol 87%
Soy Biodiesel 53%
Switchgrass Ethanol 57%
Regions with Winrock data Corn Ethanol Imported Ethanol Soy Biodiesel Switchgrass Ethanol
Argentina 4% 2% 13% 7%
Brazil 27% 64% 33% 17%
China 10% 2% 7% 13%
EU 6% 1% -3% 5%
India 24% 5% 24% 31%
Indonesia 5% 1% 6% 3%
Malaysia 0% 0% 6% 0%
Nigeria 20% 27% 12% 21%
Philippines 3% 0% 2% 2%
South Africa 3% -1% 1% 1%
WAEF applied to missing 
countries 282 288 326 256
Fuel-Specific Scenario
343 
 Figure 2.6-43 shows results for 2022 total un-discounted land use change GHG emissions 
over 80 years per million Btu of renewable fuel. 
 
Figure 2.6-43.  Total Land Use Change GHG Emissions Over 80 Years (gCO2eq / mmBtu) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.6.5.5 Timing of GHG Emissions 
 
When comparing the lifecycle GHG emissions associated with biofuels to those 
associated with gasoline or diesel emissions, it is critical to take into consideration the time 
profile associated with each fuel’s GHG’s emissions stream.  With gasoline, a majority of the 
GHG emissions associated with extraction, conversion, and combustion are likely to be released 
over a short period of time (i.e., annually) as crude oil is converted into gasoline or diesel fuel 
which quickly pass to market.  
 
In contrast, the GHG emissions from the production of a typical biofuel (e.g., corn-based 
ethanol) may continue to occur over a long period of time.  As with petroleum based fuels, GHG 
emissions are associated with the conversion and combustion of biofuels in every year they are 
produced.  In addition, GHG emissions could be released through time if new acres are needed to 
produce corn or other crops for biofuels.  The GHG emissions associated with converting land 
into crop production would accumulate over time with the largest release occurring in the first 
few years due to clearing with fire or biomass decay.  After the land is converted, moderate 
amounts of soil carbon would continue to be released for approximately 20 years.  Furthermore, 
there would be foregone sequestration associated with the fact that the forest would have 
continued to sequester carbon had it not been cleared for approximately 80 years (See Figure 2.6-
18).   
 
 
 
0
500,000
1,000,000
1,500,000
2,000,000
2,500,000
3,000,000
3,500,000
Corn Ethanol Imported Ethanol Soy Biodiesel Switchgrass Ethanol
Fuel-Specific Scenario
G
HG
 
Em
is
si
o
n
s 
(gC
O
2e
q 
/ m
m
Bt
u
)
344 
Figure 2.6-18.  Timing of International Land Use Change Emissions from Expanded Corn 
Ethanol Production 
 
0
200,000
400,000
600,000
800,000
1,000,000
1,200,000
20
22
20
30
20
40
20
50
G
HG
 E
m
is
si
on
s 
(g
CO
2-
eq
 / 
m
m
B
tu
)
International Land Use Change Emissions
Year 0 
Emissions: 
•Clearing with fire 
•Biomass decay 
•Soil carbon 
emissions 
•Foregone forest 
Years 1-19 
Emissions: 
•Soil carbon 
emissions Years 20-79 
Emissions: 
•Foregone forest 
 
While biomass feedstocks grown each year on new cropland can be converted to biofuels 
that offer an annual GHG benefit relative to the petroleum product they replace, these benefits 
may be small compared to the upfront release of GHG emission.  Depending on the specific 
biofuel in question, it can take many years for the benefits of the biofuel to make up for the large 
initial releases of carbon that result from land conversion (e.g., the payback period).   
 
 As required by EISA, our analysis must demonstrate whether biofuels reduce GHG 
emissions by the required amount relative to the 2005 petroleum baseline.  A payback period 
alone cannot answer that question.  Since the payback period is not sufficient for our analysis, we 
have developed methods for capturing the stream of emissions and benefits over time.  For our 
analytical purposes, it is important for us to determine how the time profiles of emission releases 
of different fuels compare.  It is useful to have a unitary metric that allows for a direct 
comparison of biofuels compared to gasoline or diesel, which requires an accounting system for 
GHG emissions over time.  When considering the time profile of GHG emissions, the two 
assumptions that have a significant impact on the determination of whether a biofuel meets the 
emissions reduction threshold include: 1) the time period over which we analyze the impacts and 
2) the discount rate we apply to the emissions streams.     
 
In Section XX, we present an analysis of the GHG emissions associated with corn 
ethanol over 100 years and 30 years.  There are advantages and disadvantages to using the 100 
345 
and 30 year time frames for the applicable time period.  The principal reasons for using the 100 
year time frame are twofold.  First, greenhouse gases are chemically stable compounds and 
persist in the atmosphere over long time scales that span two or more generations.  Second, the 
100 year time frame captures the emissions associated with land use change that may continue 
for a long period of time after the land conversion first takes place.496  For example, physical 
changes in carbon stocks on unmanaged lands only slow after 100 years, and optimal forest 
rotation ages can influence greenhouse gas emissions for 100 years on managed lands.   
 
The 100 year time frame also has its drawbacks.  While capturing the full land use 
change lifecycle emissions impacts over time, one concern with the 100 year time frame is that it 
assumes that the renewable fuel that caused the change in land use will continue to be produced 
on that land to displace gasoline or diesel fuel for 100 years.  In the case of corn ethanol, it is 
questionable whether land converted to grow corn for ethanol will still be utilized to plant corn 
for biofuel production in 100 years.  
 
An alternative time frame for analyzing biofuel emissions impacts is 30 years.  The 30 
year time frame assumes that a biofuel such as corn-based ethanol is likely to see a decline in its 
use due to a change in market factors or policy over a shorter period of time.  Some of the 
previous literature on the greenhouse gas impacts of biofuels have utilized a 30 year (or even a 
20 year) time frame to estimate the greenhouse gas impacts of biofuels.  The presumed reason 
for the choice of a 30 year time frame is that it represents roughly the time frame of a typical 
ethanol plant.  Since a time period such as 30 years would truncate the GHG benefits that 
accumulate over time, this second option would reduce the GHG benefits of biofuels relative to 
gasoline or diesel compared to using a longer time frame such as 100 years.   
 
One advantage of using a shorter time period is that it is more “protective” from a climate 
change perspective.  In general, the further out into the future an analysis projects, the more 
uncertainty is introduced into the results.  For example, the longer the time period analyzed, the 
more likely that there will be significant changes in market factors or policy that might change 
the incentives for producing biofuels.  If biofuels only have greenhouse benefits when considered 
in an extended future time frame, it is not clear that these benefits will be realized due to the 
inherent uncertainty of the future.  Also, potential future actions in other sectors of the economy, 
such as reductions from stationary sources, could influence the relative importance of renewable 
fuel GHG impacts.  
 
There are several disadvantages associated with choosing the 30 year time frame.  One 
key disadvantage is that it ignores the potential sources of GHG emissions after 30 years such as 
foregone sequestration representing forests that have been removed.  Thus, it doesn’t account for 
the full land use emissions “signature” of biofuels.  In addition, building a corn ethanol refinery 
represents a significant capital investment.  Once the facility is built and financed, it is likely to 
continue producing ethanol as long as it is covering its operating costs.  This suggests that, once 
built, corn ethanol may be cheaper to produce than gasoline.  This economic advantage may 
contribute to the longevity of corn ethanol usage far into the future.  
 
This issue of the appropriate time frame could also be different for different biofuels.  
While we could assume that corn ethanol would be phased out after 30 years, it might be more 
346 
appropriate to use a longer time period over which to analyze cellulosic biofuels.  We could 
reasonably assume that these cellulosic biofuels would be produced indefinitely on an acre of 
land, therefore the annual benefits would continue to accrue for 100 years or longer.  Using 
different time periods for different fuels introduces the added complexity of making comparable 
GHG emissions estimates across fuels.   
 
Related to the assumption on how long a biofuel will be produced is the issue of what 
happens to the land used to produce that particular biofuel as well as the land that was indirectly 
affected by the production of the biofuel.  The land might revert to its prior use, it might be used 
to produce different crops, or it might be used for a different use (e.g., pastureland).  The 
treatment of land reversion and the decreased demand for feedstock is especially important for 
the 30 year analysis where the production of a biofuel is assumed to end.  For this proposal, we 
have not calculated the GHG emissions associated with land reversion of direct and indirectly 
impacted acres to a different use once expansion for biofuel production is no longer needed.  We 
expect to conduct this analysis for the final rule.   
 
 Economic theory suggests that in general consumers have a time preference for benefits 
received today versus receiving them in the future.  Therefore, future benefits are often valued at 
a discounted rate.  Near-term emissions reductions would reduce uncertainty and the risks 
associated with climate change by shifting projected climate distributions into the future and 
reducing the possibility of more extreme climate change and threshold impacts (e.g., species and 
ecosystem thresholds, catastrophic events). 
 
Although discount rates are most often applied to the monetary valuation of future versus 
present benefits, this analysis is required to compare physical quantities (i.e., total GHG 
emissions emitted per gallon of fuel used).  The concept of weighting physical units accruing at 
different times has been used often in the environmental and resource economics literature,497 
and is analogous to valuing the monetary cost and benefits of a policy, only that in this case the 
metric that we ‘value’ is the reduction in GHG emissions. 498  Given this perspective, it is 
appropriate to discount the physical quantities of future emissions in order to facilitate the direct 
comparison of the very different time paths of GHG emissions from renewable fuels and 
petroleum-based fuels.  Thus, we are proposing that the GHG emissions be discounted through 
time.  
 
As described in more detail in Preamble Section IX on GHG emission reduction benefits, 
GHG emissions have primarily consumption effects and inter-generational impacts, as changes 
in GHG emissions today will continue to have impacts on climate change for decades to 
centuries.  Furthermore, an appropriate discount rate should be based on a consumption-based 
discount rate given that monetized climate change impacts are primarily consumption effects 
(i.e., impacts on household purchases of goods and services).  A consumption-based discount 
rate reflects the implied tradeoffs between consumption today and in the future.  Discount rates 
of 3% or less are considered appropriate for discounting climate change impacts, since they 
reflect the long run uncertainty in economic growth and interest rates and the risk of high impact 
climate damages that could reduce economic growth.499   
 
347 
When analyzing the GHG emissions associated with a 100 year time period, we examine 
a variety of alternative discount rates (e.g., 0, 2, 3, 7 percent) to show the sensitivity of 
greenhouse gas emissions estimates to the choice of the discount rate.  A zero discount rate is 
utilized to show how the results vary if each ton of greenhouse gas emissions is treated equally 
through time.  Also, previous methodologies of lifecycle greenhouse gas benefits have presented 
results using a zero discount rate.500  However, a zero discount rate is not consistent with OMB 
or EPA guidance.  We show the 7% discount rate for illustrative purposes, however climate 
change benefit analyses from global long-run growth models use discount rates well under 7% 
for standard analysis.501  High discount rates imply very low values for the welfare of future 
generations.  Therefore, assuming the effects of GHG are linear over time, discount rates of 2-
3% are considered more appropriate for discounting climate change impacts.502   
 
We chose to use a 2% discount rate to determine whether the biofuel meets the GHG 
emissions threshold because it is consistent with the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) 
and EPA guidance and is one of the discount rates that has been used in the literature to monetize 
the impacts of climate change.503  OMB and EPA guidance on inter-generational discounting 
suggests using a low but positive discount rate if there are important intergenerational benefits 
and costs.  Consumption discount rates of 1 – 3% are given by OMB504 and 0.5 – 3% by EPA.505  
GHG emissions have significant consumption effects and inter-generational impacts, as changes 
in GHG emissions today will continue to have impacts on climate change for decades to 
centuries.  Other options for intergenerational discounting have been discussed in the economic 
literature, such as dealing with uncertainty by using a non-constant, declining, or negative 
discount rate.506  These alternatives are described in Chapter 5.3 of the DRIA.     
 
In Section 2.8, we also present the GHG emissions reductions associated with corn 
ethanol using a 30 year time period.  For this scenario, we used a discount rate of 3%. Using a 
3% discount is still consistent with the consumption based rates of interest since most of the 
impacts of the climate policy would influence household consumption.  A 3% discount rate is 
more appropriate for this shorter time period of one generation (compared to the 2% rate used 
with the 100 year time frame), since the inter-generational impacts are not as relevant over the 30 
year time period.  A 7% discount rate is presented as well to show the greenhouse gas impacts of 
biofuels if the primary impacts of a climate policy were to displace or use of private capital.   
 
This analysis does not explicitly take into consideration climate change impacts over 
time.  For example, this analysis does not consider the impact of increased impacts with higher 
atmospheric concentrations of GHGs, nor does it consider thresholds or tipping points.  There is 
evidence in the scientific literature that increased emissions of GHG in the near-term may be 
more important in terms of physical damage to the world’s environment.  Some scientists for 
example believe that effects on factors such as arctic summer ice, Himalayan-Tibetan Glaciers, 
and the Greenland ice sheet are more likely to be effected by near-term GHG emissions, causing 
non-linearities in the effects attributable to GHG emissions.507  This issue is a distinctly different 
issue from how to account for the time preferences of society, and is outside the scope of our 
analysis.  
 
 
 
348 
 
2.6.6 Feedstock Transport 
 
The GHG impacts of transporting biofuel feedstock from the field to the biofuel facility 
and transporting co-products from the biofuel facility to the point of use were included in this 
analysis.  The GREET default of truck transportation of 50 miles was used to represent corn and 
soybean transportation from farm to plant.  This includes 10 miles from farm to stacks and 40 
miles from stacks to plant.  Transportation assumptions for DGs transport were 14% shipped by 
rail 800 miles, 2% shipped by barge 520 miles, and 86% shipped by truck 50 miles.  The percent 
shipped by mode was from data provided by USDA and based on Association of American 
Railroads, Army Corps of Engineers, Commodity Freight Statistics, and industry estimates.  The 
distances DGs were shipped were based on GREET defaults for other commodities shipped by 
those transportation modes.  Default GREET assumptions were also used for cellulosic ethanol 
feedstock transport.  Crop residues, switchgrass and forest wastes were all assumed to be shipped 
by truck from point of production to plant.  Crop residue distance shipped was 30 miles, 
switchgrass distance was 40 miles, and forest waste was 75 miles.   
 
The GHG emissions from transport of feedstock and co-product are based on GREET 
default emission factors for each type of vehicle including capacity, fuel economy, and type of 
fuel used.   
 
As part of this rulemaking analysis we have conducted a more detailed analysis of biofuel 
production locations and transportation distances and modes of transport used in the criteria 
pollutant emissions inventory calculations described in DRIA Chapter 1.6 and for the cost 
analysis of this rule described in DRIA Chapter 4.2.  Given the timing of when the current 
analysis was completed we were not able to incorporate this updated transportation information 
into our lifecycle analysis but plan to do that for the final rule.   
 
Furthermore, the transportation modes and distances assumed for corn and DGs do not 
account for the secondary or indirect transportation impacts.  For example, decreases in exports 
will reduce overall domestic agricultural commodity transport and emissions but will increase 
transportation of commodities internationally.  We plan to consider these secondary 
transportation impacts in our final rule analysis.   
 
2.6.7 Biofuel Production 
 
The GHG emissions associated with the processing of renewable fuels is dependent on a 
number of assumptions and varies significantly based on a number of key variables.  For 
example, for corn ethanol the ethanol yield impacts the total amount of corn used and associated 
agricultural sector GHG emissions.  The amount of DGs and other co-products produced will 
also impact the agricultural sector emissions in terms of being used as a feed replacement.  
Finally the energy used by the ethanol plant will result in GHG emissions, both from producing 
the fuel used and through direct combustion emissions.  The following sections outline the 
assumptions used to model biofuel production for different feedstocks and fuel pathways.   
 
349 
In each case, the GHG emissions from renewable fuel production are calculated by 
multiplying the Btus of the different types of energy inputs by emissions factors for combustion 
of those fuel sources.  The emission factors for the different fuel types are from GREET and are 
based primarily on assumed carbon contents of the different process fuels.  The emissions from 
producing electricity are also taken from GREET and represent average U.S. grid electricity 
production emissions.  The emissions from combustion of biomass fuel source are not assumed 
to increase net atmospheric CO2 levels.  Therefore, CO2 emissions from biomass combustion as a 
process fuel source are not included in the lifecycle GHG inventory of the biofuel production 
plant.   
 
2.6.7.1 Corn Ethanol 
 
The two basic methods for producing ethanol from corn are dry milling and wet milling.  
In the dry milling process, the entire corn kernel is ground and fermented to produce ethanol.  
The remaining components of the corn are then dried for animal feed (dried distillers grains with 
solubles, or DDGS).  In the wet milling process, the corn is soaked to separate the starch, used to 
make ethanol, from the other components of the corn kernel.  Wet milling is more complicated 
and expensive than dry milling, but it produces more valuable products (ethanol plus corn syrup, 
corn oil, and corn gluten meal and feeds).  The majority of ethanol plants in the United States are 
dry mill plants, which produce ethanol more simply and efficiently.   
 
For this analysis the amount of corn used for ethanol production as modeled by the 
FASOM and FAPRI models was based on yield assumptions built into those two models.  
Assumptions were ethanol yields of 2.71 gallons per bushel for dry mill plants and 2.5 gallons 
per bushel for wet mill plants (yields represents pure ethanol).   
 
As mentioned above, in traditional lifecycle analyses, the energy consumed and 
emissions generated by a renewable fuel plant must be allocated not only to the renewable, but 
also to each of the by-products.  However, for corn ethanol production, this analysis accounts for 
the DGs and other co-products use directly in the FASOM and FAPRI agricultural sector 
modeling described above.  DGs are considered a partial replacement for corn and other animal 
feed and thus reduce the need to make up for the corn production that went into ethanol 
production.  Since FASOM takes the production and use of DGs into account, no further 
allocation was needed at the ethanol plant and all plant emissions are accounted for here.   
 
 In terms of the energy used at renewable fuel facilities, there is a lot of variation between 
plants based on the process type (e.g., wet vs. dry milling) and the type of fuel used (e.g., coal vs. 
natural gas).  There can also be variation between the same type of plants using the same fuel 
source based on the age of the plant and types of processes included, etc.  For our analysis we 
considered different pathways for corn ethanol production.  Our focus was to differentiate 
between facilities based on the key differences between plants, namely the type of plant and the 
type of fuel used.  One other key difference we modeled between plants was the treatment of the 
co-products DGs.  One of the main energy drivers of ethanol production is drying of the DGs.  
Plants that are co-located with feedlots have the ability to provide the co-product without drying.  
This has a big enough impact on overall results that we defined a specific category for wet vs. 
dry co-product.  One additional factor that appears to have a significant impact on GHG 
350 
emissions is corn oil fractionation from DGs.  Therefore, this category is also broken out as a 
separate category in the following section.  See DRIA Chapter 1.4 for a discussion of corn oil 
fractionation.   
 
Furthermore, as our analysis was based on a future timeframe, we modeled future plant 
energy use to represent plants that would be built to meet requirements of increased ethanol 
production, as opposed to current or historic data on energy used in ethanol production.  The 
energy use at dry mill plants was based on ASPEN models developed by USDA and updated to 
reflect changes in technology out to 2022 as described in DRIA Chapter 4.1.  The modeling 
provided energy use for the different types of dry mill ethanol plants as shown in Table 2.6-44.  
 
 
351 
Table 2.6-44.  Energy Use at Ethanol Plants (Btu/gal) 
 Type Technology  NG Use Coal Use Biomass Use 
Purchased 
Elec 
Corn Ethanol – Dry 
Mill NG Near Term Technology (dry DDGS) 33,032   2,660 
  2022 Base Plant (dry DDGS) 28,660   2,251 
  2022 Base Plant w/ CHP (dry DDGS) 30,898   512 
  2022 Base Plant w/ CHP and Fractionation (dry DDGS) 22,014   714 
  
2022 Base Plant w/ CHP, Fractionation and Membrane 
Seperation (dry DDGS) 17,994   714 
  
2022 Base Plant w/ CHP, Fractionation, Membrane 
Seperation, and Raw Starch Hydrolysis (dry DDGS) 13,408   714 
  2022 Base Plant (wet DGS) 17,081   2,251 
  2022 Base Plant w/ CHP (wet DGS) 19,320   512 
  2022 Base Plant w/ CHP and Fractionation (wet DGS) 15,594   714 
  
2022 Base Plant w/ CHP, Fractionation and Membrane 
Seperation (wet DGS) 11,574   714 
  
2022 Base Plant w/ CHP, Fractionation, Membrane 
Seperation, and Raw Starch Hydrolysis (wet DGS) 8,841   714 
Corn Ethanol – Dry 
Mill Coal 2022 Base Plant (dry DDGS)  35,824  2,694 
  2022 Base Plant w/ CHP (dry DDGS)  39,407  205 
  2022 Base Plant w/ CHP and Fractionation (dry DDGS)  28,301  447 
  
2022 Base Plant w/ CHP, Fractionation and Membrane 
Seperation (dry DDGS)  23,276  447 
  
2022 Base Plant w/ CHP, Fractionation, Membrane 
Seperation, and Raw Starch Hydrolysis (dry DDGS)  17,545  447 
  2022 Base Plant (wet DGS)  21,351  2,694 
  2022 Base Plant w/ CHP (wet DGS)  24,934  205 
  2022 Base Plant w/ CHP and Fractionation (wet DGS)  20,277  447 
  
2022 Base Plant w/ CHP, Fractionation and Membrane 
Seperation (wet DGS) 
 15,252  447 
  
2022 Base Plant w/ CHP, Fractionation, Membrane 
Seperation, and Raw Starch Hydrolysis (wet DGS) 
 11,836  447 
Corn Ethanol – Dry 
Mill Biomass 2022 Base Plant (dry DDGS)   35,824 2,694 
  2022 Base Plant w/ CHP (dry DDGS)   39,407 205 
  2022 Base Plant w/ CHP and Fractionation (dry DDGS)   28,301 447 
  
2022 Base Plant w/ CHP, Fractionation and Membrane 
Seperation (dry DDGS)   23,276 447 
  
2022 Base Plant w/ CHP, Fractionation, Membrane 
Seperation, and Raw Starch Hydrolysis (dry DDGS)   17,545 447 
  2022 Base Plant (wet DGS)   21,351 2,694 
  2022 Base Plant w/ CHP (wet DGS)   24,934 205 
  2022 Base Plant w/ CHP and Fractionation (wet DGS)   20,277 447 
  
2022 Base Plant w/ CHP, Fractionation and Membrane 
Seperation (wet DGS)   15,252 447 
  
2022 Base Plant w/ CHP, Fractionation, Membrane 
Seperation, and Raw Starch Hydrolysis (wet DGS)   11,836 447 
Corn Ethanol – Wet 
Mill Plant with NG 45,950    
  Plant with coal  45,950   
  Plant with biomass   45,950  
352 
2.6.7.2 Biodiesel 
 
Two scenarios for biodiesel production were considered, one utilizing soybean oil as a 
feedstock and one using yellow grease. 
 
For the soybean oil scenario, the energy use and inputs for the biodiesel production 
process were based on a model developed by USDA and used by EPA in the cost modeling of 
soybean oil biodiesel including crushing, as discussed in Chapter 4.  Soybean crushing was 
modeled assuming yields of 11.2 lbs soybean oil/bu soybeans and energy use of 14,532 Btu of 
natural gas and 2,740 Btu of purchased electricity per gallon of biodiesel produced.   
 
Similar to the case with corn ethanol co-products, we analyze the aggregate GHG 
emissions from soybean crushing and transesterification that occur as a result of increased 
demand for a particular biofuel.  Therefore, any increase in soybean meal or soybean oil 
produced as a result of larger biodiesel volumes would take into account GHG emissions 
reductions from a decrease in the production of other feed and vegetable oil substitutes from our 
FASOM modeling.   
 
Biodiesel is produced through the transesterification process where vegetable oil 
(triglyceride) is reacted with an alcohol (e.g., methanol) and a catalyst (e.g., sodium hydroxide) 
to produce biodiesel and glycerin.  Soybean biodiesel transesterification was modeled assuming 
yields of one kilogram of biodiesel from a kilogram of soybean oil and energy use of 5,559 Btu 
of natural gas and 340 Btu of purchased electricity per gallon of biodiesel produced.   
 
For the yellow grease case, no soybean agriculture emissions or energy use was included. 
Soybean crushing natural gas use was included as a surrogate for yellow grease processing 
(purification, water removal, etc.).  Also, due to additional processing requirements, the energy 
use associated with producing biodiesel from yellow grease is higher than for soybean oil 
biodiesel production.  The energy use for yellow grease biodiesel production was assumed to be 
1.7 times the energy used for soybean oil biodiesel and yields of 0.94 kilograms of biodiesel 
from a kilogram of yellow grease. 
 
GHG emissions from other biodiesel production raw material inputs were also included 
in the analysis.  HCl, methanol, NaOCH3 and sodium hydroxide are used in the production of 
biodiesel and GHG emissions from producing the raw material inputs were also added to the 
model.  Table 2.6-45 shows the values that were used to convert raw material inputs into GHG 
emissions used in the anlaysis.   
 
Table 2.6-45.   Lifecycle Factors for Biodiesel Raw Material Production 
Factor Unit Methanol 
Sodium 
Methoxide 
Sodium 
Hydroxide HCl 
CO2 g/g 0.401 0.966 0.923 1.011 
CH4 g/g 0.003 0.002 0 0 
N2O g/g 3.9E-06 2.5E-06 0 0 
Total Energy Btu/g 19.05 24.10 9.67 9.35 
 
 
353 
2.6.7.3 Cellulosic Ethanol 
 
Cellulosic ethanol can be produced through two main types of production processes, 
either fermentation or gasification.  The fermentation option is mainly used for homogeneous 
feedstock sources like farmed trees, switchgrass and corn stover whereas the gasification option 
is recommended for more heterogeneous sources like forestry waste.   
 
As discussed in Chapter 1, we have worked with NREL to generate models of cellulosic 
ethanol production.  NREL has estimates for plants that were assumed to be in operation in the 
near-future (2010) and future (2015 and 2022).  Currently NREL has generated results for a corn 
stover ethanol fermentation plant.  We have used this to represent both corn stover and 
switchgrass ethanol production.  The modeling assumes 78,378 Btu of biomass and 118 Btu of 
diesel fuel is required per gallon of ethanol produced.  Process energy is assumed to be generated 
through the unfermentable portion (mainly lignin) of incoming biomass being burned for 
electricity production.  The process is assumed to generate 8,053 Btu of excess electricity per 
gallon of ethanol produced.   
 
The benefit of electricity generation is the possibility of lowering greenhouse gas 
emissions by offsetting other forms of electricity production.  This is captured in our analysis by 
assuming that the excess electricity produced by the ethanol plant will offset U.S. grid electricity 
production.  Therefore, GHG emissions from U.S. grid electricity are calculated for the amount 
of excess electricity produced based on GREET defaults for electricity production and subtracted 
from the lifecycle results of cellulosic ethanol production.   
 
We are also examining ways to incorporate this excess electricity co-product offset 
evaluation in our secondary energy sector modeling with the NEMS model.  This would be more 
consistent with our treatment of corn ethanol and biodiesel co-products where we expand the 
system boundaries to include the specific use of the co-products in an economic sector model.  
We will be examining this approach for or final rule analysis.   
 
2.6.7.4 Brazilian Sugarcane Ethanol 
 
Processing energy use for sugarcane ethanol was modeled similar to cellulosic ethanol in 
that it can produce excess electricity from burning bagasse.  The assumption was that Brazilian 
sugarcane ethanol would produce 1.78 kWh of excess electricity per gallon of ethanol produced.  
The excess electricity from ethanol production was assumed to offset Brazilian grid electricity to 
calculate GHG emissions savings.   
 
2.6.8 Fuel Transport 
 
The default values in GREET for ethanol transportation and modes were used to 
represent transport of ethanol from the plant to the retail location.  These default values are 
shown in Table 2.6-46.   
 
354 
Table 2.6-46.  GREET Ethanol Transportation Input Data 
Mode Plant to Terminal Terminal to Station 
 % Distance 
(miles) 
% Distance 
(miles) 
Barge 8% 520 0%  
Pipeline 63% 400 0%  
Rail 29% 800 0%  
Truck 0%  100% 30 
 
Typically if ethanol facilities are located within 100-200 miles of a terminal, trucking is 
preferred.  Rail and barge are used for longer distances.  Pipelines are not currently used to 
transport ethanol and are not projected to play a role in ethanol transport in the future time frame 
considered. 
 
For biodiesel transport, the values assumed in the RFS1 analysis were used to represent 
biodiesel transport.  The assumptions were 22% of biodiesel shipped by barge and 78% shipped 
by rail.  The GREET default distances for biodiesel rail and barge transport as well as terminal to 
station assumptions are consistent with ethanol transportation and distribution assumptions and 
were used in this analysis.   
 
As with feedstock transport we have conducted a more detailed analysis of fuel transport 
and distribution impacts for use in criteria pollutant inventories (see DRIA Chapter 1.6) and for 
our cost analysis described in DRIA Chapter 4.2.  Due to the timing of this analysis we were not 
able to incorporate the results in our life cycle calculation but plan to do that for the final rule.   
 
2.7 Tailpipe Combustion 
 
Combustion CO2 emissions for ethanol, biomass-based diesel, petroleum diesel and 
gasoline were based on the carbon content of the fuel.  However, over the full lifecycle of the 
fuel, the CO2 emitted from biomass-based fuels combustion does not increase atmospheric CO2 
concentrations, assuming the biogenic carbon emitted is offset by the uptake of CO2 resulting 
from the growth of new biomass.  As a result, CO2 emissions from biomass-based fuels 
combustion are not included in their life cycle emissions results.  Net carbon fluxes from changes 
in biogenic carbon reservoirs in wooded or crop lands are accounted for separately in the land 
use change analysis as outlined in the agricultural sector modeling above. 
 
When calculating combustion GHG emissions, however, the CH4 and N2O emitted 
during biomass-based fuels combustion are included in the analysis.  Unlike CO2 emissions, the 
combustion of biomass-based fuels does result in net additions of CH4 and N2O to the 
355 
atmosphere.  Therefore, combustion CH4 and N2O emissions are included in the lifecycle GHG 
emissions results for biomass-based fuels.  
 
Combustion related CH4 and N2O emissions for both biomass-based fuels and petroleum-
based fuels are based on EPA MOVES model results.  The values used are shown in Table 2.7-1.  
CO2 emissions from biofuels are shown for illustrative reasons, but as mentioned above are not 
included in the analysis because they are assumed to be offset by carbon uptake from plant 
growth.   
 
Table 2.7-1. 
Tailpipe Combustion Emissions for Bio and Petroleum Based Fuels 
 
CO2 CH4 N2O 
Fuel Type (g/mmBtu) (g/mmBtu) (g/mmBtu) 
Ethanol 75,250 269 611 
Biodiesel 81,044 11 689 
    
Gasoline 77,567 67 1,659 
Diesel Fuel 78,761 11 689 
 
 
 
2.8. Overall Lifecycle Greenhouse Gas Emissions Results by Fuel 
 
2.8.1 The Payback Period for Renewable Fuels and Central Lifecycle GHG Results for 
the Proposed Rule 
 
In this section we present detailed lifecycle GHG analysis results, including the results of 
sensitivity and scenario analyses on key assumptions that have a significant impact on the 
outcomes.  As discussed above, to implement the EISA the crucial result that determines which 
renewable fuel pathways qualify for RFS2 credits is the percent reduction in lifecycle GHG 
emissions compared to the average lifecycle greenhouse gas emissions for gasoline or diesel sold 
or distributed as transportation fuel in 2005.  To compare lifecycle GHG emissions from 
renewable fuels and petroleum, we present the grams of CO2-equivalent emissions per Btu of 
fuel produced.  The previous sections in this DRIA Chapter discussed our methodology for 
calculating lifecycle GHG emissions for each component of the renewable fuel lifecycle, and for 
the 2005 petroleum baseline.  In this Section we present and compare the GHG emissions results 
for each of these components in the fuel lifecycle.  We also discuss how key assumptions can 
change the GHG emissions from each component of the fuel lifecycle, and how they influence 
the final GHG percent reduction estimates.   
 
In addition to estimating GHG emissions at every stage of the fuel lifecycle, EPA’s task 
in this rulemaking is to bring together the GHG emissions from all these components in order to 
estimate a lifecycle GHG percent reduction for each renewable fuel pathway.  We have 
considered a number of ways to meet this challenge, and have identified several key 
methodological issues that can influence whether a particular renewable fuel pathway meets the 
356 
GHG reduction thresholds set forth in the EISA.  For example, one issue that deserves attention 
is the timing of lifecycle GHG emissions. 
 
Section 2.6.5.5 explained that the lifecycle GHG emissions associated with biofuels can 
vary over time.  Clearing forests, grasslands, and other types of land that sequester carbon, for 
crop production can results in GHG emissions for many years.  As depicted in Figure XXX, this 
type of land conversion produces very large immediate GHG emissions, followed by a lesser 
stream of emissions that can last for many years.  Biomass feedstocks grown annually on new 
cropland can be converted to biofuels that offer a GHG benefit relative to the petroleum product 
they replace, but these benefits may be small compared to the upfront release of GHGs 
associated with clearing land to expand crop production.  Depending on the specific biofuel in 
question, it can take many years for the benefits of the biofuel to make up for the large initial 
releases of carbon that result from land conversion (e.g., the payback period). 
 
The payback period calculation, presented graphically in Figure 2.8-1, represents the time 
it takes for the emissions savings from the production of biofuels to equal the potentially large 
initial emissions from land use changes.  Although we do not believe it is appropriate to use the 
payback period for RFS2 compliance purposes, this calculation helps to illustrate the importance 
of the time dimension of lifecycle GHG emissions from renewable fuels. 
 
Figure 2.8-1.  Corn Ethanol Payback Period 
 
-200,000
0
200,000
400,000
600,000
800,000
1,000,000
1,200,000
20
22
20
30
20
40
20
50
G
H
G
 
Em
is
si
o
n
s 
(g
CO
2-
eq
 / 
m
m
B
tu
)
Corn Ethanol Lifecycle GHG Emissions (2022 NG Dry Mill)
2005 Gasoline Baseline
Cumulative Net Corn Ethanol Life Cycle GHG Emissions (2002 NG Dry Mill)
Year 0 Land Use
•Clearing with fire
•Biomass decay
•Soil carbon emissions
•Foregone forest sequestration
Years 1-19 Land Use
•Soil carbon emissions
•Foregone forest sequestration
Years 20-79 Land Use
•Foregone forest sequestration
Payback ~33 years
20
22
20
30
20
40
20
50
G
H
G
 
Em
is
si
o
n
s 
(g
CO
2-
eq
 / 
m
m
B
tu
)
 
 Figure 2.8-1 shows the lifecycle GHG emissions of corn ethanol produced with a 2022 
technology natural gas fired dry mill, and of the 2005 gasoline baseline.  In the first year, in this 
357 
case 2022, corn ethanol lifecycle GHG emissions are more than ten times greater than the 
gasoline it replaces.  However, corn ethanol has significant GHG benefits in every subsequent 
year.  It takes approximately 33 years for the annual GHG benefits of corn ethanol compared to 
gasoline to pay back the large initial GHG release from land clearing.  This tells us that unless 
we analyze the lifecycle GHG emissions of corn ethanol over more than 33 years, corn ethanol 
from this pathway will not achieve a reduction compared to gasoline.  As we extend our analysis 
beyond 33 years we will see increasing GHG reductions associated with the use of corn ethanol. 
 
 As discussed in Section 2.6.5.5, economic theory suggests that in general consumers have 
a time preference for benefits received today versus receiving them in the future. Therefore, 
future benefits are often valued at a discounted rate.  If we apply this concept to GHG emissions 
the GHG reduction benefits achieved by corn ethanol in future years carries less weight 
compared to the large emissions from land conversion that happen almost immediately.  Figure 
2.8-2 illustrates that the payback period is significantly longer if we use a two percent or three 
percent discount rate. 
 
Figure 2.8-2.  Corn Ethanol Payback Period with Different Discount Rates 
-100,000
100,000
300,000
500,000
700,000
900,000
1,100,000
20
22
20
30
20
40
20
50
20
60
20
70
20
80
20
90
21
00
G
H
G
 
Em
is
si
o
n
s 
(gC
O
2-
eq
 / 
m
m
B
tu
)
Corn Ethanol Lifecycle GHG Emissions (2022 NG Dry Mill)
2005 Gasoline Baseline
Cumulative Net Corn Ethanol Life Cycle GHG Emissions (2002 NG Dry Mill), r=0%
Cumulative Net Corn Ethanol Lifecycle GHG Emissions (2022 NG Dry Mill), r=2%
Cumulative Net Corn Ethanol Lifecycle GHG Emissions (2022 NG Dry Mill), r=3%
r=0%Payback ~33 years r=2%Payback ~47 years r=3%Payback ~69 years
Note: Annual emissions 
discounted 3%
20
22
20
30
20
40
20
50
20
60
20
70
20
80
20
90
21
00
G
H
G
 
Em
is
si
o
n
s 
(gC
O
2-
eq
 / 
m
m
B
tu
)
 
 
 The payback period concept helps to demonstrate the importance of the choice of a 
discount rate and time horizon for this analysis.  These factors are so important because of the 
variation in GHG emissions from renewable fuels over time, and the contrasting steady annual 
emissions from the petroleum baseline.  It is difficult to compare these two very different 
emissions profiles unless we put them on an equal footing.  To do this, we compared the net 
present value (NPV) of renewable fuels’ emissions and the NPV of emissions from the 
358 
petroleum baseline.  Using NPVs to compare streams of costs and benefits is a well established 
practice for cost-benefit analysis.  Similarly, a net present value approach is commonly used to 
assess GHG emissions.TTTTTT  The NPV of lifecycle GHG emissions is the sum of all terms: 
 
GHGt / (1 + r)^t, where 
t = the time of the GHG emissions 
r = the discount rate 
GHGt = the net flow of GHG emissions at time t 
 
In this case we express the GHG term as CO2-equivalent emissions per mmBtu of fuel 
produced.  For the reasons discussed in Section 2.6.5.5, and in the preamble for the proposed 
rule, we have selected a discount rate of two percent (i.e. r=2%), and a 100 year time horizon 
(i.e. T=100) for our central lifecycle GHG reduction estimates.  Figure 2.8-3 includes lifecycle 
GHG results for a typical dry mill corn ethanol facility fired with natural gas using the central 
approach for the proposed rule. 
 
Figure 2.8-3.  Central Corn Ethanol Lifecycle GHG Analysis Results  
(NPV, r=2%, T=100 years) 
 
-16%
-1,000,000
0
1,000,000
2,000,000
3,000,000
4,000,000
5,000,000
2005 Gasoline Baseline 2022 Base Dry Mill NG
G
HG
 
Em
is
si
o
n
s 
(gC
O
2-
eq
 / 
m
m
Bt
u
)
Fuel Production
International Land Use Change
International Farm Inputs and Fert N2O
Other (fuel and feedstock transport)
Domestic Soil Carbon
International Livestock
International Rice Methane
Tailpipe
Domestic Rice Methane
Domestic Farm Inputs and Fert N2O
Domestic Livestock
Net Emissions
 
 
 The NPV of gasoline GHG emissions over 100 years is presented on the left side of 
Figure 2.8-3.  The chart shows that with a 2 percent discount rate the 100 year net present value 
                                                 
TTTTTT
 See for example The Stern Review of the Economics of Climate Change, October 2006, 
http://www.occ.gov.uk/activities/stern.htm 
359 
of lifecycle GHG emissions from average 2005 gasoline is 4,240,674 gCO2eq/mmBtu.  Tailpipe 
emissions make up over 80% of the lifecycle GHG emissions from gasoline.  The rest of 
gasoline’s lifecycle GHG emissions occur during the fuel production process, which includes 
both upstream and downstream production processes.   
 
The lifecycle GHG emissions from corn ethanol appear on the right-hand side of Figure 
2.8-3.  As discussed above in Section 2.7, tailpipe emissions are almost negligible for corn 
ethanol, because the carbon emitted upon ethanol combustion was sequestered when the corn 
was growing in the field.  The result is a net carbon emission of zero, and small emissions of 
non-CO2 GHGs.  Fuel production accounts for almost 40 percent of the net emissions from corn 
ethanol.  The fuel production emissions presented in Figure 2.8-3 correspond with a typical dry 
mill corn ethanol production facility that uses natural gas and electricity for energy, and produces 
dried DGs.  The base year for our analysis of lifecycle GHG impacts is 2022, so the ethanol 
production facility in this example has the projected efficiency of a typical dry mill in 2022.  
Emissions associated with transportation and distribution of feedstocks to the ethanol plant, and 
ethanol to the end consumer, account for almost 5 percent of corn ethanol’s net lifecycle GHG 
emissions.  The other corn ethanol lifecycle GHG impacts in Figure 2.8-3 are linked to domestic 
and foreign agriculture. 
 
As discussed in detail above, corn production requires land, fertilizer, pesticides, energy 
use, and other inputs that produce GHG emissions.  However, using more corn for ethanol has 
other significant indirect impacts that ripple through the domestic agricultural sector.  Many of 
the secondary agricultural sector impacts have significant GHG emissions implications.  For 
example, as corn prices increase, corn-intensive livestock production tends to decrease and 
methane emissions from cattle also drop.  As Figure 2.8-3 shows, we estimated that using more 
corn for ethanol results in net reductions of GHG emissions from domestic livestock, domestic 
farm inputs and nitrous oxide, and domestic rice methane emissions.  Domestic soil carbon 
emissions increase modestly, but the net effect is a reduction in GHG emissions from domestic 
agriculture.  These results are discussed in more detail below. 
 
Major sources of GHG emissions that appear in Figure 2.8-3 are associated with foreign 
agriculture.  As a result of using more U.S. corn for ethanol, crop and livestock production 
increase in foreign countries.  Accordingly, GHG emissions from the foreign agricultural sector 
go up.  Excluding international land use change, foreign agriculture accounts for almost 13 
percent of life cycle GHG emissions from corn ethanol.  The remaining emissions, making up 
almost 54 percent of the net total, are from land use changes associated with the expansion of 
crop production in foreign countries. 
 
Figure 2.8-3 shows that with a 2 percent discount rate the 100 year net present value of 
lifecycle GHG emissions from corn produced in a typical natural gas fired dry mill is 3,563,294 
gCO2eq/mmBtu.  This represents a 677,379 gCO2eq/mmBtu benefit compared to the gasoline 
baseline, or a 16 percent lifecycle GHG reduction.  Figure 2.8-4 shows similar results for other 
types of corn ethanol production facilities, and for ethanol made from other types of feedstocks. 
 
 
 
360 
Figure 2.8-4.  Central Ethanol Lifecycle GHG Analysis Resultsa  
(NPV, r=2%, T=100 years) 
 
-115%
-105%
-44%-39%
13%
-39%*
-16%
-2,000,000
-1,000,000
0
1,000,000
2,000,000
3,000,000
4,000,000
5,000,000
6,000,000
2005
Gasoline
Baseline
2022 Base
Dry Mill NG
2022 Best
Case Dry
Mill NG
2022 Base
Dry Mill
Coal
2022 Base
Dry Mill
Biomass
Sugarcane
Ethanol
Switchgrass
Ethanol
Corn Stover
Ethanol
CORN ETHANOL ADVANCED ETHANOL CELLULOSIC ETHANOL
G
HG
 
Em
is
s
io
n
s
 
(gC
O
2-
eq
 
/ m
m
Bt
u
)
Fuel Production
International Land Use
Change
International Farm Inputs and
Fert N2O
Other (fuel and feedstock
transport)
Domestic Soil Carbon
International Livestock
International Rice Methane
Tailpipe
Domestic Rice Methane
Domestic Farm Inputs and
Fert N2O
Domestic Livestock
20% Reduction Threshold
50% Reduction Threshold
60% Reduction Threshold
Net Emissions
 
a
 “best case” plants include CHP, fractionation, membrane separation and raw starch hydrolysis technologies 
 
 
 The net emissions results presented in Figure 2.8-4 shows that with a reduction of 39 
percent compared to gasoline, a best case corn ethanol plant fired with natural gas surpasses the 
20 percent reduction threshold.  The best case plant reaches the threshold because of the 
substantial projected efficiency gains of advanced technologies that can be deployed in tandem: 
combined heat and power (CHP), fractionation, membrane separation and raw starch hydrolysis.  
Details about these fuel production technologies are discussed in Section 2.6.7.  These central 
estimates for the proposed rule suggest that the energy efficiency of future corn production 
facilities could be an important determinant of which corn ethanol production pathways meet the 
thresholds laid out in the EISA. 
 
 Figure 2.8-4 shows that imported sugarcane ethanol achieves a 44 percent reduction 
compared to the gasoline baseline.  Imported sugarcane ethanol can qualify for the RFS2 
definition of advanced biofuel if it reaches a 50 percent lifecycle GHG reduction compared to 
gasoline.  Lifecycle GHG emissions for sugarcane ethanol are lower than the emissions from 
corn ethanol for a number of reasons.  Converting sugarcane to ethanol is less energy intensive 
than the conversion process with corn.  Standard sugarcane ethanol production facilities burn 
bagasseUUUUUU for energy which helps to shrink their carbon footprint.  International land use 
change emissions associated with sugarcane ethanol production are only about 10 percent less 
than international land use change emissions from corn ethanol.  This is logical because both 
                                                 
UUUUUU
 Bagasse is the biomass remaining after sugarcane stalks are crushed. 
361 
sugarcane and corn are food commodities, and using them as biofuel feedstocks encourages crop 
expansion.  Sugarcane ethanol also has benefits compared to corn ethanol in the international 
rice methane, international livestock, and other emissions categories. 
  
The cellulosic ethanol pathways presented in Figure 2.8-4, corn stover and switchgrass 
ethanol, both achieve greater than 100 percent lifecycle GHG reductions compared to gasoline.  
In fact, as the figure shows, producing ethanol from these pathways creates a net abatement of 
GHG emissions.  A major source of this GHG mitigation occurs at the fuel production stage.  
The cellulose and lignin in switchgrass and corn residue are separated with an enzymatic 
process.  The cellulose is fermented to produce ethanol, leaving lignin as a by-product which can 
be burned for heat and electricity.  Our process modeling suggests that cellulosic ethanol 
production facilities utilizing an enzymatic conversion process will generate more electricity 
than they need by burning lignin.  These facilities will be net exporters of electricity to the grid, 
and we gave these pathways credit for offsetting an average mix of grid electricity.  Switchgrass 
ethanol has modest impacts on international land use and crop production, because it competes 
with other crops for land.  Switchgrass land use change emissions are only about a fifth as large 
as land use change emissions from corn ethanol because switchgrass can be produced on less 
fertile lands, thus displacing less commodity crop production.  Of all the renewable fuel 
pathways we analyzed for the proposed rule, ethanol from corn stover achieves the largest GHG 
reduction compared to gasoline. Corn stover is a waste product, so it does not displace any land 
from commodity crop production.  Using stover for ethanol creates a market for corn residue and 
could make corn farming a more profitable enterprise.  Corn residue is a source of nitrogen, so 
removing it from the field requires additional fertilizer application, which is why we see a 
modest increase in emissions from domestic farm inputs.  To harvest stover and sell it to ethanol 
producers, farmers must employ no-till farming practices.  The spread of no-till farming has soil 
carbon benefits that show-up in Figure 2.8-4.  Results for biodiesel are displayed in Figure 2.8-5. 
 
362 
Figure 2.8-5. 
Central Biodiesel Lifecycle GHG Analysis Results 
(NPV, r=2%, T=100 years) 
 
-80%
-22%
-1,000,000
0
1,000,000
2,000,000
3,000,000
4,000,000
5,000,000
2005 Diesel
Baseline
Soy Biodiesel Waste Grease
GH
G 
Em
iss
ion
s 
(gC
O2
-eq
 / m
m
Bt
u)
Fuel Production
International Land Use Change
International Farm Inputs and Fert
N2O
Other (fuel and feedstock transport)
Domestic Soil Carbon
International Livestock
International Rice Methane
Tailpipe
Domestic Rice Methane
Domestic Farm Inputs and Fert
N2O
Domestic Livestock
50% Reduction Threshold
Net Emissions
 
 
363 
Figure 2.8-6. 
Biodiesel Lifecycle GHG Results with Different Discount Rates 
(NPV, r=0%, 2%, 3%, 7%, T=100 years) 
51%
-7%
-22%
-48%
0
2,000,000
4,000,000
6,000,000
8,000,000
10,000,000
12,000,000
2005 Diesel
Baseline
Soybean
Biodiesel
2005 Diesel
Baseline
Soybean
Biodiesel
2005 Diesel
Baseline
Soybean
Biodiesel
2005 Diesel
Baseline
Soybean
Biodiesel
0% DISCOUNT RATE 2% DISCOUNT RATE 3% DISCOUNT RATE 3% DISCOUNT RATE
G
HG
 
Em
is
si
o
n
s 
(gC
O
2-
eq
 
/ m
m
Bt
u
)
Land Use Change
Non-Land Use Change
Net Emissions
 
 
Figure 2.8-6 shows the effect of the choice of discount rate on the final lifecycle GHG 
results.  As the discount rate increases, the net present value of non-land use change emissions 
decrease substantially.  This happens because a high discount rate, such as 7%, diminishes the 
present value of emissions that occur in the future.  On the other hand, the net present value of 
land use change emissions are less affected by the choice of discount rate.  This is because, as 
displayed above in Figure 2.6-18, more than 40 percent of international land-use change 
emissions occur in the first year, even though international land use change emissions continue 
for 80 years.  As a result more than 40 percent of international land-use change emissions are not 
discounted when we calculate the net present value.  For renewable fuels that create international 
land-use change emissions, increasing the discount rate will reduce the lifecycle GHG percent 
reduction compared to petroleum.  In Figure 2.8-6 going from a zero percent to 7 percent 
discount rate changes the lifecycle GHG emissions of biodiesel compared to average diesel from 
a 48 percent reduction to a 51 percent increase. 
 
364 
Figure 2.8-7. 
Corn Ethanol Lifecycle GHG Results  
(NPV, r=2%, T=30 years) 
-6%
46%
-5%
18%
-500,000
0
500,000
1,000,000
1,500,000
2,000,000
2,500,000
3,000,000
3,500,000
4,000,000
2005 Gasoline
Baseline
2022 Base Dry Mill
NG
2022 Best Case
Dry Mill NG
2022 Base Dry Mill
Coal
2022 Base Dry Mill
Biomass
G
HG
 E
m
is
si
o
n
s 
(gC
O
2-
eq
 
/ m
m
Bt
u
)
Fuel Production
International Land Use Change
International Farm Inputs and Fert
N2O
Other (fuel and feedstock
transport)
Domestic Soil Carbon
International Livestock
International Rice Methane
Tailpipe
Domestic Rice Methane
Domestic Farm Inputs and Fert
N2O
Domestic Livestock
20% Reduction Threshold
Net Emissions
 
 
 The choice of the time horizon for net present value calculations is as important as the 
choice of discount rate.  Figure 2.8-7 shows corn ethanol lifecycle GHG results with a 2 percent 
discount rate over 30 years.  This figure is similar to Figure 2.8-4 except that instead of looking 
at emissions over 100 years the results here only consider emissions over 30 years.  For corn 
ethanol produced in a typical natural gas fired dry mill, decreasing the time horizon from 100 
years to 30 years changes the lifecycle GHG percent change compared with gasoline from a 16 
percent decrease to an 18 percent increase. 
 
365 
Figure 2.8-8. 
Lifecycle GHG Results for Corn Ethanol Produced with a Standard Natural Gas Fired Dry 
Mill, Percent Change from Gasoline with Different Discount Rates and Time Horizons 
-36%
18%
25%
7%
-17%
5%
-2%
-16%
-4%
-40%
-20%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
20
22
20
40
20
70
21
00
Li
fe
c
yc
le
 G
HG
 P
er
c
en
t C
ha
n
ge
 
Fr
o
m
 
G
as
o
lin
e 
B
as
el
in
e
Corn Ethanol Base Plant, 0% Discount Rate
Corn Ethanol Base Plant, 2% Discount Rate
Corn Ethanol Base Plant, 3% Discount Rate
30, 50 & 100 Year Results, r=0%
30, 50 & 100 Year Results, r=3%
30, 50 & 100 Year Results, r=3%
 
 
 Figure 2.8-8 presents lifecycle GHG results for a standard corn ethanol pathway over 
time.  As discussed above, the payback period for a standard corn ethanol pathway is 
approximately 33 years.  With a zero percent discount (the blue line in Figure 2.8-8) corn ethanol 
increases GHG emissions by 5 percent over 30 years, and reduces emissions by 17 percent and 
36 percent over 50 and 100 years respectively.  With higher discount rates, it takes longer for the 
future benefits of corn ethanol production to payback the very large initial land clearing releases.  
Notice that with a time horizon of 30 years and a 3 percent discount rate, corn ethanol represents 
a 25 percent increase in GHG emissions compared with gasoline.  If we extend our analysis 100 
years with a 2 percent discount rate, the benefits of corn ethanol over time reach a 16 percent 
reduction compared to gasoline.  When we use a discount rate greater than zero, future benefits 
are discounted, to the curves in Figure 10-8 begin to flatten out.  For illustrative purposes, if we 
extended our analysis 1,000 years (i.e. assume that corn ethanol production will continue for ten 
centuries), the lifecycle GHG percent reductions compared to gasoline are 60 percent, 22 percent 
and 7 percent with zero, 2 and 3 percent discount rates respectively.   
 
2.8.2 Land Use Change Sensitivity Results 
  
 Emissions from land use changes are a major component of the life cycle GHG profiles 
for renewable fuels produced with feedstocks that are edible or grown on fertile land.  As 
366 
discussed above, we used a number of agricultural and economic models to estimate the land use 
impacts of these fuels.  We used the FASOM model to estimate GHG emissions from land use 
changes in response to renewable fuel production.  With the FAPRI model we projected which 
foreign countries would expand crop production as a result of the RFS2 program. We then used 
satellite data from 2001 to 2004 to project where cropland is likely to be added within foreign 
countries, and which types of land are cleared to make room for new crop areas.  Emissions 
factors developed by the non-profit Winrock International, using 2006 IPPC guidelines, were 
applied to estimate the GHG emissions associated with foreign land use change.  This approach 
for estimating land use change GHG emissions used the best available tools, and we are 
confident that the proposed rule lifecycle GHG analysis includes the most advanced analysis of 
this issue.  However, we do acknowledge that even with the best available tools, projecting how 
a U.S. policy will effect international land use change is a task with substantial uncertainty.  For 
this reason we identified key parameters within our land use change projections, and conducted 
sensitivity analysis to see how changing these parameters would influence our central estimates. 
 
2.8.2.1 Types of Land Converted to Cropland Sensitivity Analysis 
 
 One of the most important questions that determine the magnitude of land use change 
GHG emissions is what types of land are cleared when new cropland is added.  This question is 
so significant because clearing forest to expand cropland has much larger GHG emissions 
impacts than clearing grassland, or other types of land that sequester less carbon.  For example, 
we estimate that in Brazil an average acre of forest contains almost 10 times more carbon than an 
average acre of grassland.   
 
Our central estimate of which types of land would be converted to cropland relies 
primarily on satellite data provided by Winrock International.  Section 2.6 discusses the details 
of our approach for using the satellite data to project which types of land would be converted.  
We believe that using recent land use trends to forecast future land use patterns is a strong 
methodology, but past events will never be a perfect indicator of future behavior.  To address 
some of this uncertainty, we conducted sensitivity analyses in which we adjusted our central 
estimates about which types of land would be converted to cropland. 
 
A common input from stakeholders has been their belief that in many countries, such as 
Brazil, there is ample idle grassland, degraded pastureland and abandoned cropland (from now 
on this type of land is referred to as idle grassland) for cropland expansion. The Winrock satellite 
data suggests that if recent trends persist many types of land, in addition to idle grassland, would 
be cleared to make room for new crops.  However, future economic conditions or government 
policies could dictate that new cropland will only come from idle grasslands.  We did a 
sensitivity analysis that assumes that all new cropland comes from idle grassland, which also 
implies no pasture replacement is necessary.VVVVVV  Figure 2.8-9 shows that the assumption that 
all cropland comes from idle grassland has a dramatic impact on GHG emissions per acre of land 
converted to cropland.  This assumption has a particularly large impact on the weighted average 
emissions factors for South East Asian countries that have a large portion of forest to cropland 
conversion in our central estimates for the proposed rule.   
 
                                                 
VVVVVV
 See Section 2.6 for a discussion of pasture replacement 
367 
Figure 2.8-9. 
GHG Emissions per Acre of Cropland Expansion If All Cropland Expansion Comes from 
Degraded Pasture, (NPV, r=2%, T=100 years) 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Argentina Brazil China EU India Indonesia Malaysia Nigeria Philippines South Africa
G
HG
 
Em
is
si
o
n
s 
(M
TC
O
2e
q 
/ A
cr
e 
Cr
o
pl
an
d 
Ex
pa
n
si
o
n
)
Proposed Rule Land Use Change Estimate
All Cropland Expansion From Idle Grassland
 
 Figure 2.8-10 compares the overall corn ethanol lifecycle GHG results with the 
assumption that all RFS2 related cropland expansion comes from idle grassland and our central 
estimates about what types of land are cleared to expand cropland.  The assumption that all 
cropland comes from idle grassland reduces international land use change emissions by 70 
percent compared to our central estimate for the proposed rule.  
368 
Figure 2.8-10. 
Corn Ethanol Lifecycle GHG Results – All Cropland Expansion from Idle Grassland 
Sensitivity (NPV, r=2%, T=100 years) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.8.2.2 Foregone Forest Sequestration Sensitivity Analysis 
 
 Section 2.6 discussed our central methodology for estimating foregone forest 
sequestration after forestland is converted to cropland.  As discussed in that section, foregone 
sequestration was estimated using average annual biomass accumulation rates for forests greater 
than 20 years old given in Table 4.9 of the 2006 GL AFOLU according  to ecological zone and 
continent. These values were used to estimate the lost biomass accumulation of forests that were 
converted to another land use.  Foregone sequestration was assumed to continue at a constant 
rate for 80 years.  Studies have estimated that new forests grow for 90 years to over 120 
years.WWWWWW  More recent estimates suggest that old growth forests accumulate carbon for up 
to 800 years.508  Our proposed estimate that foregone sequestration continues for 80 years is 
within the range supported by the scientific literature and the 2006 IPCC guidelines.  However, 
there are other reasonable approaches that could have been used to estimate foregone 
sequestration. 
 
 Given the wide range of estimates about how long forests continue to accumulate carbon 
it would not be unreasonable to assume that we should account for more than 80 years of lost 
sequestration.  On the other hand, if we expect that very old forests would be converted to 
cropland, it would also be reasonable to assume a shorter timeframe for lost sequestration, or no 
lost sequestration at all.  Figure 2.8-11 shows how using different assumptions about the length 
of foregone sequestration affects weighted average emissions factors for forest to cropland 
conversion in Brazil. 
                                                 
WWWWWW
 See Greenhouse Gas Mitigation Potential in U.S. Forestry and Agriculture, EPA Document 430-R-05-006 
for a discussion of the time required for forests to reach carbon saturation.   
-48%
-16%
-1,000,000
0
1,000,000
2,000,000
3,000,000
4,000,000
5,000,000
2005 Gasoline
Baseline
Corn Ethanol -
2022 Base Dry Mill
NG
Corn Ethanol -
2022 Base Dry Mill
NG
PROPOSED RULE LAND USE
CHANGE ESTIMATE
100% GRASSLAND LAND USE
CHANGE & NO PASTURE
REPLACEMENT
G
HG
 
Em
is
si
on
s 
(gC
O
2-
eq
 / 
m
m
Bt
u)
Fuel Production
International Land Use Change
International Farm Inputs and
Fert N2O
Other (fuel and feedstock
transport)
Domestic Soil Carbon
International Livestock
International Rice Methane
Tailpipe
Domestic Rice Methane
Domestic Farm Inputs and Fert
N2O
Domestic Livestock
20% Reduction Threshold
Net Emissions
369 
 
Figure 2.8-11. 
Weighted Average Emissions per Acre Forest to Cropland Conversion in Brazil – Different 
Lengths of Foregone Sequestration (NPV, r=2%, T=100 years) 
157
165
103
65
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
80 Years of Foregone
Sequestration
100 Years of Foregone
Sequestration
20 Years of Foregone
Sequestration
No Foregone
Sequestration
M
TC
O2
-
e
q 
/ A
cr
e
 
Fo
re
s
t t
o
 
Cr
o
pl
a
n
d 
Co
n
v
e
rs
io
n
 
 
 Figure 2.8-12 presents lifecycle GHG results for soy biodiesel with different assumptions 
about the length of foregone forest sequestration.  The length of foregone sequestration is an 
important part of international land use change emissions, but even if we assume no foregone 
sequestration soy biodiesel does not achieve a 40 percent lifecycle GHG reduction compared to 
average diesel fuel. 
 
370 
Figure 2.8-13. 
Soy Biodiesel Lifecycle GHG Results – Foregone Sequestration Length Sensitivity (NPV, 
r=2%, T=100 years) 
-37%
-31%
-21%
-22%
-1,000,000
0
1,000,000
2,000,000
3,000,000
4,000,000
5,000,000
2005 Diesel
Baseline
80 Years
Foregone
Sequestration
100 Years
Foregone
Sequestration
20 Years
Foregone
Sequestration
No Foregone
Sequestration
SOY BIODIESEL
G
HG
 
Em
is
si
o
n
s 
(gC
O
2-
eq
 
/ m
m
Bt
u
)
Fuel Production
International Land Use Change
International Farm Inputs and Fert N2O
Other (fuel and feedstock transport)
Domestic Soil Carbon
International Livestock
International Rice Methane
Tailpipe
Domestic Rice Methane
Domestic Farm Inputs and Fert N2O
Domestic Livestock
50% Reduction Threshold
Net Emissions
 
 
 As discussed in detail in Section XXX, annual foregone sequestration was calculated as: 
, ,
( )lostseq LUbefore i LUafter i
i
C Cseq CseqΔ = −∑   
where:  
lostseqCΔ = change in carbon sequestration in aboveground biomass t C ha
-1
 yr-1  
,LUbefore iCseq = annual sequestration in aboveground biomass before conversion t C ha
-1
 yr -1 
,LUafter iCseq = annual sequestration in aboveground biomass after conversion t C ha
-1
 yr-1 
i = type of land use converted to another land use category. 
 
 Table 4.9 of the 2006 GL AFOLU was used to estimate the annual sequestration in 
aboveground forest biomass.  The 2006 GL AFOLU provides a sequestration range for typical 
forest types by continent and ecological zone.  The area of forest in each state was stratified by 
FAO ecozone and continent.  This calculation is consistent with 2006 IPCC guidelines, but there 
are other reasonable methodologies available to estimate foregone sequestration.  For example, 
foregone sequestration could be estimated as a percentage of a forest’s initial aboveground 
biomass.  As explained in detail in Section 2.6, we used regional biomass maps to estimate forest 
carbon stocks in each state.  Instead of using Table 4.9 of the 2006 GL AFOLU to estimate 
annual foregone sequestration, other approaches that were recommended by Winrock included 
calculating annual lost sequestration as one or two percent of the initial biomass in cleared 
forests.  Figure 2.8-14 compares lifecycle GHG results for soy biodiesel using the proposed rule 
estimate of foregone sequestration and two other estimates that use one percent and two percent 
371 
of initial forest biomass.  For some countries, such as Brazil, the proposed rule method yields 
greater foregone sequestration than either the one or two percent of initial biomass estimation.  
However, when we estimate the foregone sequestration from total land use changes for soy 
biodiesel, the proposed rule estimate of annual foregone sequestration is approximately half way 
between the one and two percent of initial biomass estimates.  For corn ethanol the proposed rule 
estimation of foregone sequestration also falls in between the one and two percent of initial 
biomass estimates. 
 
Figure 2.8-14 Soy Biodiesel Results – Foregone Sequestration Calculation Sensitivity  
(NPV, r=2%, T=100 years) 
-37%
-18%
-27%
-22%
-1,000,000
0
1,000,000
2,000,000
3,000,000
4,000,000
5,000,000
2005 Diesel
Baseline
Proposed Rule
Foregone
Sequestration
Foregone
Seuqestration =
1% of Initial
Aboveground
Biomass
Foregone
Seuqestration =
2% of Initial
Aboveground
Biomass
No Foregone
Sequestration
SOY BIODIESEL
G
HG
 
Em
is
si
o
n
s 
(gC
O
2-
eq
 
/ m
m
Bt
u
)
Fuel Production
International Land Use Change
International Farm Inputs and Fert N2O
Other (fuel and feedstock transport)
Domestic Soil Carbon
International Livestock
International Rice Methane
Tailpipe
Domestic Rice Methane
Domestic Farm Inputs and Fert N2O
Domestic Livestock
50% Reduction Threshold
Net Emissions
 
 
2.8.2.3 Soil Carbon Emissions Sensitivity Analysis 
 
 Land in annual crop production holds less soil carbon than land that is not harvested.  A 
digital soil carbon map of the world available from USDA was used to estimate soil carbon by 
region.509  Carbon stocks on annual cropland were estimated as 5 metric tons of carbon per 
hectare based on Table 5.9 of the IPCC AFOLU.  Changes in soil carbon stocks on land 
converted to cropland were calculated based on Section 5.3.3.4 of the IPCC AFOLU.  Following 
the IPCC AFOLU guidelines, the total difference in carbon stocks before and after conversion 
was averaged over 20 years.  (See Section 2.6 for details about methods used to estimate changes 
in soil carbon stocks). 
 
 During the proposed rule making process, EPA received feedback from some 
stakeholders that soil carbon emissions occur more rapidly than 20 years.  For example, there is 
scientific literature that suggests that most soil carbon emissions occur in the first 5 years after 
conversion to cropland. To gauge the importance of the timing of soil carbon emissions on our 
lifecycle, we calculated results with soil carbon emissions averaged over 20 years, 10 years, and 
5 years.  With our net present value approach, near term emissions have more impact on the final 
372 
results than emissions further into the future.  Figure 2.8-15 shows that the timing of soil carbon 
emissions has a modest impact on lifecycle GHG results for sugarcane ethanol. 
 
Figure 2.8-15. 
Sugarcane Ethanol Results – Soil Carbon Emissions Sensitivity (NPV, r=2%, T=100 years) 
-42%-43%
-44%
-500,000
0
500,000
1,000,000
1,500,000
2,000,000
2,500,000
3,000,000
3,500,000
4,000,000
4,500,000
2005 Gasoline
Baseline
Soil C Emissions Over
20 Years
Soil C Emissions Over
10 Years
Soil C Emissions Over
5 Years
SUGARCANE ETHANOL
G
HG
 
Em
is
si
o
n
s 
(gC
O
2-
eq
 
/ m
m
Bt
u
)
Fuel Production
International Land Use Change
International Farm Inputs and Fert N2O
Other (fuel and feedstock transport)
International Livestock
International Rice Methane
Tailpipe
50% Reduction Threshold
Net Emissions
 
 
2.8.2.4 Pasture Replacement Sensitivity Analysis 
 
 We have a two step methodology for projecting the types of land that would be converted 
to cropland as a result of U.S. biofuel consumption (See Section 2.6 for a description of this 
methodology).  The first step is the expansion of cropland, in which we used satellite data to 
determine which types of land would be converted to crops.    The second step is pasture 
replacement.  We added the second step, because recent land use trends suggest that in many 
countries cropland expansion often displaces grasslands, but that overall grassland area stays 
relatively constant.  This is an important trend, because it maintains land area for livestock 
grazing.  To preserve this trend in our projections we used land use information from the GTAP 
database to determine how much of the grassland and savanna converted to cropland in the first 
step is likely to be managed pasturelands.  This two step process is illustrated above in Figure 
2.6-13.  However, we acknowledge that there are sources of uncertainty associated with our 
methodology for pasture replacement.  We think that our approach is reasonable because it 
maintains recently observed trends in land use patterns, and because it recognizes that there will 
be continuing demand for pastureland, even in the face of cropland expansion. 
 
 To illustrate the importance of the pasture replacement concept, Figure 2.8-15 bounds our 
central corn ethanol lifecycle GHG results with results that have no pasture replacement, and 
results that replace all grassland and savanna converted to cropland.  It is clear from the figure 
that our projections about the interactions between crop expansion and pasturelands can have a 
substantial impact on the final life cycle GHG results.  One way that we intend to make our 
373 
projections about this more robust for the final rule is to run more scenarios with the GTAP 
model.  GTAP should provide a sophisticated economic projection that accounts for the demands 
for livestock grazing, the potential for livestock intensification, the availability and fertility of 
available grasslands, and other important factors that affect global pasturelands.  When the 
GTAP model is augmented to include unmanaged lands, it could be particularly helpful as a way 
to check our pasture replacement assumptions. 
 
Figure 2.8-15. 
Corn Ethanol Results – Pasture Replacement Sensitivity 
(NPV, r=2%, T=100 years) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.8.2.5 Year of Analysis Sensitivity Results 
 
 The EISA mandates increasing volumes of U.S. renewable fuel volumes, culminating in 
36 billion gallons renewable fuel use in 2022.  To estimate the full fuel-specific GHG impacts of 
the EISA mandates, we used 2022 as the central year for our analysis.  We expected that the use 
of 2022 as the analysis year would produce conservative estimates of emissions from land use 
change.  This is because our projections include crop yield increases that alleviate cropland 
demand in 2022 compared to more recent years when crop yields are lower.  To test the 
importance of our choice of 2022 as our year of analysis, we also calculated corn ethanol life 
cycle GHG results for 2017 and 2012 (See Figure 2.8-16).  As we expected, land use change 
emissions get lower as the year of analysis if extended further into the future.  The other impacts 
are either fairly stable based on the analysis year, or they follow the same pattern as the land use 
change emissions.  The one major exception is emissions from foreign livestock, which changes 
substantially across the different analysis years.  We should also note that the results for 2012 
and 2017 used 2022 domestic soil carbon emissions impacts, because of issues with FASOM’s 
-1%
-34%
-16%
-1,000,000
0
1,000,000
2,000,000
3,000,000
4,000,000
5,000,000
2005 Gasoline Baseline 2022 Base Dry Mill NG
Managed Pasture
Replacement
2022 Base Dry Mill NG
No Pasture Replacement
2022 Base Dry Mill NG
100% Pasture
Replacement
CORN ETHANOL
G
HG
 
Em
is
s
io
n
s 
(gC
O
2-
eq
 / 
m
m
Bt
u)
Fuel Production
International Land Use
Change
International Farm Inputs and
Fert N2O
Other (fuel and feedstock
transport)
Domestic Soil Carbon
International Livestock
International Rice Methane
Tailpipe
Domestic Rice Methane
Domestic Farm Inputs and
Fert N2O
Domestic Livestock
20% Reduction Threshold
Net Emissions
374 
methodology for soil carbon projections.  As discussed in Section 2.6, we have plans to update 
FASOM’s soil carbon projections, which should help to address this issue. 
 
Figure 2.8-16. 
Corn Ethanol Results – Pasture Replacement Sensitivity  
(NPV, r=2%, T=100 years) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.8.2.6 Fuel Volumes Modeled Sensitivity Analysis 
 
 The renewable fuel volume scenarios used for the proposed rule analysis are described 
above in Section 2.3.2.  We modeled the difference between domestic fuel consumption without 
EISA and domestic fuel consumption with EISA.  For corn ethanol, this meant modeling the 
difference between 12.4 and 15 billion gallons of domestic corn ethanol consumption in 2022.  
This approach allowed us to estimate the incremental impacts of the EISA.  For the reasons 
discussed in the preamble for the proposed rule, we believe this is the most relevant analytical 
approach for RFS2 implementation.  However, we also wanted to check the sensitivity of our 
results to a change in the volumes modeled. For example, questions were raised by stakeholders 
about whether the results would change if we started from a lower volume of corn ethanol.  To 
address this issue we estimated lifecycle GHG impacts for an increase in ethanol consumption 
from 8.7 to 15 billion gallons in 2022.  Figure 2.8-17 compares the results of this lower reference 
case corn ethanol volume case to our standard fuel volume scenario. 
 
 Starting from a lower volume of corn ethanol actually increased the per Btu lifecycle 
GHG emissions for corn ethanol.  The international land use emissions were very close between 
-16% -13%
-6%
-1,000,000
0
1,000,000
2,000,000
3,000,000
4,000,000
5,000,000
2005 Gasoline Baseline Base Dry Mill NG in
2022
Base Dry Mill NG in
2017
Base Dry Mill NG in
2012
G
HG
 E
m
is
si
o
n
s 
(gC
O
2-
eq
 
/ m
m
Bt
u)
Fuel Production
International Land Use Change
International Farm Inputs and Fert
N2O
Other (fuel and feedstock
transport)
Domestic Soil Carbon
International Livestock
International Rice Methane
Tailpipe
Domestic Rice Methane
Domestic Farm Inputs and Fert
N2O
Domestic Livestock
20% Reduction Threshold
Net Emissions
375 
the two volume scenarios shown in Figure 2.8-17.  The lower reference volume scenario 
produced larger per Btu corn ethanol emissions because GHG emissions from domestic 
livestock, and domestic farm inputs and N2O emissions did not decrease as much.  International 
livestock emissions also increased more when we started with 8.7 billion gallons of corn ethanol.  
We intend to explore these findings in more depth for the final rule.  In particular, as mentioned 
above, we are updating FASOM’s domestic N2O emissions estimations with parameters from 
the CENTURY model.  We would also like to gain a better understanding of why the lower fuel 
volume is affecting international livestock impacts so dramatically. 
 
Figure 2.8-17. 
Corn Ethanol Results – Pasture Replacement Sensitivity  
(NPV, r=2%, T=100 years) 
 
 
2.8.3 Result Conclusions 
 
 We conducted an expansive analysis of the life cycle GHG emissions from domestic 
biofuel consumption for the RFS2 program.  The results and discussion presented above 
demonstrate a number of ways to turn our estimates into final life cycle GHG results that can be 
used to guide regulatory implementation of RFS2.  Hopefully, this chapter helps to demonstrate 
the complexity of these issues, and to explain the choices we made to arrive at central life cycle 
GHG estimates for the proposed rule. 
 
During our analysis we identified several key elements for further exploration; including: 
the timing of GHG emissions, the choice of discount rate, methodologies for estimating foregone 
forest sequestration, interactions between cropland expansion and pasture area, the volumes of 
-16%
-6%
-1,000,000
0
1,000,000
2,000,000
3,000,000
4,000,000
5,000,000
2005 Gasoline
Baseline
Corn Ethanol - 2022
Base Dry Mill NG
Corn Ethanol - 2022
Base Dry Mill NG
12.4 to 15 BILLION GALLONS in 2022 8.7 to 15 BILLION GALLONS in 2022
GH
G 
Em
is
si
o
n
s 
(gC
O2
-
e
q 
/ m
m
Bt
u
)
Fuel Production
International Land Use Change
International Farm Inputs and
Fert N2O
Other (fuel and feedstock
transport)
Domestic Soil Carbon
International Livestock
International Rice Methane
Tailpipe
Domestic Rice Methane
Domestic Farm Inputs and Fert
N2O
Domestic Livestock
20% Reduction Threshold
Net Emissions
376 
renewable fuels modeled, and other issues identified above.  The results presented above show 
how these key parameters and methodological design decisions can influence the final per Btu 
life cycle GHG results.  It is clear from the discussion in this chapter that there are areas of 
uncertainty in our life cycle GHG analysis of renewable fuels.  The breadth of the analysis 
required to produce full and accurate life cycle GHG results lends itself to the introduction of 
uncertainty.  It has been noted in the life cycle assessment literature that for this type of analysis 
a narrower methodological approach could only reduce the amount of uncertainty at the expense 
of accuracy.510  
 
We hope that the detailed results presented in this analysis will facilitate substantive 
comments about our proposed approach for life cycle analysis.   Careful consideration of these 
results, and the comments we will receive on the proposed rule, should help us to understand and 
narrow the uncertainty in our analysis, and to improve the accuracy of our results.  For more 
information about our life cycle GHG analysis, we have placed spreadsheets with all of our 
calculations and outputs on the docket for this rulemaking. 
 
2.9 Overall Lifecycle Greenhouse Gas Emissions Results of Rulemaking 
Volume 
 
Our analysis of the overall GHG emission impacts of this proposed rulemaking was 
performed in parallel with the lifecycle analysis performed to develop the individual fuel 
thresholds described in previous sections.  The same system boundaries apply such that this 
analysis includes the effects of three main areas: a) emissions related to the production of 
biofuels, including the growing of feedstock (corn, soybeans, etc.) with associated domestic and 
international land use change impacts, transport of feedstock to fuel production plants, fuel 
production, and distribution of finished fuel; b) emissions related to the extraction, production 
and distribution of petroleum gasoline and diesel fuel that is replaced by use of biofuels; and c) 
difference in tailpipe combustion of the renewable and petroleum based fuels.  As discussed in 
the previous section we will be updating our lifecycle approach for the final rule and there are 
some areas that we were not able to quantify at this time, such as secondary impacts in the 
energy sector.  We are working to include this for our final rule analysis.   
 
Consistent with the fuel volume feasibility analysis and criteria pollutant emissions 
evaluation, our analysis of the GHG impacts of this proposed rulemaking was conducted by 
comparing the difference between a 2022 reference case and a 2022 control case with volumes of 
renewable fuels meeting the RFS2 mandate.  Similar to what was done to calculate lifecycle 
thresholds for individual fuels we considered the change in 2022 of these two volume scenarios 
of renewable fuels to determine overall GHG impacts of the rule.  The reference case for the 
GHG emission comparisons was taken from the AEO 2007 projected renewable fuel production 
levels for 2022 prior to enactment of EISA.  This scenario provided a point of comparison for 
assessing the impacts of the RFS2 standard volumes on GHG emissions.  We ran these multi fuel 
scenarios through our FASOM and FAPRI models and applied the Winrock land use change 
assumptions to determine to overall GHG impacts of producing this increase in renewable fuels.   
 
The main differences between this overall impacts analysis and the analysis conducted to 
develop the threshold values for the individual fuels were that we analyzed the total change in 
377 
renewable fuels in one scenario as opposed to looking at individual fuel impacts.  When 
analyzing the impact of the total 36 billion gallons of renewable fuel, we also took into account 
the agricultural sector interactions necessary to produce the full complement of feedstock.  
Figure 2.9-1 shows the different scenarios considered in this analysis. 
 
Figure 2.9-1.  Fuel Volume Scenario Considered to Determine GHG Impact of 
Proposed Rulemaking 
Biofuel Volumes in 2022
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
Reference Case Primary Volume
Scenario
Reference Case Primary Volume
Scenario
FASOM FAPRI
B
ill
io
n
s
 
o
f G
a
llo
n
s
 (E
th
a
n
o
l E
qu
iv
a
le
n
t)
Imports FAPRI
Imports FASOM
Forestry
MSW
Cellulosic FAPRI
Cellulosic FASOM
Other Fats / Oils
Soybean Oil
Other Grains
Corn
 
 
As discussed in Chapter 5, certain types of fuels and feedstocks are not specifically 
captured in the models, for example MSW and forestry feedstocks are not explicitly modeled in 
FASOM while cellulosic ethanol in general is not explicitly modeled in FAPRI.  Also, imports 
are not explicitly modeled in FASOM but are included in FAPRI modeling.   
 
We also considered a mix of plant types and configurations for the 2022 renewable fuel 
production representing the mix of plants we project to be in operation in 2022.  The following 
table shows the types of plants considered in the analysis for the references and control cases. 
 
378 
Table 2.9-1.  Types of Plants Considered in 2022 
  
Volume of Fuel (Bgal) 
Plant Type Technology 
Reference 
Case 
Control 
Case Difference 
Plant with NG (dry DG) 7.19 8.77 1.58 
Plant with NG (wet DG) 2.62 3.25 0.63 
Plant with coal (dry DG) 1.11 1.17 0.06 
Plant with coal (wet DG) 0.11 0.10 -0.01 
Plant with biomass(dry DG) 0.09 0.19 0.09 
Corn Ethanol – Dry 
Mill 
Plant with biomass (wet DG) 0.12 0.14 0.01 
Plant with NG 0.00 0.16 0.16 Corn Ethanol – Wet 
Mill Plant with coal 1.30 1.23 -0.06 
Switchgrass feedstock & lignin used as fuel 0.00 1.28 1.28 Cellulosic Ethanol – 
Enzymatic Corn stover feedstock & lignin used as fuel 0.25 8.80 8.55 
Cellulosic Ethanol – 
Thermochemical Forest waste feedstock 0.00 5.92 5.92 
Soybean oil feedstock 0.37 0.79 0.41 Biodiesel 
Yellow grease / tallow feedstock 0.01 0.02 0.01 
Renewable Diesel Yellow grease / tallow feedstock 0.00 0.38 0.38 
Imports Brazilian Sugarcane Ethanol 0.64 3.14 2.50 
 
The upstream feedstock production and processing impacts for each of the different fuel 
technologies were modeled based on the same assumptions used in determining the per fuel 
lifecycle GHG results described in previous sections.   
 
For this overall impacts analysis we also used a different petroleum baseline fuel that is 
offset from renewable fuel use.  The lifecycle threshold values are required by EISA to be based 
on a 2005 petroleum fuel baseline.  For this analysis of the overall impacts of the rule we 
considered the crude oil and finished product that would be replaced in 2022.   
 
Displaced petroleum product analysis was consistent with work performed for the energy 
security analysis described in Chapter 15.  For this analysis we consider that 25% of displaced 
gasoline will be imported gasoline and 0% of displaced diesel fuel will be imported diesel fuel.   
 
For the types of gasoline displaced we assume 65% of the displaced gasoline will be 
conventional gasoline and 35% will be RFG bledstock gasoline.  We assume 100% of the 
displaced diesel fuel will be low sulfur diesel fuel.   
 
In order to come up with GHG emissions for average crude oil used in producing 
gasoline and diesel fuel in 2022 we assumed 7.6% would be from tar sands and 3.8% would be 
from Venezuelan heavy crude.  The basis for this was EIA projections for 2022511.  EIA projects 
that roughly 64% of total Canadian crude oil production will be oil sand production in 2022, and 
that roughly 40% of total Venezuelan crude oil production will be heavy crude production in 
2022.  EIA also has assumptions on how much crude oil will be imported into the U.S. from 
379 
Canada and Venezuela in 2022.  We assumed the percentage of this imported Canadian and 
Venezuelan crude oil that would be oil sands and heavy oil was the same percentage of total 
production that is unconventional crude in those countries (~64% for Canada and ~41% for 
Venezuela).  Based on the percent of Canadian and Venezuelan imports to total crude oil 
projected in 2022, oil sands represented 7.6% and heavy oil represented 3.8% of total crude oil 
use.   
 
For this analysis we did not assume any efficiency improvements at the petroleum 
refining portion of the gasoline and diesel fuel lifecycle.  Therefore the same refining energy use 
and emissions was assumed that was used to represent the 2005 petroleum fuel baseline.  One the 
one hand this may be overestimating energy use and emission from petroleum refining, however, 
this also does not factor in recent regulations that might increase energy use and emissions, such 
as increased desulfurization of both gasoline and diesel fuel.   
 
Furthermore, the tailpipe emissions changes were determined based on the specific 
volumes and blends of fuel considered as opposed to looking at only the difference between the 
renewable fuel and petroleum fuel replaced.  For highway vehicles, the impact of this rule on 
Methane (CH4) and Nitrous Oxide (N2O) emissions is primarily due to vehicles switching from 
gasoline to E85 fuel.  Based on available data, we projected no change in N2O or CH4 emissions 
from highway vehicles that switched from conventional gasoline to E10.  For diesel highway 
vehicles, emissions of N20 and CH4 are almost one hundred times less than emissions from 
gasoline vehicles,512 thus diesels were omitted from this analysis. 
 
E85 effects for this analysis based on available emission data from EPA’s certification 
program, testing performed by EPA as part of the Mobile Source Air Toxic (MSAT) rulemaking, 
and a recent study performed by Environment Canada [insert reference].  This analysis found 
that on a per-vehicle basis using E85 resulted in a 56 percent decrease in N2O emissions and a 
123 percent increase in CH4 emissions.   
 
 To estimate the inventory-wide impact, we used MOVES to model CH4 and N20 for 
highway gasoline vehicles using reference case fuels.   Because MOVES does not vary CH4 and 
N20 emissions by temperature or by gasoline fuel properties, the model was run at the annual, 
national level.  The control case was modeled by computing an E85 factor for each model year 
and vehicle type that was the product of the proportion of FFV fuel that is E85 and the 
proportion of FFVS in that model year, as described in Chapter 1.   FFV use was assumed to be 
limited to light duty cars and light duty trucks.  We multiplied the appropriate E85 factor by the 
emissions for that model year and then computed a weighted average of E85 and E10 emissions 
for both CH4 and N2O.   In order to compare the results in a meaningful way, we also computed 
the CO2 equivalent by multiplying the tons for each pollutant by the Global Warming Potential 
(310 for N2O, 21 for CH4513) and summing the products.  The results are summarized in Table 
2.21 below. 
 
380 
Table 2.9-2.  Tailpipe Nitrous Oxide and Methane Emissions in 2022 
 
 Pollutant Reference 
Case Tons 
Control 
Case Tons 
Percent 
Change 
N2O 31,447 29,191 -7% 
CH4 50,683 61,853 22% 
LDGV & 
LDGT 
CO2 equiv. 10,812,803 10,348,003 -4% 
N2O 33,997 31,741 -7% 
CH4 55,277 66,447 20% 
All Gasoline 
Highway 
Vehicles CO2 equiv. 11,699,809 11,235,009 -4% 
 
Given these many differences, it is clearly not possible to simply add up the individual 
lifecycle results determined in Section 2.8 multiplied by their respective volumes to assess the 
overall rule impacts.  The two analyses are separate in that the overall rule impacts capture 
interactions between the different fuels but can not be broken out into per fuels impacts, while 
the threshold values represent impacts of specific fuels but do not account for all the interactions.   
 
For example, when we consider the combined impact of the different fuel volumes the 
overall land use change is greater than when considering fuel independently, as shown in Table 
2.9-3.   
 
Table 2.9-3. 
Comparison of International Land Use Change (‘000 Acres) 
 Considering Only 
Change in Soybean 
Based Biodiesel 
Fuel Volumes 
Considering Only 
Change in Corn 
Ethanol Fuel 
Volumes 
Considering Only 
Change in Brazilian 
Sugarcane Ethanol 
Fuel Volumes 
Considering 
Change of all 
Fuel Volumes 
Combined 
Land 
Use 
Change  
880 4,400 3,684 9,867 
 
The primary reason for the difference in acre change between the sum of the individual 
fuel scenarios and the combined fuel scenarios is that when looking at individual fuels there is 
some interaction between different crops (e.g., corn replacing soybeans), but with combined 
volume scenario when all mandates need to be met there is less opportunity for crop replacement 
(e.g., both corn and soybean acres needed) and therefore more land is required.   
 
Overall rule impacts were determined for the different components of the lifecycle 
analysis as described in previous sections.  The domestic agricultural sector impacts include 
changes in energy use GHG emissions and fertilizer / soil N2O emissions as well as changes in 
livestock and rice production GHG emissions. 
 
Our analysis indicates that overall domestic agriculture emissions would increase.  There 
is a relatively small increase in total domestic crop acres however, there are additional inputs 
required due to the removal of crop residues.  The assumption is that removal will require more 
inputs to make up for lost residue nutrients.  These additional inputs result in GHG emissions 
381 
from production and from N2O releases from application.  This effect is somewhat offset by 
reductions due to lower livestock production.  These results are dependent on our agricultural 
sector input and emission assumptions that are being updated for the final rule (e.g., N2O 
emission factor work).   
 
As with domestic agriculture impacts, the international agricultural sector impacts 
include changes in energy use GHG emissions and fertilizer / soil N2O emissions as well as 
changes in livestock and rice production GHG emissions. 
 
Increased crop production internationally resulted in increased fertilizer and fuel use 
emissions, however, these are offset by reductions in livestock GHG emissions.  Higher 
commodity crop prices internationally are resulting in lower livestock production internationally.   
 
We estimate the largest overall agricultural sector impact is an increase in land use 
change impacts, reflecting the shift of crop production both domestically and internationally to 
meet the biofuel demand in the U.S., and land use change emissions associated with converting 
land into crop production.   
 
Domestic soil carbon change impacts are negative reflecting the soil carbon changes 
associated with crop shifting and production.  There are several factors impacting this result, 
switchgrass has a large benefit in terms of soil carbon and carbon sequestration.  Residue 
removal is greater on low and no till cropping management practices, and larger removal rates 
shift to some of these practices and result in increased soil carbon sequestration.  However, land 
use change impacts are dominated by the international acreage and land use change increase.   
 
Other portions of the biofuel lifecycle include fuel production and feedstock and fuel 
transport.  We project reductions in GHG emissions from the renewable fuel production portion 
of the lifecycle due to the generation of electricity along with the increased production of 
cellulosic ethanol.  A large portion of the cellulosic ethanol production is assumed to be 
produced through the enzymatic process which also produces excess electricity to be sold to the 
grid.  This excess electricity is offsetting grid electricity production and results in GHG benefits.  
Cellulosic biofuels contribute by far the most to the total emission reductions due to both their 
superior per gallon emission reductions and the large volume of these fuels anticipated to be used 
by 2022.  Process emission reductions are partially offset by both feedstock and fuel 
transportation emissions.   
 
CO2 produced in the combustion of biofuels is offset by the uptake of CO2 in the 
biomass crop used to produce the fuel, resulting in a significant net reduction of CO2 compared 
to fossil fuel tailpipe combustion.  Net carbon fluxes from changes in biogenic carbon reservoirs 
in wooded or crop lands associated with land use change are accounted for in the domestic and 
international agriculture impacts shown in upstream impacts.  In addition we assume biofuel use 
is offsetting petroleum fuel production which also results in GHG emissions reductions from 
reduced upstream emissions of petroleum fuel production (crude oil extraction and transport, 
refining, transport).   
 
382 
The results of the individual lifecycle stage results can be summed to determine the 
overall GHG impact of the proposed rulemaking.  As discussed in previous sections on lifecycle 
GHG thresholds there is an initial one time release from land conversion and smaller ongoing 
releases but there are also ongoing benefits of using renewable fuels over time replacing 
petroleum fuel use.  Figure 2.9-2 shows the GHG emissions impact of the change in fuel 
volumes considered over time.   
 
Figure 2.9-2.  GHG Impacts over time 
-4,500,000,000
-4,000,000,000
-3,500,000,000
-3,000,000,000
-2,500,000,000
-2,000,000,000
-1,500,000,000
-1,000,000,000
-500,000,000
0
500,000,000
1,000,000,000
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25
Time Since Initial Land Use Change (years)
N
et
 T
o
ta
l G
H
G 
Im
pa
c
ts
 
(M
T C
O2
-
e
q.
)
Land Use Change Impacts
Ongoing Benefits (w/o Land Use Change)
Net Cumulative Total Emissions Over Time
 
 
Based on the volume scenario considered the one time land use change impact results in 
448 million metric tons of CO2-eq. emissions.  There are however, based on the biofuel use 
replacing petroleum fuels, annual reduction benefits of 161 million metric tons of CO2-eq. 
emissions.  This results in a less than two year payback period before the ongoing benefits of the 
biofuels use offsets the initial land use impacts.   
 
The timing of the impact of land use change and ongoing renewable fuels benefits were 
discussed in the previous lifecycle results section.  The issue is slightly different for this analysis 
since we are considering absolute tons of emissions and not determining a threshold comparison 
to petroleum fuels.  However the results can be presented in a similar manner to our individual 
fuels analysis in that we can determine net benefits over time with different discount rates and 
over a different time frame for consideration.   
 
383 
If we consider a 2% discount rate and 100 years of benefits (i.e., 161 million tons of 
GHG emissions reductions per year) we get an estimated discounted NPV reduction in GHG 
emissions of 6.8 billion tons of GHG emissions.  Assuming a 3% discount rate over 30 years 
would result in an estimate of 2.8 billion tons of discounted GHG emission reductions.   
 
Furthermore, for the calculations of the monetized GHG benefits we calculate an 
annualized NPV GHG reduction.  This annualized value is based on converting a lump sum 
present value into its annualized equivalent.  For this analysis we convert the NPV results for the 
100 year 2% discount rate into an annualized stream such that the NPV of the annualized 
emissions will equal the NPV of the emission stream over 100 years with a 2% discount rate.  
This results in an annualized emission reduction of 160 million metric tons of CO2-eq. 
emissions.   
 
 
2.10  Effects of GHG Emission Reductions and Changes in Global 
Temperature and Sea Level 
 
2.10.1 Introduction 
 
 The reductions in CO2 and other GHGs associated with the proposal will affect climate 
change projections.  Because GHGs mix well in the atmosphere and have long atmospheric 
lifetimes, changes in GHG emissions will affect future climate for decades to centuries.  One 
common indicator of climate change is global mean surface temperature.  This section estimates 
the response in global mean surface temperature and sea level rise projections to the estimated 
net global GHG emissions reductions associated with the Proposed Rulemaking (See Section 
2.9) for the estimated net reductions in global emissions over time by GHG).    
 
2.10.2 Estimated Projected Reductions in Global Mean Surface 
Temperatures 
 
 EPA estimated changes in projected global mean surface temperatures to 2100 using the 
MiniCAM (Mini Climate Assessment Model) integrated assessment modelXXXXXX coupled with 
                                                 
XXXXXX
 MiniCAM is a long-term, global integrated assessment model of energy, economy, agriculture and land use, 
that considers the sources of emissions of a suite of greenhouse gases (GHG's), emitted in 14 globally disaggregated 
global regions (i.e., U.S., Western Europe, China), the fate of emissions to the atmosphere, and the consequences of 
changing concentrations of greenhouse related gases for climate change.  MiniCAM begins with a representation of 
demographic and economic developments in each region and combines these with assumptions about technology 
development to describe an internally consistent representation of energy, agriculture, land-use, and economic 
developments that in turn shape global emissions.  Brenkert A, S. Smith, S. Kim, and H. Pitcher, 2003: Model 
Documentation for the MiniCAM.  PNNL-14337, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, Richland, Washington.  
For a recent report and detailed description and discussion of MiniCAM, see Clarke, L., J. Edmonds, H. Jacoby, H. 
Pitcher, J. Reilly, R. Richels, 2007.  Scenarios of Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Atmospheric Concentrations. Sub-
report 2.1A of Synthesis and Assessment Product 2.1 by the U.S. Climate Change Science Program and the 
384 
the MAGICC (Model for the Assessment of Greenhouse-gas Induced Climate Change) simple 
climate model.YYYYYY  MiniCAM was used to create the globally and temporally consistent set 
of climate relevant variables required for running MAGICC.  MAGICC was then used to 
estimate the change in the global mean surface temperature over time.  Given the magnitude of 
the estimated emissions reductions associated with the proposed rule, a simple climate model 
such as MAGICC is reasonable for estimating the climate response. 
 
 EPA applied the estimated annual GHG emissions changes for the proposal to the 
MiniCAM U.S. Climate Change Science Program (CCSP) Synthesis and Assessment Product 
baseline emissions.514  Specifically, the CO2, N2O, and CH4  annual emission changes from 
2022-2121 from Section 2.9  were applied as net reductions to the MiniCAM CCSP global 
baseline net emissions for each GHG.  Post-2121, we assumed no change in emissions from the 
baseline. This assumption is more conservative than allowing the emissions reductions to 
continue. 
 
 Table 2.10-1 provides our estimated reductions in projected global mean surface 
temperatures and sea level associated with the proposed increase in renewable fuels in 2022.  To 
capture some of the uncertainty in the climate system, we estimated the changes in projected 
temperatures and sea level across the most current Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
(IPCC) range of climate sensitivities, 1.5°C to 6.0°C.ZZZZZZ  To illustrate the time profile of the 
estimated reductions in projected global mean surface temperatures and sea level, we have also 
provided Figures 2.10-1 and 2.10-2. 
 
                                                                                                                                                             
Subcommittee on Global Change Research. Department of Energy, Office of Biological & Environmental Research, 
Washington, DC., USA, 154 pp. 
YYYYYY
 MAGICC consists of a suite of coupled gas-cycle, climate and ice-melt models integrated into a single 
framework.  The framework allows the user to determine changes in GHG concentrations, global-mean surface air 
temperature and sea-level resulting from anthropogenic emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), nitrous 
oxide (N2O), reactive gases (e.g., CO, NOx, VOCs), the halocarbons (e.g. HCFCs, HFCs, PFCs) and sulfur dioxide 
(SO2).  MAGICC emulates the global-mean temperature responses of more sophisticated coupled 
Atmosphere/Ocean General Circulation Models (AOGCMs) with high accuracy.  Wigley, T.M.L. and Raper, S.C.B. 
1992. Implications for Climate and Sea-Level of Revised IPCC Emissions Scenarios Nature 357, 293-300. Raper, 
S.C.B., Wigley T.M.L. and Warrick R.A. 1996. in Sea-Level Rise and Coastal Subsidence: Causes, Consequences 
and Strategies J.D. Milliman, B.U. Haq, Eds., Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, pp. 11-45.  
Wigley, T.M.L. and Raper, S.C.B. 2002.  Reasons for larger warming projections in the IPCC Third Assessment 
Report  J. Climate 15, 2945-2952. 
ZZZZZZ
 In IPCC reports, equilibrium climate sensitivity refers to the equilibrium change in the annual mean global 
surface temperature following a doubling of the atmospheric equivalent carbon dioxide concentration.  The IPCC 
states that climate sensitivity is “likely” to be in the range of 2°C to 4.5°C and described 3°C as a "best estimate."  
The IPCC goes on to note that climate sensitivity is “very unlikely” to be less than 1.5°C and “values substantially 
higher than 4.5°C cannot be excluded.”  IPCC WGI, 2007, Climate Change 2007 - The Physical Science Basis, 
Contribution of Working Group I to the Fourth Assessment Report of the IPCC, http://www.ipcc.ch/.  
385 
Table 2.10-1. 
 Estimated Reductions in Projected Global Mean Surface Temperature and Global Mean 
Sea Level from Baseline in 2030, 2050, 2100, and 2200 for the Proposed Standard in 2022 
 
  
1.5 2 3 4.5 6
2030 0.000 0.000 -0.001 -0.001 -0.001
2050 -0.001 -0.002 -0.002 -0.002 -0.003
2100 -0.003 -0.004 -0.005 -0.006 -0.007
2200 -0.003 -0.004 -0.006 -0.008 -0.009
2030 -0.002 -0.002 -0.003 -0.003 -0.003
2050 -0.012 -0.014 -0.017 -0.020 -0.022
2100 -0.045 -0.052 -0.063 -0.074 -0.082
2200 -0.077 -0.091 -0.114 -0.143 -0.172
Climate sensitivity
Change in global mean surface temperatures (degrees Celsius)
Change in global mean sea level rise (centimeters)
 
 
 
 The results in Table 2.10-1 and Figures 2.10-1 and 2.10-2 show small, but detectable 
reductions in the global mean surface temperature and sea level rise projections across all climate 
sensitivities.  Overall, the reductions are small relative to the IPCC’s “best estimate” temperature 
increases by 2100 of 1.8ºC to 4.0ºC.AAAAAAA Although IPCC does not issue “best estimate” sea 
level rise projections, the model-based range across SRES scenarios is 18 to 59 cm by 
2099.BBBBBBB  Both figures illustrate that the overall emissions reductions can decrease projected 
annual temperature and sea level for all climate senstitivities. This means that the distribution of 
potential temperatures in any particular year is shifting down. However, the shift is not uniform. 
The magnitude of the decrease is larger for higher climate sensitivities. Thus, the probability of a 
higher temperature or sea level in any year is lowered more than the probability of a lower 
temperature or sea level. For instance, in 2100, the reduction in projected temperature for climate 
sensitivities of 3 and 6 is approximately 65% and 140% greater than the reduction for a climate 
sensitivity of 1.5. This difference grows over time, to approximately 80% and 185% by 2200. 
The same pattern appears in the reductions in the sea level rise projections.CCCCCCC Also 
noteworthy in Figures 2.10-1 and 2.10-2, is that the size of the decreases grows over time due to 
the cumulative effect of a lower stock of GHGs in the atmosphere (i.e., concentrations).DDDDDDD  
                                                 
AAAAAAA
 IPCC WGI, 2007.  The baseline increases by 2100 from our MiniCAM-MAGICC runs are 2°C to 5°C for 
global mean surface temperature and 35 to 74 centimeters for global mean sea level. 
BBBBBBB
 “Because understanding of some important effects driving sea level rise is too limited, this report does not 
assess the likelihood, nor provide a best estimate or an upper bound for sea level rise.” IPCC Synthesis Report, p. 45 
CCCCCCC
 In 2100, the reduction in projected sea level rise for climate sensitivities of 3 and 6 is approximately 40% 
and 80% greater than the reduction for a climate sensitivity of 1.5. This difference grows over time, to 
approximately 50% and 120% by 2200. 
DDDDDDD
 For global average temperature after 2100, the growth in the size of the decrease noticeable slows. This is 
because the emissions changes associated with the policy were only estimated for 100 years. Note that even with 
emissions reductions stopping after 100 years, there continues to be a decrease in projected temperatures due to 
386 
 
The bottom line is that the risk of climate change is being lowered, as the probabilities of 
any level of temperature increase and sea level rise are reduced and the probabilities of the 
largest temperature increases and sea level rise are reduced even more. For the Final 
Rulemaking, we hope to more explicitly estimate the shapes of the distributions and the 
estimated shifts in the shapes in response to the Rulemakings. 
   
Figure 2.10-1 
Estimated Projected Reductions in Global Mean Surface Temperatures across 
Climate Sensitivities (CS) for the Proposed Standard in 2022 
 
-0.012
-0.010
-0.008
-0.006
-0.004
-0.002
0.000
19
90
20
00
20
10
20
20
20
30
20
40
20
50
20
60
20
70
20
80
20
90
21
00
21
10
21
20
21
30
21
40
21
50
21
60
21
70
21
80
21
90
22
00
22
10
22
20
22
30
22
40
22
50
D
eg
re
es
 C
el
si
u
s
CS = 1.5
CS = 2.0
CS = 3.0
CS = 4.5
CS = 6.0
  
                                                                                                                                                             
reduced inertia in the climate system from the earlier emissions reductions. However, unlike temperature, after 2100, 
the size of the decrease in sea level rise increases as the projected reduction in warming has a continued effect on ice 
melt and ocean thermal expansion. 
387 
Figure 2.10-2 
Estimated Projected Reductions in Global Mean Sea Level across Climate Sensitivities 
(CS) for the Proposed Standard in 2022 
-0.250
-0.200
-0.150
-0.100
-0.050
0.000
19
90
20
00
20
10
20
20
20
30
20
40
20
50
20
60
20
70
20
80
20
90
21
00
21
10
21
20
21
30
21
40
21
50
21
60
21
70
21
80
21
90
22
00
22
10
22
20
22
30
22
40
22
50
Ce
n
tim
e
te
rs
CS = 1.5
CS = 2.0
CS = 3.0
CS = 4.5
CS = 6.0
 
388 
Chapter 3:  Impacts of the Program on Non-GHG Pollutants 
 
 
In addition to the GHG impacts laid out in Chapter 2, we project that today’s proposal 
will affect emissions of “criteria” pollutants (those pollutants for which a National Ambient Air 
Quality Standard has been established), criteria pollutant precursors, and air toxics.  Changes in 
these emissions would derive from the direct effect of renewable fuels on the tailpipe and 
evaporative emissions of vehicles and off-road equipment; and increased renewable fuel 
production and distribution including the effect of decreases in the production and distribution of 
gasoline and diesel displaced by renewable fuel.  For today’s proposal we have focused on 
estimating the change in mass emissions for these pollutants across the entire U.S. in 2022, when 
the program is fully implemented; for the final rule we plan to conduct full-scale air quality 
modeling and health impact assessment as well.  This chapter presents national emission impacts 
for NOx, VOC, CO, PM10, PM2.5, SO2, NH3 (ammonia), benzene, 1,3-butadiene, acrolein, 
formaldehyde, acetaldehyde, naphthalene, and ethanol. This chapter also presents the 
methodology for developing these estimates and discusses air quality and health impacts 
qualitatively.  
 
 
3.1 Methodology for Calculating Non-GHG Emission Impacts 
 
 Our analysis focused on the projected impact of today’s proposed action in 2022, the first 
full year of implementation.  The impacts of the program were quantified as the difference in 
mass emissions between the proposed volumes and several reference cases, as presented in 
Section 3.2.  In order to allow assessment of total emission impacts of mandated renewable 
volumes, the main reference case presented in this analysis was the RFS1 mandate volume of 7.5 
billion gallons of renewable fuel (6.7 billion gallons ethanol).   We are also presenting impacts 
relative to the roughly 14 billion gallons of renewable fuels projected by DOE’s Annual Energy 
Outlook (AEO) 2007 (summarized in Table V.A.1-1 of the Preamble to today's proposal) to 
show the impact of today’s action incremental to the projected renewable market pre-EISA.  
Finally, we also present impacts relative to the pre-RFS1 baseline of roughly 4 billion gallons 
renewable fuel.  Due to time constraints, for the proposed rule we did not perform separate 
modeling runs for each reference case.  Rather, we focused our modeling on the impacts between 
the AEO reference case and control case, and scaled our estimates of national emissions based on 
the volumes of ethanol.  For the final rule inventories and air quality work we intend to model 
two of these reference cases - RFS1 mandate and AEO.    
 
Our analysis of non-GHG emissions impacts was comprised of a) an analysis of direct 
impacts on motor vehicles, off-road equipment and other sources from burning (or evaporating) 
renewable fuels in place of petroleum-based fuels; and b) the emissions impacts from the 
production and distribution of renewable fuels.  These analyses are discussed separately in 
Sections 3.1.1 and 3.1.2.   
 
 
3.1.1   Impact on Non-GHG Emissions from Motor Vehicles and Equipment 
 
389 
Today’s proposed volumes of renewable fuel will directly affect emissions from most 
mobile source categories, and for this analysis we have quantified the effects on exhaust and 
evaporative emissions of gasoline-fueled vehicles and equipment including passenger cars, light 
trucks, heavy trucks, motorcycles and off-road sources such as lawn mowers, recreational boats 
and all-terrain vehicles.  We have also estimated the impact of ethanol on emissions from 
portable fuel containers, and increased refueling emissions due to higher volatility of ethanol-
blended fuel and increased refueling events due to lower energy content of biofuels.  The 
emissions impacts of biodiesel were also estimated on heavy-duty diesel vehicles, assuming 
additional biodiesel would be burned by on-road sources.   
 
 A considerable source of uncertainty in estimating the emission impacts of renewable 
fuels is the effect ethanol blends will have on emissions of cars and light trucks.  Under today’s 
proposed action every gasoline vehicle and piece of equipment would be fueled on at least E10, 
and with the volumes of E85 projected necessary to meet today’s mandate, we estimate that, on 
average, flexible fueled vehicles with access to E85 would need to be using  E85 about 74 
percent of the time.   The impacts of E10 emissions have been studied for years, but current data 
on newer technology vehicles is not definitive on its impact on NOx and exhaust VOC 
emissions.  Data on E85 is limited, and the results show large variability of emission effects in 
some pollutants.  EPA is in the midst of a large-scale emission testing program to improve our 
understanding of fuel effects on Tier 2 cars and trucks, and we expect our analysis for the final 
rule to reflect the results of this program.515  In the meantime, in order to help bound the 
uncertainty of exhaust fuel effects, we calculated emissions impacts for two vehicle fuel effects 
scenarios as detailed in Section 3.1.1.2. 
 
EPA is in the process of updating its mobile source emission platform to the Motor 
Vehicle Emissions Simulator (MOVES).  For the analysis of gasoline-fueled highway vehicles, a 
pre-draft version of MOVES was used to generate national inventories based on the fuel supply 
scenarios determined for the RFS2.  Although the model is not complete, we decided to use a 
pre-release version of MOVES for this analysis to begin to reflect significant updates in 
emissions from MOBILE6.   As the other mobile source categories in MOVES were still under 
development at the time of this analysis, onroad diesel vehicles and all off-road  equipment 
emissions were calculated with the National Mobile Inventory Model (NMIM) model, a platform 
which generates emission inventories based on EPA’s MOBILE6 and NONROAD models.   
 
The development of vehicle and equipment emission impact estimates for today’s 
proposal required:  a) developing fuel supply inputs at the county level for the 2005 base year 
and 2022 reference and control cases which accounted for the projected change in fuel properties 
due to today’s proposed action; b) developing individual vehicle fuel effects; and c) running 
MOVES and NMIM to produce raw inventory estimates and post-processing these results as 
needed to account for different baselines, to apply “off model” corrections, or to estimate 
impacts not accounted for in the models.  Each of these steps are detailed in the following 
sections   
 
 
3.1.1.1 Fuel Inputs  
 
390 
 As inputs to our emissions modeling, we developed a detailed profile of fuels for each 
modeling case. We prepared county-level databases of fuel properties and fuel market shares for 
the 2005 base case and the 2022 AEO reference case and 2022 control case.  These county-level 
databases were applied in both NMIM and MOVES for consistency in fuel inputs across the 
different mobile source categories. 
 
The 2005 base case fuel properties were derived from 2005 historical data.  These data 
included national summer and winter fuels surveys, studies that tracked the total amount of 
ethanol produced for use in gasoline each year, and Reformulated Gasoline (RFG) 
measurements.  Additional data were available on the fuel properties of all gasoline produced 
and imported annually by refiners, and on the distribution of gasoline to and from Petroleum 
Administration for Defense Districts (PADDs).  Where survey data was available, it was used to 
determine a county's fuel properties for summer and winter.  Where survey data was not 
available, fuel properties were set to equal the average fuel properties in that PADD.  Special 
adjustments were made to some counties to account for local gasoline volatility control programs 
and winter oxygenated gasoline programs.   
 
For the 2022 reference and control cases, the 2005 base case fuel properties were 
adjusted to account for implementation of  other fuel regulations and to account for increased 
ethanol use.  There is a greater percentage of ethanol in the 2022 AEO reference case than in the 
2005 base case because MTBE has been replaced with ethanol and because of AEO projected 
growth in ethanol production for 2022.  For this analysis, ethanol was allocated to the state and 
county level based on the economics of distribution and blending, as well as other factors.  Refer 
to Section 1.7.1 of this document for details.   The 2022 control case models the requirements of 
EISA, in which approximately 34 bgal of ethanol are present in the fuel supply for 2022.  The 
control case models this by assigning E10 gasoline to all U.S. counties, and E85 based on the 
economics of distribution, blending and other factors.   
 
In general, future fuel properties in both the reference and control cases were adjusted to 
account for widespread increases in ethanol under the assumption that, while historically ethanol 
has been splash blended in conventional gasoline (CG), it will be match-blended (i.e., the 
changes associated with ethanol addition will be accounted for by refiners when producing the 
base gasoline) by the timeframe of our analyses.  We believe this is reasonable given that there 
will be a large (and thus more geographically predictable) volume of ethanol used in gasoline, 
and that certain property changes that take place when ethanol is blended (such as octane 
increase) could be financially beneficial to refiners if able to be assumed when producing the 
base gasoline.  Thus, we adjusted aromatics, olefins, T50, and T90 fuel parameters by first 
backing out the effects of any existing oxygenate (by reverse dilution), and then re-adjusting the 
properties for ethanol blends based on refinery modeling done for the RFS1 rulemaking that 
projected how gasoline properties were likely to change given widespread use of ethanol.  Table 
3.1-1 shows the adjustment factors used per volume percent ethanol blended.  RVP was 
increased 1.0 psi wherever ethanol was present in conventional gasoline unless there was a state 
constraint. 
 
391 
Table 3.1-1.  Adjustment Factors for 2022 Conventional Gasoline 
 Aromatics Olefins E200 E300 
Change per vol% ethanol added -0.464 0.019 0.909 0.063 
 
For RFG areas, refiners already account for the blending of ethanol when producing the 
base gasoline, and therefore the properties are not predicted to change in the same ways as for 
CG.  We used refinery modeling results for each PADD (produced along with those above for 
CG) to project the properties of fuel in RFG areas accounting for increased ethanol in the 
national gasoline pool.  RFG properties used in the reference and control cases in 2022 are 
shown here in Table 3.1-2.  The 2022 reference and control cases also incorporate reductions in 
gasoline sulfur resulting from Tier 2 regulations.  It should be noted that fuel benzene levels 
presented in this table are higher than what they should be, given impacts of the 2007 mobile 
source air toxics (MSAT) rule, which mandates a 0.62% fuel benzene standard.516  For the final 
rule, we will use more recent refinery modeling, which provides better estimates of benzene 
levels with implementation of the MSAT rule.   
 
 
Table 3.1-2.  2022 Reformulated Gasoline Properties by PADD 
PADD RVP 
(psi) 
Aromatics 
(vol%) 
Benzene 
(vol%) 
Olefins 
(vol%) 
E200 E300 
Summer 
1 7.0 20.1 0.70 13.9 56.0 83.5 
2 7.1 17.9 0.76 17.3 54.1 81.8 
3 7.0 20.0 0.76 14.1 52.0 87.5 
5 6.8 22.5 0.61 5.7 54.5 86.2 
Winter 
1 12.8 19.6 0.71 15.3 60.8 83.2 
2 13.0 17.8 0.64 12.3 63.9 79.5 
3 11.8 21.2 0.64 12.6 53.4 87.5 
5 12.6 23.7 0.61 5.7 58.2 86.2 
 
 
For the control case, we also modeled Flexible-Fueled Vehicles running on E85.  For 
most emissions, these effects were modeled using fuel adjustments as described in Section 
3.1.1.2, below.  However, in MOVES, vapor venting emissions and sulfate emissions are 
calculated directly from the RVP and sulfur level of the fuel.  These properties were derived for 
E85 fuels from the properties of the same county's E10 fuel in the Control Case, with the RVP 
adjusted to account for the lower vapor pressure of E85.517 and the sulfur level adjusted to 15% 
of that of the original E10 fuel in that county.  The predicted sulfur adjustment underestimates 
the actual sulfur content of the fuel because it neglects the sulfur content of ethanol (about 1.5 
ppm) and it does not account for any refinery increases in sulfur in the base gasoline; thus the 
benefit attributed to sulfate reductions in the E85 case may be overestimated.   
 
For each of the modeled scenarios, fuel information was input into an NMIM database 
and used for NMIM runs.  For MOVES runs, the NMIM databases were converted into MOVES 
databases using a conversion program.  To reduce time needed for MOVES runs, we reduced the 
392 
size of the MOVES fuel database by processing the database with a "binner" program that 
grouped fuels with similar properties and assigned each group to a single fuel formulation 
identification number and a single set of fuel properties. 
 
3.1.1.2 Effect of Fuels on Non-GHG Emissions from Vehicle & Equipment  
 
The average effect of renewable fuels on an individual vehicle basis, based on available 
research, are the foundation of the emission impact assessment.  This section contains discussion 
of the effects used in the emission impact assessment for E10 on gasoline vehicles and 
equipment, for E85 on gasoline vehicles, and for biodiesel.   
 
3.1.1.2.1 On-road Gasoline Vehicle E10 Effects 
 
3.1.1.2.1.1 Exhaust Emissions 
 
A 10 percent ethanol blend can affect exhaust emissions from vehicles and off-road 
equipment.  A comprehensive analysis of E10 impacts on exhaust emissions was undertaken for 
the RFS1 rule, as documented in Chapter 3 of the RFS1 Regulatory Impact Analysis.518  This 
analysis considered previous EPA work in coming up with a so-called “Predictive Model” to 
assess California’s request for an oxygenate waiver in 2000, as well as test data from several test 
programs conducted by the auto trade associations (AAM/AIAM), ExxonMobil, Toyota, and the 
Mexican Petroleum Institute.  This assessment concluded that for Tier 1 and later vehicles 
(nominally model year 1996 and later, comprising the majority of the fleet in 2022) there was not 
enough consistency across these studies to confidently predict the impact of oxygenated fuel on 
exhaust HC and NOx emissions.   As a result the RFS1 analysis carried forward two sets of fuel 
effects: a “primary” analysis assuming no effect of oxygen on NMHC and NOx emissions from 
Tier 1 and later vehicles, and a “sensitivity” analysis which applied EPA’s Predictive Model 
effects to Tier 1 and later vehicles.   
 
We are the midst of a large scale testing effort, scheduled for completion in 2009, aimed 
at quantifying the effects of several fuel parameters, including ethanol and other fuel properties 
impacted by the blending of ethanol into gasoline, on exhaust and evaporative emissions from 
Tier 2 vehicles.519  It is our expectation that data from this program will be used in our analysis 
for the final rule.  For this proposal we are analyzing two ethanol effect scenarios: “less 
sensitive” based on the “primary” case used in RFS1, and “more sensitive” based on the RFS1 
“sensitivity” case.  While the effects of E10 on individual vehicles will vary depending on 
properties of the fuel (e.g., RVP, distillation, and aromatic content),  Table 3.1-3 demonstrates 
the effects used for conventional and reformulated gasoline based on the fuel properties derived 
from Tables 3.1-1 and 3.1-2.    The effects shown for NOx, HC and toxics were applied to only 
Tier 0 vehicles (mid 1990’s and older) in the “less sensitive” case, and to all vehicles in the 
“more sensitive” case.   
 
 
 
 
393 
Table 3.1-3.  Exhaust Effect of E10 Relative to E0 a 
Pollutant Source CG RFG 
Exhaust HC (VOC) -7.4% -9.7% 
NOx 
EPA Predictive 
Models 7.7% 7.3% 
COb MOBILE6.2 -11% / -19% -36% 
Exhaust Benzene -24.9%  -38.9% 
Formaldehyde 6.7%  2.3% 
Acetaldehyde 156.8% 173.7% 
1,3-Butadiene 
EPA Predictive 
and Complex 
Models  
-13.2%  6.1% 
aAssumes summer (July) conditions 
bThe first figure shown applies to normal emitters; the second applies to high emitters. 
   
3.1.1.2.1.2 Evaporative Emissions 
 
3.1.1.2.1.2.1 Permeation 
 
E10 affects evaporative emissions from gasoline vehicles due to the increased volatility 
of E10 blends, the increased permeation of fuel vapors through tanks and hoses, and the 
increased vapor emissions due to the lower molecular weight of E10.  Each of these effects were 
modeled using the draft MOVES model, which separates permeation emissions from vapor 
venting emissions to allow better accounting for these different processes.    
 
Permeation effects were developed from CRC’s E-65 program520, which measured 
evaporative emissions from ten fuel systems that were removed from the vehicles on E0 and 
E5.7 fuels; fuel systems were removed to ensure that all evaporative emissions measured were 
from permeation of the fuel through the different components of the fuel system.  For this 
analysis, we estimated the effect by calculating the percent increase in average emissions from 
all vehicles between E0 and E5.7 fuels over the 65 to 105 degree Fahrenheit diurnal test.  This 
value was 46 percent.   In order to estimate the effect at E10 we simply ratioed this result by 1.75 
(10/5.7), resulting in a 79 percent increase applied to cars and light trucks from all model years.    
 
 This approach heavily weights the emission contribution of older vehicles in the test 
program, and, in conjunction with lower emission rates for vehicles certified to Enhanced 
Evaporative and later standards in MOVES, may underestimate the impact of E10 on permeation 
from newer vehicles.  The limited data on  vehicles certified to Enhanced Evaporative standards 
showed an increase of  232 percent, versus 46 percent for all vehicles.  We expect CRC to 
release a significant body of new E-77 program permeation data on later model vehicles before 
the end of 2008.  We plan to revisit our permeation emissions estimates when these results are 
available.   
 
3.1.1.2.1.2.2 Tank Vapor Venting 
 
In MOVES, tank vapor venting (TVV) emissions from controlled vehicles are modeled 
as a function of uncontrolled vapor generation (TVG), which is affected by both ethanol content 
and RVP according to the formula (Reddy, 1989): 
 
394 
 
 
where A, B, and C are coefficient dependent on ethanol level as described in the table 3.1-4, and 
Tx and T2 are the temperatures at the start and end point of the vapor generation period.   
 
Table 3.1-4.  Tank Vapor Venting Coefficients (at sea level) 
 E0 E10 
Constant   
A 0.0082 0.0088 
B 0.2357 0.2056 
C 0.0409 0.0430 
 
In MOVES, the relationship between TVV and TVG is a function of vehicle model year, 
temperature rise, and whether RVP is held constant or increased with the additional of ethanol.  
For example, for the 1978-1995 model year group over a temperature rise of 65 to 105 degrees F, 
the increase in tank vapor venting emissions is 6 percent for E10 relative to E0 with no change in 
RVP.  However, the same scenario a 1.0 psi increase results in an increase in tank vapor venting 
emissions of 46 percent.  The national impacts presented in this analysis reflect a composite 
effect of the mix of vehicle model years in 2022, hourly temperature differentials by county, and 
county-specific fuel property changes with the addition of ethanol.    
 
3.1.1.2.2 On-road Gasoline vehicle E85 effects 
 
As discussed in Section 1.7.1, because ethanol blended into E10 everywhere in the U.S. 
would account for less than half of the mandated ethanol volumes, we project that nearly 30 
billion gallons of E85 will be required to fulfill the mandate.  E85 is by no means a new fuel - 
automakers have been producing flex fuel vehicles (FFVs) capable of operating on E85 since the 
early 1990s.  Nonetheless, there are relatively few sources of data available comparing the 
emissions of non-oxygenated (E0) and high-level (E85) ethanol blended fuels either for older 
(Tier 0 and 1), and particularly for current technology (i.e. Tier 2) vehicles.  Understanding the 
emissions effects of E85 on the latter group of vehicles is of particular importance since Tier 2 
FFVs will dominate the FFV fleet in future years.  For this reason, we focused our analysis for 
this proposed rulemaking on newer technology (i.e. LEV and later) vehiclesEEEEEEE.  
 
For this analysis we identified three recent data sources that investigate the effects of E85 
on current technology (i.e. Tier 2 and similar) vehiclesFFFFFFF.521, 522, 523  Two of these sources are 
test programs conducted by Southwest Research Institute and Environment Canada, and the third 
is EPA certification data.   This section briefly describes each data source and highlights the key 
findings, and explains how these data were used to generate E85 effects.  
 
In 2006, Southwest Research Institute (SwRI) conducted a study for EPA on three model 
year 2005 Tier 2 FFVs (bins 5 and 8) operating on several gasoline and ethanol blends.  This 
                                                 
EEEEEEE
 For a discussion of the effect of  E85 on older technology vehicles, see Chapter 3 of the RFS RIA available 
here: http://www.epa.gov/otaq/renewablefuels/420r07004chap3.pdf  
FFFFFFF
 EPA is aware of several test programs, either planned or underway, by CRC and others that may provide 
additional test data for future fuel effects modeling and rulemaking support. 
)( 2* CTCTRVPB eeAeTVG x −=
395 
study was primarily focused on the impacts of fuel ethanol content and reduced ambient test 
temperature (tests were conducted at 75ºF and 20ºF) on VOC and PM emissions.  Multiple fuel 
blends were evaluated in this program, although for this analysis we will focus only on E0 and 
E85 emissions at 75º F.  At this test temperature, Tier 2 certification fuel was used as the non-
oxygenated test fuel (E0) as well as the base gasoline for the splash-blended E10 and E85 fuels.  
Additionally, EPA certification “cold CO” wintertime gasoline was used for reduced ambient 
temperature (20 ºF) testing – used alone (E0) and as the base fuel for wintertime E10 and E70 
blends.  This base gasoline has a higher RVP than its summertime equivalent, which is necessary 
to ensure proper fuel vaporization at lower ambient temperatures.  Repeat tests were conducted 
for the 20ºF tests on the winter fuel blends, but no repeats were run for 75ºF testing.  In addition 
to the regulated pollutants, SwRI measured CO2, CH4, Benzene, 1-3 Butadiene, Naphthalene, 
Acetaldehyde, Acrolein, and Ethanol.  This study saw reductions in PM 2.5, Benzene, and 1,3-
Butadiene of 55% - 70% with E85 relative to E0.  HC emissions increased while NOx and CO 
decreased.  Emissions of Methane, formaldehyde, and acetaldehyde were found to increase 
significantly with E85 use.  Table 3.1-6 summarizes the average percent change in emissions 
with E85 vs. E0.  This table also compares the findings of this dataset with the other two 
programs described below. 
 
Environment Canada released a report in 2005 in which an NLEV and an interim non-
Tier 2 vehicle were tested on Tier 2 certification fuel and a commercially available E85 blend.  
Repeat tests were conducted in this study so that each vehicle was tested three times on each 
fuel.  The pollutants measured include NMOG, NMHC, CO, NOx, CO2, CH4, N20, Benzene, 
1,3-Butadiene, Acetaldehyde, Formaldehyde, Acrolein, and Ethanol, among others.  The results, 
summarized in Table 3.1-6  showed statistically significant reductions in CO and NOx (-48% 
and -40%, respectively) when switching from E0 to E85.  E85 caused NMOG emissions to 
increase in one vehicle and decrease in the other.  Toxics reductions were of a similar order of 
magnitude as the vehicles tested in the SwRI study discussed above 
 
 EPA’s Certification and Fuel Economy Information System (CFEIS) database was 
accessed to identify data from five model year 2006 Tier 2 vehicles (bins 5, 8, and 9) tested on 
both E85 and Tier 2 certification gasoline.  The E85 blend tested here was 85% denatured 
ethanol splash blended with 15% Tier 2 certification gasoline.  Each vehicle was only tested once 
on each fuel. Weighted FTP results were reported for the regulated pollutants (except PM) as 
well as CO2, Acetaldehyde, and Ethanol (Formaldehyde, Acetaldehyde, and Ethanol were only 
measured for tests where E85 was used; therefore these are expressed as fractions of NMOG 
here).  This data indicates that E85 causes a slight increase in NMOG emissions, a slight 
decrease in NOx and CO2, and significant reductions in CO.  The average percent change in 
each pollutant for these vehicles when operated on E85 is shown in Table 3.1-5, below. 
 
 
396 
Table 3.1-5. 
Effect of E85 on LEV and Later Per-mile Exhaust Emissions Relative to 
Conventional Gasoline: Percent change separated by data source 
 EPA - CFEIS EPA - SwRI Env. Canada 
NMOG  10% 87% 5% 
CO -34% -15% -48% 
NOx -3% -42% -40% 
Benzene NA -61% -65% 
1,3 Butadiene NA -66% -74% 
Acetaldehyde 12% of NMOG 5600% 3121% 
Formaldehyde 2% of NMOG 116% 98% 
Acrolein  
(E85 mg/mile 
emissions) NA 0.023 0.010 
Unburned Ethanol  
(E85 mg/mile 
emissions) 
28.3 (55% of 
NMOG) 
25.4 (33% of 
NMOG) 
34.6 (48% of 
NMOG) 
PM 2.5 NA -68% NA 
 
 
Viewed independently, each study provides only limited insight on the effects of E85 on 
emissions relative to E0.  Table 3.1-6 shows that while changes in some pollutants compare 
reasonably well between studies, others can vary widely.  This makes it difficult to determine 
quantitative trends in emissions, since calculating an average percent change in emissions across 
all three studies does nothing to address the variability of the test data.  Without this assessment 
of variability there is no way to estimate the statistical significance of the reported values.  Only 
the Environment Canada conducted the repeat tests necessary to assess the test-to-test variability 
of a given vehicle, and none of the studies tested enough vehicles to confidently state that their 
findings can be applied to the Tier 2 FFV fleet as a whole.  In this case it is desirable to combine 
the test data into a single dataset and apply a statistical modeling technique that allows one to 
estimate the average effect of E85 observed across the vehicles tested and to assess whether 
those changes are statistically significant.   
 
Combining the data from these three studies results in dataset that is still quite small 
(only 26 unique tests) and is by no means ideal. This clearly illustrates the need for additional 
testing in this area.  In the absence of such data, we feel that combining the data is warranted 
since the majority of the vehicles employ similar emissions control technology and the base 
gasoline used in each study was Tier 2 certification fuel.  In the SwRI and EPA CFEIS datasets, 
the E85 fuels were splash blended from denatured ethanol and Tier 2 gasoline.  In the case of 
Environment Canada, their E85 was purchased from a commercial distributor, so its physical 
properties are slightly different than the splash blended E85 fuels.  However, when 
approximately 82% of the fuel is a single compound (ethanol), the variability in the remaining 
fuel properties is small enough to consider the E85 fuels from all three data sources to be 
substantially similar for the purposes of this analysis.  In other words, no distinction was made 
between the E0 and E85 fuels used in study A vs. the E0 and E85 fuels used in study B. 
 
397 
The fact that Environment Canada tested non-Tier 2 vehicles is noteworthy.  The 2004 
Chrysler Sebring was an interim non-Tier 2 bin 8 vehicle.  Despite its name, however, the 
standard is equivalent to the final Tier 2 bin 8 FTP standards in all areas but the full useful life 
(120K miles vs. 100K miles).  In fact this vehicle was cleaner than required by the standard, with 
observed emissions on E0 at the level of a Tier 2 bin 7 vehicle.  The second vehicle tested by 
Environment Canada was a 2002 Dodge Caravan certified to the NLEV LEV LDT level.  The 
standards at this certification level are considerably more relaxed than Tier 2 levels for some 
pollutants but not others.  While these vehicles share the same NMOG certification standard 
(0.100 g/mi), the CO standard is roughly 30% higher and the NOx standard nearly 4 times higher 
than the Tier 2 bin 8 level.  As a result of this difference in standards, the Caravan emitted about 
20% more CO and 2.5 times more NOx than the Sebring.  NMOG emissions were nearly the 
same for both vehicles with non-oxygenated gasoline.  On a relative scale, both vehicles 
experienced similar percent changes in emissions between E0 and E85.  The Sebring emitted 
more ethanol with E85 than did the Caravan, resulting in a higher E85 NMOG emissions factor 
for that vehicle.  For the purposes of this analysis, we did not differentiate either of these 
vehicles from the Tier 2 vehicles tested in the other studies. 
 
The fact that tests were conducted in different laboratories is of little consequence since 
we are attempting to quantify the average effect of E85 across individual vehicles, not 
necessarily comparing the results (in absolute terms) of one vehicle to another.  Therefore any 
laboratory bias is implicitly included in an individual vehicle’s test results and does not confound 
the relative effects of fuel on emissions for that vehicle.   
 
The statistical software package SPSS (version 9.0.1) was used  to create a univariate 
linear model using the natural log of a given pollutant (CO2, NOX, etc) as the dependent variable, 
the fuel terms as a fixed variable, and the vehicle term as a random variable.  This is a so-called 
mixed model since it includes both fixed and random variablesGGGGGGG.  Only the first order 
(linear) fuel and vehicle terms were considered in this model since three fuel levels would have 
been needed to assess nonlinear fuel effects.  The model also excluded the vehicle by fuel 
interaction term.  This approach was taken since our primary focus is to identify the main effect 
of fuel on the natural log of emissions (the dependent variable).  Including the vehicle by fuel 
interaction would have told us something about the sensitivity of each individual vehicle to 
changes in fuel, but for this analysis we are more concerned with the average effect of fuel across 
all vehicles in the dataset.  Therefore we removed the interaction from the model since including 
it on such a small dataset would confound the main fuel effect and inappropriately constrain the 
model. 
 
The results of the statistical analysis are summarized in Table 3.1-6.  Statistically 
significant results are shown in bold.    
 
                                                 
GGGGGGG
 A sensitivity analysis was performed designating the vehicle term as a fixed variable (a fixed-effect model) 
but the results were identical to those with the mixed model so only these results are presented here. 
398 
Table 3.1-6: Combined E85 effects over 3 Programs  
VOC                                      
E85 change from 
E0 
NMOG 8.6% 
CO -38.7% 
NOx -20.9% 
Toxics (mg/mile)   
Benzene -59.6% 
1,3 Butadiene -61.2% 
Acetaldehyde 3739.8% 
Formaldehyde 62.3% 
Acrolein (mg/mile emission w/ E85)   
Unburned Ethanol (mg/mile emission w/ E85)   
PM 2.5 -68.2% 
  
Bold = statistically significant at 95% CI  
 
As shown in the table above, the effect of E85 on emissions was significant for all 
pollutants of interest except for NOx and NMOG.  For NOx, the p-value is 0.83 and for NMOG 
the p-value is 0.55, meaning these results are only significant at the 17% and 45% confidence 
levels (respectively).  While relatively speaking, NOx is more statistically significant than 
NMOG, for our purposes they both can only be used qualitatively.  Directionally, the NMOG 
increase and NOx decrease are consistent with the observations of each individual study and 
agree with basic engineering judgment.  The variability in the magnitude of these changes, 
however, is what weakens the statistical significance.  Had additional observations been made, 
these results may have become more statistically significant.  For our “more sensitive” fuel 
effects case, only those effects shown to be statistically significant were applied in the analysis.  
No E85 effects were applied for the “less sensitive” case. 
 
 The “more sensitive” case also included a 50 percent reduction in evaporative emissions 
with use of E85 based on results from one vehicle from CRC’s E-65 evaporative permeation 
program.  For the final rule we expect to verify the change in evaporative emissions with E85 
based on results from ongoing EPA and CRC testing.   
 
Data from the analyses discussed above, and an additional dataset from a 1995 test 
program conducted by EPA’s Office of Research and Development, were used to develop inputs 
for MOVES, in order to model E85 impacts on air toxics inventories.  Since MOBILE6 does not 
model air toxics for E85, ratios were developed to apply to E85 hydrocarbon or PM mass (Table 
3.1-7).  The exhaust ratios for all pollutants except naphthalene were obtained from data on 
seven vehicles from the 1995 test program in EPA’s Office of Research and Development, along 
with the previously discussed 2007 test program at Southwest Research Institute,524  and the 
2005 test program at Environment Canada.525, 526  The data from the ORD test program is 
unpublished, but is available in the docket for this rule.  Napthalene inputs for were derived from 
estimates from E10 values based on dilution of fuel with ethanol.  The only source of data on 
evaporative emissions were results of hot soak tests from the Auto/Oil Air Quality Improvement 
Research Program.527   
399 
 
 
Table 3.1-7.  Toxic to THC/PM ratios used for E85 Fuel in MOVES 
Pollutant Exhaust/Ratio Type  Evaporative/Ratio Type 
Benzene 0.0036/THC 0.0054/THC 
1,3-Butadiene 0.0005/THC N.A. 
Acetaldehyde 0.0673/THC N.A. 
Formaldehyde 0.0093/THC N.A. 
Acrolein 0.0002/THC N.A. 
Ethanol 0.3316/THC 0.6123/THC 
Naphthalene 0.0126/PM 0.00006/THC 
 
 
3.1.1.2.2 Spark-Ignited Off-Road Engines 
 
Effects of E10 relative to E0 on exhaust as well as fuel tank and hose permeation 
emissions from gasoline-fueled off-road engines are contained in EPA’s NONROAD model, 
based on limited data.  The effects on exhaust HC, NOx, and CO are shown in Table 3.1-8.  
Effects on tank and hose permeation emissions vary by equipment type and were recently 
updated to reflect new information on uncontrolled emissions and their control due to recently 
finalized new standards.528  For most small spark-ignition engines and recreational marine 
engines in 2022 E10 is estimated to double the tank and hose permeation emissions. There can 
also be increases in diurnal and refueling emissions with E10 if the fuel volatility of the blend is 
allowed to be greater than E0.  These volatility effects are accounted for in the NMIM model that 
has the county-specific fuel properties that were used to generate the emission inventory impacts 
for this proposal presented below in section 3.2.  
      
Table 3.1-8. 
Exhaust Effect of Ethanol (E10) on Spark-Ignited Gasoline Emissions 
 4 stroke 2 stroke 
HC exhaust -15.75%   -2.1%   
NOx +40.25% +65.1% 
CO -21.7% -22.75% 
 
EPA, DOE and ARB are in the midst of additional testing on off-road engines that will be 
used to update our analysis for the final rule.   
 
3.1.1.2.4 Biodiesel Effects on Diesel Emissions 
 
As discussed in Appendix A to this RIA, we investigated the emission impacts on NOx, 
PM, HC, and CO of 20 volume percent biodiesel fuels on emissions from heavy-duty diesel 
vehicles.529  Average NOx emissions were found to increase 2.2 percent, while PM, HC, and CO 
were found to decrease 15.6 percent, 13.8 percent, and 14.1 percent, respectively, for all test 
cycles run on 20 volume percent soybean-based biodiesel fuel (Table 3.1-9).  These results are 
400 
generally consistent with the exhaust emission impacts for heavy-duty, in-use diesel engines 
found in our previous work on this subject.530   For our estimate of biodiesel impacts on toxics 
we applied the HC emission change from Table 3.1-9 to toxic emissions.   
 
 
Table 3.1-9.  BD20 Emission impacts  
 Percent change in emissions 
NOx 
PM 
HC 
CO 
+2.2% 
-15.6% 
-13.8% 
-14.1% 
 
  
3.1.1.3 Non-GHG Emission Impact Scenarios Analyzed 
 
As discussed in Section 3.1.1.2.1, two sets of fuel effects scenarios were analyzed in the 
RFS1 rule in order to bound the uncertainty in ethanol effects on on-road gasoline engines.  For 
today’s proposal we have carried forward these scenarios, but have expanded the sensitivity case 
to consider the impacts of E85 as well.   Fuel effects cases differ only in how on-road gasoline 
exhaust emissions are modeled.  For all other sources discussed above – on-road gasoline 
evaporative and refueling emissions, off-road SI, portable fuel containers, and heavy-duty diesel 
emissions – the same fuel effects, as summarized in the preceding sections, were used.  The 
differences between the fuel effect cases are summarized below:  
 
1) “Less Sensitive”:  No exhaust VOC or NOx emission impact on Tier 1 and later vehicles 
due to E10, and no impact due to E85.  This was the “primary” case analyzed in the RFS1 
rule, and results in only pre-Tier 1 vehicles having an effect from E10 
2) “More Sensitive”:  VOC and NOx E10 emission impacts based on test data on newer 
technology vehicles, as presented in Table 3.1-3, and the statistically significant E85 
effects that were presented in Table 3.1-6.   
 
3.1.1.4 Non-GHG Emission Impact Calculation Methodology 
 
3.1.1.4.1  On-Road Gasoline 
 
Emissions from gasoline highway vehicles were generated with a preliminary draft 
version of EPA's new MOVES model.   This model is current being prepared for release in draft 
form by the end of 2008. Although we applied a  preliminary pre-draft version of the model and 
we anticipate changes between the version used for the NPRM analysis and the version to be 
released publicly (and the final rule version), our analysis does reflect significant updates in 
gasoline vehicle emissions from MOBILE6.  Exhaust emission rates for HC, CO and NOx were 
developed based on an analysis of state inspection/maintenance and roadside remote sensing data 
from millions of vehicles.531  Emissions of particulate matter are based on EPA's recent Kansas 
City gasoline PM study.532,533  Evaporative emission rates have been updated based on extensive 
evaporative testing conducted by EPA and the Coordinating Research Council (CRC) since the 
401 
release of MOBILE6, including investigations quantifying the effects of ethanol on permeation 
emissions534.   For this assessment of toxics, MOVES applies toxic ratios from the MOBILE6.2 
model to updated MOVES HC estimates within the model.535   
 
Details of how MOVES was configured and run are documented in a report contained in 
the docket.536  To summarize, a separate MOVES was run configured for each year (2005 and 
2022) and fuel effect case (primary and sensitivity) for the reference case (AEO reference) and 
control case.  Each of these runs required a unique “run specification” file and bundle of input 
databases to allow modeling of differences in analysis year, fuel supplies, and fuel effects.  For 
example, for the 2005 base year run, MOVES was configured to run with the estimates of fuel 
formulations and market shares by county in 2005, using the inputs developed as discussed in 
Section 3.1.1.1, and two sets of fuel effects to reflect the “less sensitive” and “more sensitive” 
cases.  Reference and control case runs in 2022 were run with estimates of fuel formulations and 
market shares for both cases by county as we project in 2022, again with the two fuel effects 
cases.   MOVES was only run for the AEO reference case, so results relative to other reference 
cases (i.e. RFS1 mandate or baseline) were based on scaling the differences between the AEO 
reference and control cases.    
 
  MOVES allows different levels of pre-aggregation depending on the level of resolution 
needed.   For regional inventory applications, the finest level of aggregation the model can run is 
by county for each hour of the day, which maximizes the influence of inputs such as county-level 
fuel effects, hourly temperatures and activity patterns; however, since running the model at this 
level for the entire nation over multiple years and scenarios would be time prohibitive, the model 
was run at a higher level of aggregation to reduce run time.  Exhaust emissions were run at the 
state/month aggregation for all cases, meaning that county-level inputs were aggregated to a 
single state average before being processed into MOVES, and hourly inputs were aggregated into 
an average monthly value.  Likewise evaporative emissions were run at the state/hour level of 
aggregation since evaporative emissions are required to be run at the hourly level.  For further 
time savings runs were performed in January and July only and weighted to approximate an 
entire year – for most pollutants we simply used the number of days in each month to extrapolate 
to the full year (approximately 50/50), however due to the higher temperature sensitivity of PM 
care was taken to develop weighting factors that better approximated a yearly total based on a 
month-by-month run (January/July weightings of approximately 30/70).  While aggregation does 
lose some resolution in the overall emission results, test runs indicated that emissions differences 
are within a few percent of fully disaggregated runs and acceptable for estimating the emission 
impacts of the control programs.   
 
MOVES categorizes vehicles according to use type; for this analysis the majority of the 
focus was on light vehicles, which would include the MOVES use types Passenger Car, 
Passenger Truck and Light Commercial Truck.    To account for larger gasoline vehicles which 
will also have emissions affected by the change in gasoline formulations, we also ran additional 
MOVES use types:   school buses, single-unit trucks, and motor homes.  For the purposes of this 
rulemaking, the number of gasoline-powered refuse trucks, transit buses, intercity buses and 
combination trucks was determined to be negligible, and they were omitted from the MOVES 
runs to reduce run time.  Because the PM10 calculation inputs for MOVES were incomplete, PM 
10 was calculated outside the model as PM2.5 times a correction factor of 1.086. 
402 
 
 Because at the time of this analysis the MOVES module for automating the calculation of 
E85 emissions from flexible fueled vehicles was not complete, we calculated the emission 
impact of E85 use by running MOVES for all E85 and for all E10 and then weighted the 
emissions in a post-processing step.  To run MOVES for "all E85", we created a special set of 
MOVES input files that essentially set all gasoline vehicle to run on E85.  We created MOVES 
fuel supply and fuel adjustment tables that applied multiplicative E85 fuel adjustments from 
Table 3.1-7 to all gasoline vehicle emissions.HHHHHHH  Because sulfate and vapor venting 
emissions are calculated using fuel properties (sulfur level and RVP) rather than fuel 
adjustments, we also created a specific MOVES table of E85 fuel properties as described in 
section 3.1.1.1   In a post-processing step, we calculated a weighted average of the "all E85" 
results and the 2022 control case, sensitivity analysis results (called "all E10" results here).  We 
chose to use the "sensitivity" results for consistency with its premise that modern vehicles are 
responsive to changes in fuel characteristics.   The all E85 and all E10 results were weighted 
together by state, model year, and vehicle type using a weighting factor that was the product of 
the FFV fraction and the E85 market share, where FFV fraction is the fraction of that vehicle 
type and model year that are projected to be E85 flexible-fueled vehicles, and the E85 
marketshare is the state fraction of FFV energy use that we project will be provided by E85.  
These fractions were generated using the assumptions described in the sections in Chapter 1,  
Section 1.7.1 pertaining to Primary FFV Growth Assumptions and Projected Growth in E85 
Access.   We performed this calculation for passenger cars and trucks and light commercial 
trucks only since the number of heavy-duty vehicles using E85 is expected to be small.   
 
Toxic emissions are in development for MOVES; for this analysis some post-processing 
was required to generate complete inventory estimates.  Specific toxic:HC  ratios by fuel 
formulation, vehicle class and model year were developed from a series of MOBILE6 runs and 
fed into MOVES, which applied these ratios to HC emissions to produce emissions of benzene, 
acetaldehyde, 1-3 butadiene, formaldehyde and acrolein for all of these cases analyzed.  
Napthelene from heavy-duty vehicles was ratioed to PM 10 in MOVES.  For light-duty vehicles, 
naphthalene emssions were calculated as the sum of PM 2.5 elemental carbon and PM 2.5 
organic carbon emissions times a ratio of 0.088.  Aggregate ratios from the running emissions 
were also applied to start emissions to develop overall toxic emission inventories.  E85 emissions 
were calculated in MOVES using the factors in Table 3-1.7.   
 
3.1.1.4.2 Off-Road Gasoline 
 
Emissions from nonroad gasoline equipment were developed by running the National 
Mobile Inventory Model (NMIM), a consolidated emissions modeling system for EPA’s 
MOBILE6 and NONROAD models.537  The key feature of NMIM is a national county database 
(NCD), which includes county-level information on temperatures, fuel properties, equipment 
populations, etc.  NMIM runs MOBILE6 and NONROAD based on information in the NCD.  
The NCD used to produce these inventories was updated as part of the 2005 National Emission 
Inventory (NEI) process.538  The NCD also included the 2005 and 2022 fuels described in 
                                                 
HHHHHHH
 The MOVES fuel adjustment table developed for this analysis contained all E85 fuel effects from Table 
3.1-9, including the not statistically significant NOx and NMHC results; however, only results pollutants identified 
as statistically significant in Table 3.1-9 are reported in the sensitivity case inventory results 
403 
Section 3.1.1.2.  The version of the NONROAD Model used included the effects of the recently 
signed Final Rule: Control of Emissions of Air Pollution from New Nonroad Spark-Ignition 
Engines, Equipment, and Vessels.539  It is also capable of modeling the effects of gasoline blends 
containing 10 percent or less of ethanol. 
  
Emissions from onroad and nonroad diesel equipment were also developed by running 
NMIM (see above), using the same NCD and version of the NONROAD Model described above.  
The version of MOBILE was MOBILE6.2.  Diesel fuels are less fully characterized than 
gasoline, since the only property used by MOBILE and NONROAD is fuel sulfur.  VMT used to 
model onroad emissions was that developed for OAQPS's 2002 Version 3 Modeling Platform540 
and used in the recently published Locomotive-Marine Rule.541 
 
Toxic emissions for off-road reference cases were taken directly from NMIM.  
Inventories for the control case were developed by applying ratios of the aggregate MOVES 
toxic exhaust, evaporative and refueling emissions for on-road gasoline for control versus 
reference case, to reference case toxic emissions for off-road from NMIM. 
 
3.1.1.4.3 On-Road Diesel 
 
Today’s proposal requires an increase in biodiesel to 0.81 billion gallons by 2022.  As it 
is likely this will be consumed in a variety of blend levels (e.g. 20 percent, 5 percent, 2 percent) 
by light-duty diesel vehicles and off-road diesel equipment as well as heavy-duty diesel vehicles, 
we assumed for this analysis that the effects of biodiesel on emissions are linear with biodiesel 
concentration as demonstrated by Sze, et al,542 and that impacts can be analyzed assuming all 
biodiesel is blended as BD20.  We applied the BD20 effects discussed in Section 3.1.1.2.4 to 
baseline heavy-duty emissions generated by NMIM, as MOVES heavy-duty diesel estimates 
were not available in time for this analysis.  Biodiesel impacts were using the following formula: 
 
Biodiesel Impact P = Base HD Emissions P * Effect P * (Increase in BD20 Volume / Total Diesel Volume) 
 
Where: 
 
P = pollutant 
Effect = Percent change with BD20 blend from Section 3.1.1.3.3   
Increase in B20 Volume= Change in B20 volume  from 2022 reference case  to control in billion gallons of 
B20 blend 
 (ie, change in gallons of biodiesel * 5) 
Total Volume = Total Highway Diesel Volume in 2022 in billion gallons 
   
Toxic effects were calculated using the HC effects from Table 3.1-9 
 
3.1.1.4.4 Portable Fuel Containers 
 
 There are several sources of emissions associated with portable fuel containers (PFC) 
used for gasoline.  These sources include vapor displacement and spillage while refueling the gas 
can at the pump, spillage during transport, permeation and evaporation from the gas can during 
transport and storage, and vapor displacement and spillage while refueling equipment.  As the 
404 
calculation of emissions for refueling non-road equipment includes spillage and some vapor 
dispersion, these impacts are not included here.     
 
 As part of the 2007 regulation controlling emissions of hazardous pollutants from mobile 
sources (MSAT2 rule), EPA promulgated requirements to control VOC emissions from gas cans.  
The methodology used to develop emission inventories for gas cans is described in the regulatory 
impact analysis for the rule and in an accompanying technical support document.543, 544   
 
 Based on the MSAT work, we generated two sets of hypothetical nationwide annual 
estimates of PFC VOC emissions, for calendar years 2017 and 2030, based on all E0 and all E10.  
Interpolation can be used to estimate PFC VOC emissions for the reference cases.  Proportions of 
national E0 and E10 fuel use were calculated from the 2022 reference and policy scenarios.  The 
reference case featured a mix of 89.1% E10 and 10.9% E0, while the policy case featured 100% 
E10.  While E85 is used in flexible fueled highway vehicles, it is unlikely to be used in the near 
future in non-road equipment, and is therefore unlikely to be stored or dispensed from PFCs.   
  
 MSATs found in liquid gasoline will be present as a component of VOC emissions.  
These MSATs include benzene and naphthalene.  Ethanol is present as well in VOC emissions.  
Inventories for these pollutants were estimated by the application of toxic to VOC ratios. 
 
 For benzene emissions from all sources except permeation, the following formula was 
used to calculate toxic to VOC ratios: 
 
36.0
Re
Re
×⎟⎟⎠
⎞
⎜⎜⎝
⎛
×
=
LDGV
LDGV
VOCfueling
Benzenefueling
EmissionsVOCPFC
EmissionsBenzenePFC
        
 
where the ratio of refueling benzene to VOC was estimated using average nationwide fuel 
properties for 0 and 10 percent ethanol gasoline from refinery modeling, done for RFS rule, and 
applied to EPA’s Complex Model for reformulated gasoline.545, 546  The 0.36 multiplier corrects 
for the difference in the percentage of gasoline in refueling emissions at 90º F, the temperature 
assumed for the algorithm in the Complex Model, versus a more typical lower fuel temperature 
of 60 º F for gas cans.  The basis of this adjustment is discussed in more detail in the regulatory 
impact analysis for the mobile source air toxics rule.  An additional adjustment factor is applied 
to the ratio for permeation emissions, based on a recent study547 that suggests that the ratio of 
benzene from permeation to total VOC from permeation is about 1.77 times higher than the ratio 
associated with evaporation, according to the following formula: 
 
77.136.0
Re
Re
x
VOCfueling
Benzenefueling
EmissionsVOCPFC
EmissionsBenzenePFC
LDGV
LDGV ×⎟⎟⎠
⎞
⎜⎜⎝
⎛
×
=
                   
 
 The resulting ratios for 0% and 10% ethanol did not differ at the fifth decimal place, and 
were 0.0135 for all sources except for permeation, and 0.00239 for permeation. Thus, impacts of 
405 
this rule on benzene emissions are due to the overall impact of RVP changes on total VOC 
emissions. 
 
 A naphthalene to VOC ratio was estimated using the following formula: 
 
0054.0×⎟⎟⎠
⎞
⎜⎜⎝
⎛
×
=
LDGV
LDGV
VOCeEvaporativ
eNaphthaleneEvaporativ
EmissionsVOCPFC
EmissionseNaphthalenPFC
           
 
 An evaporative naphthalene to VOC ratio for light-duty gasoline vehicles of 0.0004 was 
obtained from analyses done for the Mobile Source Air Toxics Rule, and did not vary by fuel 
type.  The 0.0054 adjustment was based on a recent analysis of average nationwide percentage of 
naphthalene in gasoline vapor from gasoline distribution with an RVP of 10 psi at 60 degrees 
Fahrenheit.548, 549  The resulting ratio applied to PFC emissions was 0.0000022. 
 
 For E10 fuel, we assumed 16.74 percent of the evaporative emissions were ethanol 
(SPECIATE profile 1301)550 and 33.34 percent of permeation emissions were ethanol.551    
 
3.1.1.4.5 Refueling Emissions 
 
Refueling emissions were calculated by NMIM, based on MOBILE6 refueling module.   
Emissions are impacted by the increase in RVP due to ethanol, and also because the reduced 
energy density of ethanol would require more fillups.   NMIM directly provides the emission 
increase due to increased RVP for the areas allowing the 1.0 psi waiver, so no additional 
processing was required to estimate RVP effects on refueling.    
 
In order to estimate the emission impact of the increase in refueling events, we developed 
ton per gallon refueling emission factors based on NMIM by dividing total refueling emissions 
from NMIM for each case by the number of gallons consumed in the AEO case.  The ton per 
gallon emission factors were then applied to the total volume in gallons in each case.  Fuel 
volumes for the control case, RFS 1 base, RFS 1 mandate and AE02007 cases are listed in Table 
3.1-10.  Our estimates of total gallons were calculated from energy balance, reflecting the 
various number of gallons needed to consume the same energy.  We assume the number of trips 
to the pump will increase in proportion to the increased gallons estimated for the rule.   
 
Table 3.1-10.  Gasoline Volumes (Billion Gallons) 
 RFS 1 Base  RFS 1 Mandate  AEO Control Case 
E0 77.95 107.51 16.03 0 
E10 67.00 36.40 131.00 124.6 
E85 0.00 0.00 0.11 29.3 
Total 
Gallons 138.25 143.91 147.14 153.9 
 
 
406 
 3.1.2 Impact on Non- GHG Emissions from Fuel Production and Distribution  
In addition to the effects of increased renewable fuel use on emissions from the vehicles 
and equipment that use the fuels, as discussed above, there are shifts in the fuel production and 
transport/distribution methods that can have substantial impacts on emissions.  These "upstream" 
emissions are associated with all stages of biofuel production and distribution, including biomass 
production (agriculture, forestry), fertilizer & pesticide production and transport, biomass 
transport, biomass refining (corn or cellulosic ethanol production facilities), biofuel transport to 
blending/distribution terminals, and distribution of finished fuels to retail outlets.  Additionally, 
changes in agricultural economics associated with increased biomass production can result in 
shifts in related agricultural production, such as livestock. 
This section describes the changes in upstream emission sources and related emission 
rates connected with the renewable fuel use.  The emission inventory impacts resulting from 
these changes are described in section 3.2.  This section is divided into two major sub-sections, 
the first covering emissions of criteria pollutants, their precursors, and ammonia, and the second 
covering non-criteria air toxic emissions and ethanol.  The specific air toxics covered are:  
benzene, acetaldehyde, formaldehyde, 1,3 butadiene, acrolein, and naphthalene.   
 
3.1.2.1 Upstream Criteria Pollutants 
 
3.1.2.1.1 Agricultural Sector 
 
Introduction 
 
In prior EPA estimates, such as the RFS1 rule, changes in agricultural emissions were 
based solely on the increases in bushels of corn (and soybeans for biodiesel), and the necessary 
acreage to produce those additional bushels.  Given the greater pressure on farmland use likely in 
the 2022 timeframe for this proposed rule (15 billion gallons of corn ethanol) compared to the 
2012 assessment for RFS1 (6.7 or 9.6 billion gallons of ethanol depending on scenario), 
additional factors have been added to the agricultural analysis, such as likely shifts of acreage to 
corn from certain other crops as corn prices increase.  
 
The number of acres of cropland for corn, soy, and all other principle crops were 
estimated using the FASOM agriculture and forestry model, as described in section 2.1 of this 
document.  We are using the change in total acres of planted cropland to estimate changes in 
certain agricultural emissions, such as tillage dust and crop residue burning, that are not directly 
calculated by FASOM.  Another substantial source of agricultural emissions (especially 
ammonia and methane) is livestock.  Changes in livestock-related emissions are estimated based 
on the change in head counts of cattle, swine, and poultry predicted by FASOM.   
 
The impacts relative to the two RFS1 reference cases (3.64 and 6.7 billion gallons) rely 
only on applying ethanol volume proportions to the modeling results of the AEO2007 reference 
case (13.2 billion gallons).  Due to the complex interactions involved in projections in the 
agricultural modeling, we did not attempt to adjust the agricultural inputs of the AEO reference 
case for the other two reference cases.  So the fertilizer and pesticide quantities, livestock counts, 
407 
and total agricultural acres were the same for all three reference cases.  The agricultural 
modeling that had been done for the RFS1 rule itself was much simpler and inconsistent with the 
new modeling, so it would be inappropriate to use those estimates.  Thus, we plan to conduct 
additional agricultural modeling specifically for the RFS1 mandate case prior to finalizing this 
rule.    
 
3.1.2.1.1.2  VOC/NOx/CO/SOx/PM2.5 
 
Criteria pollutants related to agricultural operations come from five major sources:  farm 
equipment (mainly diesel engine emissions), fertilizer production and application, pesticide 
production and application, burning of crop residue, and fugitive dust from field tilling and 
related activities.  
 
Agricultural Equipment Emissions 
 
Changes in farm equipment emissions were estimated by multiplying an average fuel-
based emission factor for diesel or gasoline farm equipment by the change in farm fuel 
consumption predicted by FASOM.  The emission factors for each pollutant in units of grams 
emitted per million BTU of fuel burned were calculated from EPA NONROAD2005 nationwide 
modeling outputs for 2022 (pollutant tons emitted, gallons of fuel consumed) for each year of 
interest.  The diesel emissions include all agricultural diesel equipment, which are dominated by 
agricultural tractors, while the gasoline emissions include only the limited number of larger 
agricultural gasoline-fueled equipment, such as tractors, combines, balers, swathers, and 
irrigation sets.  The fuel energy contents (lower heating value) used for the unit conversions were 
115,000 BTU/gallon for gasoline and 130,000 BTU/gallon for diesel.  For comparison, the 
corresponding 2020 emission factors from GREET are shown, where available.  Most of the 
differences between NONROAD and GREET are small and are likely attributable to the 
difference between 2020 and 2022 values.  And although the gasoline equipment emission 
factors for VOC and CO from NONROAD are much greater than those used in GREET, this 
does not have much impact on emission inventories due to the small number of gasoline-fueled 
equipment used in agriculture relative to diesel equipment.  
 
408 
Table 3.1-11.  
Agricultural Equipment Emission Factors  
(grams per mmBTU of fuel burned) 
 
Diesel Gasoline Pollutant NONROAD GREET NONROAD GREET 
NOx 306 298 204 208 
VOC 30.55 34.87 355.53 52.30 
PM10 21.12 22.67 7.49 9.07 
PM2.5 20.49 20.41 6.89 8.34 
CO 130 136 10,067 204 
Benzene 0.62 -- 11.90 -- 
Ethanol 0.00 -- 0.00 -- 
1,3-Butadiene 0.057 -- 1.90 -- 
Acetaldehyde 1.62 -- 1.63 -- 
Formaldehyde 3.61 -- 3.17 -- 
Naphthalene 0.027 -- 0.66 -- 
Acrolein 0.09 -- 0.14 -- 
SO2 0.44 -- 15.88 -- 
NH3 0.68 -- 1.01 -- 
 
 
Fertilizer and Pesticide Production 
 
The manufacturing processes for agricultural fertilizer and pesticides generate a variety 
of pollutants.  The agricultural inputs from GREET provide emission factors in grams of 
pollutant per ton of nutrient for various types of fertilizers, herbicides, and insecticide, as shown 
in Table 3.1-13.  These emission factors were multiplied by the changes in fertilizer and 
pesticide use predicted by FASOM, as shown in Table 3.1-12, to give projected changes in 
nationwide agricultural fertilizer and pesticide production emissions.  
 
Table 3.1-12.  
Changes in Agricultural Chemical Use relative to AEO reference case  
 
 
Nitrogen 
(average) 
Phosphate 
(P2O5) 
Potash 
(K2O) 
Limestone 
(CaCO3) Herbicides Pesticides 
Annual Short 
Tons 322,430 211,988 657,066 -239 -11,240 -781 
Percentage 2.42% 7.17% 19.09% -2.12% -5.07% -1.86% 
 
 
409 
Table 3.1-13.  
Agricultural Chemical Production & Transport Emission Factors  
(grams per ton of nutrient) 
 
Pollutant Nitrogen (average) 
Phosphate 
(P2O5) 
Potash 
(K2O) 
Limestone 
(CaCO3) Herbicides Pesticides 
NOx 1,605 4,484 734 573 19,371 21,628 
VOC 2,761 240 40.7 56.8 1,575 2,040 
PM10 454 1,551 148 506 10,840 11,746 
PM2.5 262 1,018 74.5 167 4,869 5,479 
CO 2,595 790 129 186 5,417 6,872 
Benzene 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 3.21 4.16 
Ethanol 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
1,3-Butadiene 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.576 0.745 
Acetaldehyde 0.018 0.001 0.000 0.000 0.082 0.106 
Formaldehyde 20.75 1.55 0.19 0.41 18.11 23.44 
Naphthalene 0.033 0.117 0.010 0.039 114.4 124.0 
Acrolein 0.009 0.001 0.000 0.000 0.024 0.031 
SO2 703 53,299 321 701 11,300 12,895 
NH3 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
 
 
Until the 1990s it was reasonable to assume that all fertilizers and pesticides used on 
domestic agriculture were produced within the U.S.  This has been less true in recent years as 
more agricultural chemicals, especially fertilizers, are being imported from countries with a 
greater availability of natural gas at lower costs.  For greenhouse gases the location of these 
emissions is of less importance, but for criteria pollutants and HAPS it is important to reduce the 
estimated impacts by the percentage of production and transportation occurring outside of the 
U.S.   Using data from USDA552,553 the percentages applied from domestic sources are shown in 
Table 3.1-14.  After applying these percentages to the production and initial transportation 
portions of the GREET emission factors, the unadjusted final (domestic) transportation portion 
of the GREET emission factors was added back in.  Since the relative emissions from production 
versus transportation vary by pollutant, the net adjustments to the GREET emission factors also 
vary by pollutant, as shown in the second section of Table 3.1-14.   To calculate an overall factor 
for nitrogen fertilizers, the proportions from GREET were used: 70.7% ammonia, 21.1% urea, 
and 8.2% ammonium nitrate.  The pesticide adjustment does not vary by pollutant because 
virtually all of the pesticide emissions come from actual production rather than 
transportation/distribution.  
 
410 
Table 3.1-14.  Domestic Fractions of Fertilizer and Pesticide Production Applied to Crops 
 Nitrogen 
Fertilizers 
Potash Phosphate Pesticides 
Domestic Fraction of 
Production 
50% 20% 94% 76% 
     
Net Adjustment to Production, 
Transportation & Distribution 
Emission Factor from GREET 
    
VOC 50.63% 94.85% 53.62% 76% 
CO 52.47% 94.92% 54.37% 76% 
NOx 73.34% 94.92% 65.55% 76% 
PM10 52.64% 94.12% 24.06% 76% 
PM2.5 53.67% 94.14% 28.31% 76% 
SOx 60.48% 94.02% 33.66% 76% 
 
 
Fertilizer and Pesticide Application 
 
In addition to the agricultural equipment emissions mentioned above, the application of 
fertilizer and pesticides (herbicides, insecticides, fungicides, etc.) to agricultural fields causes the 
release of certain types of pollutants into the air.  For nitrogen fertilizers the only pollutant 
considered to be significant is ammonia (NH3), the estimation of which is covered in section 
3.1.3.1.1.2.  Pesticide application emissions are mainly VOC and various individual organic 
compounds, most notably benzene and acrolein.  A discussion of the toxic pollutant emissions as 
a fraction of VOC is presented in section 3.1.3.2.2, but the resulting emission factors and 
inventory impacts are shown here in Table 3.1-15.  There are also potential toxicity concerns 
with volatilization of the pesticide active ingredients, and this is discussed in section 3.4 of this 
document.  
 
The basis of the pesticide application emissions for this analysis was the 2002 NEI area-
source inventory. The ton per year emissions data from the NEI was used with USDA pesticide 
application data for 2002 (or the nearest year for which data were collected) to generate an 
overall average estimate of the pesticide application emissions per ton of pesticide applied.  This 
ratio of pollutant tons (for VOC, benzene, and acrolein) per ton of pesticide applied was then 
multiplied by the change in total pesticide tons used (including herbicides) as projected by 
FASOM and shown in Table 3.1-12 to give the projected change in nationwide agricultural 
pesticide application emissions in Table 3.1-15.  
 
411 
Table 3.1-15.  
Herbicide and Pesticide Application Emission Factors and Impacts 
relative to AEO reference case 
 
Emission Factor Impact Pollutant (tons per ton applied) (annual short tons) 
VOC 0.543 -6,531 
Benzene 0.142 -1,707 
Acrolein 0.0036 -43.1 
 
 
Agricultural Residue Burning Emissions 
 
One source of air pollution related to crop farming is the burning of crop residues.  This 
practice is one of the methods that is used to clear fields between crop cycles so that the old crop 
residue does not build up and clog or otherwise hinder the tilling of the fields in preparation for 
new crop planting.  This practice is mainly used for grassy crops like wheat, rye, and barley, but 
in some areas it is also used for corn and other crops.  
 
Crop residue burning produces substantial emissions of CO2, VOC, CO, NOx, as well as 
ammonia and toxic pollutants such as benzene, formaldehyde, 1,3-butadiene, and acrolein.  
 
The use of crop residue burning is quite variable from area to area and among individual 
farmers, since there are alternative methods to deal with crop residue, including use of 
conservation tillage methods and equipment that allows planting through the residue.  In some 
locations and time periods crop residue burning has been prohibited by law, due to the possible 
health effects in nearby residential areas.   
 
Although the agricultural burning data in the NEI does not currently cover all states 
where crop residue burning occurs, the data available was used to generate a rough overall 
estimate of the average crop burning emissions per acre of planted crops.  This was done using 
2002 crop acreage data from USDA/NASS for the counties covered by the NEI agricultural 
burning data.  The overall ratio of pollutant tons (for each pollutant) per total acre farmed was 
then multiplied by the change in total planted acres projected by FASOM to give a projected 
change in nationwide agricultural burning emissions.  These values are shown below in 
combination with the agricultural dust emissions in Table 3.1-12.   
 
Agricultural Dust Emissions 
 
Soil and related dust particles (e.g., fertilizer, pesticide, manure) become airborne as a 
result of  field tillage and animal grazing/foraging, especially in drier areas of the country.  Some 
of this dust is in a size range that is a concern for human health and welfare.  The NEI includes 
estimates of these particulate emissions by county.   
 
As done for agricultural burning emissions, the agricultural dust data from the 2002 NEI 
was used to generate an estimate of the average fugitive dust emissions per acre of planted crops 
412 
for the crop related dust, and per head of cattle for the dust related to cattle.  This was done using 
2002 nationwide crop acreage and livestock inventory data from USDA/NASS.  The calculated 
pollutant tons (for PM) per total acre farmed was then multiplied by the change in total planted 
acres projected by FASOM to give a projected change in nationwide crop related dust emissions.  
And the calculated PM tons per head of cattle was multiplied by the change in cattle inventory 
projected by FASOM to give a projected change in nationwide livestock related dust emissions.  
 
The emission factors and inventory impacts of agricultural burning and fugitive dust from 
crop related acvities and livestock are shown in Table 3.1-16 and 3.1-17.   The ton per year 
impacts for the crop-related emissions are based on a modeled increase of 2,327,000 farmed 
acres (0.79%) in 2022 relative to the AEO reference case. The changes in fugitive dust from 
livestock operations are based on the head count changes shown in Table 3.1-19.  
 
Table 3.1-16.  
2022 Crop-related Burning and Dust Emission Impacts  
relative to AEO reference case 
 
Emission Factors Inventory Impacts Pollutant (Tons per thousand 
acres farmed) (annual short tons) 
NOx 0.191 443.8 
VOC 0.535 1,245 
PM10 7.62 17,723 
PM2.5 1.71 3,974 
CO 6.13 14,255 
Benzene 0.017 38.97 
Ethanol 0 0 
1,3-Butadiene 0.0073 17.06 
Acetaldehyde 0.032 75.46 
Formaldehyde 0.07 173.46 
Naphthalene unknown unknown 
Acrolein 0.013 30.01 
SO2 0.059 136.6 
NH3 0.071 165.5 
 
 
413 
Table 3.1-17.  
2022 Livestock-related Dust Emission Impacts  
relative to AEO reference case 
 
Beef Cattle Dust Emissions Dairy Cattle Dust Emissions Pollutant (kg/head/year) (annual short tons) (kg/head/year) (annual short tons) 
PM10 0.888 -0.945 0.172 -0.008 
PM2.5 0.089 -0.095 0.017 -0.001 
 
 
3.1.2.1.1.2  Ammonia (NH3) 
 
The two primary sources of ammonia emissions on farms are fertilizer application and 
livestock waste.  Fertilizer application emissions were estimated using an average emission 
factor of 57,428.71 grams per ton of fertilizer nitrogen applied for all forms of nitrogen, which is 
a weighted average of the standard EPA emission factors that are used to generate the NEI.  The 
weightings for each type of fertilizer come from USDA Economic Research Service data for 
2006.  The individual emission factors, weightings, and resulting average emission factor are 
shown in Table 3.1-18.  This average emission factor was multiplied by the nitrogen application 
quantities generated by the FASOM model for each scenario.  
 
Table 3.1-18.  Fertilizer Ammonia Emission Factors 
Fertilizer Type SCC Emission Factor 
(lbs NH3/Ton Nitrogen) 
USDA 2006 all 
crops Weighting 
Anhydrous Ammonia 2801700001 24 15.46% 
Aqua Ammonia 2801700002 24 1.61% 
Nitrogen Solutions 2801700003 61 40.88% 
Urea 2801700004 364 21.73% 
Ammonium Nitrate 2801700005 49 3.9% 
Ammonium Sulfate 2801700006 194 4.93% 
Ammonium Thiosulfate 2801700007 64  
Other Straight Nitrogen 2801700008 61 11.49% 
Ammonium Phosphates 2801700009 97  
N-P-K 2801700010 97  
    
avg lbs/ton   126.61 
avg grams/ton   57428.71 
 
Changes in ammonia emissions from livestock waste were estimated using emission 
factors (kg/head/year) multiplied by the change in animal head counts predicted by FASOM.  
The ammonia emission factors and livestock head changes used in this analysis, along with 
resulting ammonia inventory impacts are shown in Table 3.1-19.  This analysis was limited to 
these four types of livestock because they are the ones specifically modeled by FASOM.   
 
414 
Table 3.1-19.  Livestock Ammonia Emission Impacts relative to AEO reference case  
Livestock 
Type 
kg NH3 per head 
per yeara 
Head count change 
(million head) 
Percent 
change 
Change in NH3 emissions 
(annual short tons) 
Beef Cattle 9 -1.065 -1.40% -9.58 
Dairy Cattle 25 -0.047 -0.60% -1.18 
Swine 5 -2.553 -2.15% -12.76 
Poultry 0.22 -90.14 -0.97% -19.83 
a
  Source: EPA/600/R-02-017, "Review of Emission Factors and Methodologies to Estimate Ammonia Emissions From 
Animal Waste Handling," April 2002. 
 
 
Although it is a minor source of ammonia compared to fertilizer and livestock emissions 
described below, changes in farm equipment ammonia emissions were estimated by multiplying 
an average fuel-based emission factor for diesel or gasoline farm equipment by the change in 
farm fuel consumption predicted by FASOM.  The ammonia emission factors in units of grams 
emitted per million BTU of fuel burned were calculated from the default ammonia emission 
factors used in the EPA NMIM model:   
 116 mg per gallon of gasoline burned;  
and 88.3 mg per gallon of diesel fuel burned.  
 
3.1.2.1.2 Biofuel Production 
 
 Emissions from the production of biofuels include the emissions from the production 
facility itself as well as the emissions from production and transport of the biomass and any other 
fuels used by the biofuel plant, such as natural gas, coal, and electricity.  The biomass feedstock 
production emissions are discussed above in the section on agricultural emissions. The 
calculation of emissions from corn ethanol, cellulosic ethanol, and biodiesel plants, including 
feedstock transport, was done using the basic methodology of the GREET model.  But some 
updates and enhancements were made to GREET, including updated feedstock energy 
requirements and estimates of excess electricity available for sale from new cellulosic ethanol 
plants, based on modeling by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL).    
 
 The facility emission factors used are shown in Table 3.1-20.   The dry mill corn ethanol 
plant emission factors were developed for the RFS1 rule based on an average of state supplied 
data (RFS1 final rule RIA Table 3.4-2, based on C. Jackson memo Docket EPA-HQ-OAR-2005-
0161, April 6, 2007).   The dry mill PM2.5 factors and all the wet mill emission factors come 
from GREET 1.7.  Emission factors for cellulosic ethanol plants, biodiesel, and renewable diesel 
production were taken from GREET (version 1.8 added renewable diesel).  Additional analyses 
are still being conducted to determine potential decreased plant energy requirements and 
emission rates that may be feasible by 2022.  
 
 
415 
Table 3.1-20.  Biofuel Production Plant Emission Factors in 2022 (grams per gallon 
produced) 
Biofuel Plant Type 
VOC CO NOx PM10 PM2.5 SOx NH3 
Corn Ethanol, Dry Mill NG 4.000 1.900 5.500 2.200 0.265 7.000 0.000 
Corn Ethanol, Dry Mill NG (wet DGS) 4.000 1.900 5.500 2.200 0.222 7.000 0.000 
Corn Ethanol, Dry Mill Coal 4.000 1.900 5.500 2.200 1.884 7.000 0.000 
Corn Ethanol, Dry Mill Biomass 4.000 1.900 5.500 2.200 0.421 7.000 0.000 
Corn Ethanol, Dry Mill Biomass (wet DGS) 4.000 1.900 5.500 2.200 0.313 7.000 0.000 
Corn Ethanol, Wet Mill NG 2.330 1.039 1.677 0.998 0.288 0.012 0.000 
Corn Ethanol, Wet Mill Coal 2.334 3.501 4.857 4.532 1.984 4.595 0.000 
Cellulosic Ethanol (switchgrass or corn stover, 
enzymatic) 1.937 11.722 16.806 2.792 1.116 0.625 0.000 
Cellulosic Ethanol (forest waste, 
thermochemical) 0.363 5.154 7.427 0.854 0.435 0.271 0.000 
Biodiesel, Soybean oil 0.040 0.454 0.733 0.062 0.062 0.005 0.000 
Renewable Diesel, Soybean Oil 0.029 0.329 0.530 0.045 0.045 0.004 0.000 
 
       
 
 
3.1.2.1.3 Crude Oil Production/Transport/Refining 
 
 The estimate of emissions associated with production of gasoline and diesel fuel from 
crude oil is based on emission factors in the GREET model.  The actual calculation of the 
emission inventory impacts of the decreased gasoline and diesel production is done in EPA's 
spreadsheet model for upstream emission impacts.  This model uses the decreased volumes of 
the crude based fuels and the various crude production and transport emission factors from 
GREET to estimate the net emissions impact, which is shown below in section 3.2 (see the 
displaced gasoline line of Table 3.2-5).  
 
3.1.2.1.4 Finished Fuel Transport and Distribution 
 
Transfer and Storage Evaporative Emissions from Gasoline, Gasoline/Ethanol Blends, 
and Ethanol -- VOC emissions are produced by transfer and storage activities associated with 
distribution of gasoline, gasoline/ethanol blends, and ethanol.  These are referred to as Stage 1 
emissions.554  Stage 1 distribution begins at the point the fuel leaves the production facility and 
ends when it is loaded into the storage tanks at dispensing facilities.   
There are five types of facilities that make up this distribution chain for gasoline.  Bulk 
gasoline terminals are large storage facilities that receive gasoline directly from the refineries via 
pipelines, barges, or tankers (or are collocated at refineries). Gasoline from the bulk terminal 
storage tanks is loaded into cargo tanks (tank trucks or railcars) for distribution to smaller, 
intermediate storage facilities (bulk plants) or directly to gasoline dispensing facilities (retail 
public service stations and private service stations).  When ethanol is blended into gasoline it 
usually occurs in the pipes which supply the tank trucks. 
There are two types of pipeline facilities found at various intervals along gasoline 
distribution pipelines: pipeline breakout stations and pipeline pumping stations. Pipeline 
416 
breakout stations receive gasoline via pipelines, store it in storage tanks, and re-inject it into 
pipelines as needed to meet the demand from downstream facilities. Pipeline pumping stations 
are located along the entire length of a pipeline at about 40 mile intervals. Their purpose is to 
provide the extra ‘‘push’’ needed to move the product through the pipeline. They do not 
normally have gasoline storage capability. 
Bulk plants are intermediate storage and distribution facilities that normally receive 
gasoline or gasoline/ethanol blends from bulk terminals via tank trucks or railcars. Gasoline and 
gasoline/ethanol blends from bulk plants are subsequently loaded into tank trucks for transport to 
local dispensing facilities.   
Gasoline and gasoline/ethanol blend dispensing facilities include both retail public outlets 
and private dispensing operations such as rental car agencies, fleet vehicle refueling centers, and 
various government motor pool facilities. Dispensing facilities receive gasoline and 
gasoline/ethanol blends via tank trucks from bulk terminals or bulk plants. Inventory estimates 
for this source category only include the delivery of gasoline at dispensing facilities and does not 
include the vehicle or equipment refueling activities. 
Emission factors (EFs) for gasoline were based on inventory estimates from the 2002 
NEI.555  We used these data to develop E0 gasoline emission factors even though the 2002 
emissions included the E10 that was in the fuel pool at that time.  In 2002 this was still a 
relatively small proportion of gasoline consumption, so it should not substantially affect the 
national E0 estimates.  Since ethanol is blended with gasoline at bulk terminals to produce E10 
and E85 at the point fuel is loaded into tankers, we assumed bulk terminal emissions were 
associated with unblended gasoline.  We then divided emissions into a refinery to bulk terminal 
component and a bulk terminal to dispensing facility ("Stage I" emissions) component.  Total 
nationwide emissions for these two components were divided by the energy content of the total 
volume of gasoline distributed in 1999, to obtain the emission factor in g/mmBtu.  Total volume 
of gasoline was based on gasoline sales as reported by the Energy Information Administration.556  
These emission factors are provided in Table 3.1-21.   
We also developed emission factors for Stage 1 emissions of E10 and E85 subsequent to 
blending at bulk terminals.  These emission factors were calculated by applying adjustment 
factors to the gasoline EF.  The adjustment factors for E10 and E85 were based on an algorithm 
from the 1994 On-Board Refueling Vapor Recovery Rule557: 
EF (g/gal)  =  exp[-1.2798 - 0.0049(ΔT) + 0.0203(Td) + 0.1315(RVP)]  (1) 
where delta T is the difference in temperature between the fuel in the tank and the fuel being 
dispensed, and Td is the temperature of the gasoline being dispensed.  We assumed delta T is 
zero, temperature of the fuel being dispensed averages 60 degrees over the year, and that the 
RVP of conventional gasoline is 8.7 psi, 10% ethanol is 9.7, and 85% ethanol is 6.2.  Using these 
assumptions, the adjustment factor is +14% for E10 and -30% for E85.  Emission factors in 
grams per million BTU of fuel transferred are given in Table 3.1-21.  
 
In addition to these Stage I emissions for gasoline and gasoline/ethanol blends, transport 
of ethanol to bulk terminals also results in evaporative emissions of ethanol, a VOC.  These 
emissions are estimated based on an adjustment to the gasoline transport VOC emissions to 
account for the much lower vapor pressure (approximately 3 psi at 100F for denatured ethanol 
417 
versus 9 psi for gasoline) and molecular weight (48.7 for denatured ethanol versus approximately 
72 for gasoline vapor).  The net factor is 0.23 x gasoline evap VOC, resulting in the value shown 
for E100 in Table 3.1-21:   
 
3.56 g/mmBTU of ethanol  
  = 0.23 x gasoline VOC per-gallon EF / ethanol energy content 
 = 0.23 x (10.2137 g/mmBTU x 115000 BTU/gal) /  76000 BTU/gal 
   
Note that this very simplified methodology does not attempt to account for differences 
between ethanol and gasoline transport modes, distances, or transfer methods in movement of the 
fuel from production facility to the bulk distribution terminal.  We plan to do a more thorough 
analysis of this for the final rule.  
 
 Significant evaporative emissions are not expected from storage and transport of 
biodiesel fuel due to its low volatility.  
 
Table 3.1-21. 
VOC Emission Factors for Gasoline and Gasoline/Ethanol  
Blend Storage and Transfer Emissions (Stage 1) 
Process Blend EF(g/mmBtu) 
Refinery to Bulk Terminal E0 14.94 
Refinery to Bulk Terminal E100 3.56 
Bulk Terminal to Pump E0 27.79 
Bulk Terminal to Pump E10 32.74 
Bulk Terminal to Pump E85 25.93 
 
 
Combustion Emissions from Transport and Distribution of Fuels and Feedstocks -- Emissions 
are produced by the vehicles and engines used to transport feedstocks such as crude oil, corn, and 
cellulosic biomass to fuel production facilities, as well as transport/distribution of the finished 
fuels from the production plants to distribution terminals and retail outlets.   For example, corn 
would be transported from farms and grain facilities to ethanol plants by truck and possibly rail.  
The finished ethanol would be transported from there to bulk distribution terminals by truck, rail, 
or barge, and distribution from terminal to retail outlet is by truck.  The emission factors for the 
year 2022 in Table 3.1-22 take into account the mix of newer better controlled engines (including 
trucks meeting the standards for 2008 and later engines558 and engines meeting the 2008 
locomotive/marine diesel engine rule559), as well as any remaining older engines subject to less 
stringent standards.  The truck EFs are given in terms of grams per vehicle mile traveled, while 
the other EFs are in grams per million BTU of fuel burned by the engine. Emission factors for 
these engines are taken from the rulemaking analyses.  
 
 To estimate the net emission rates for the assumed mix of transport modes for each fuel 
type, these emission factors were incorporated into a modified version of GREET, since GREET 
1.7 and 1.8 retained emission factors based only on earlier regulations.  Thus, the miles traveled 
418 
and quantities of fuel burned are those used by GREET for each transport mode and fuel being 
transported.  For the final rule air quality analysis we will have a more detailed analysis of miles 
and fuel volumes transported by mode within each county.  
 
 
Table 3.1-22.  2022 Criteria Emissions from Fuel and Feedstock Transport/Distribution 
 
Transport Mode Year VOC CO NOx PM10 PM2.5 
Class 2B HD Diesel Trucks (g/mile) 2005 0.282 1.303 3.594 0.163 0.139 
 2022 (2020) 0.137 0.205 0.483 0.033 0.019 
Medium HD DIesel Trucks (g/mile) 2005 0.653 2.482 8.297 0.309 0.271 
 2022 (2020) 0.289 0.417 1.243 0.053 0.035 
Locomotive (g/mmBTU of fuel burned) 2005 84.733 212.861 1620.376 51.575 50.028 
 2022 (2020) 34.070 203.984 815.271 19.015 18.445 
Barge (avg of C1 & C2 vessels)560 2005 26.761 237.513 1276.901 47.923 46.485 
    (g/mmBTU of fuel burned) 2022 (2020) 15.527 188.994 676.097 22.017 21.356 
Ocean Tanker (C3 vessels) 2005 79.943 181.746 2177.881 181.410 166.930 
    (g/mmBTU of fuel burned) 2022 (2020) 79.891 181.526 2054.819 181.118 166.666 
 
 
 
3.1.2.2 Upstream Air Toxics 
 
3.1.2.2.1 Upstream Air Toxics Reference Case 
 
Air toxic emissions are associated with a variety of upstream processes.  These processes 
include production of agricultural pesticides and fertilizers, as well as their application, operation 
of petroleum refineries, operation of ethanol and biodiesel production facilities, operation of 
electrical production facilities which supply power to these facilities, and distribution of 
agricultural persticides and fertilizers, feedstocks, gasoline, gasoline/ethanol and biodiesel 
blends.   
 
Although a large number of compounds which are considered air toxics could be 
impacted by this rule, we focused on those which were identified as national and regional-scale 
cancer and noncancer risk drivers in the 1999 NATA561 and were also likely to be significantly 
impacted by this rule.  These compounds include benzene, 1,3-butadiene, formaldehyde, 
acetaldehyde, and acrolein.  Naphthalene impacts were included for petroleum refineries, since it 
is a significant emission product for those facilities.   Ethanol impacts were also included in our 
analyses because of health concerns (Section 3.4.5) and its role as an acetaldehyde precursor. 
 
2002 air toxic emissions for stationary sources, other than for fires, were obtained from 
the 2002 National Emissions Inventory (NEI), version 3.  Future year emissions of benzene, 1,3-
butadiene, formaldehyde, acetaldehyde, and acrolein were estimated for sectors only, rather than 
individual sources.  These sectors included non-EGU (electric generating unit) point sources, 
EGU point sources, the nonpoint storage and transfer subsector, and other nonpoint sources.  
Emissions were estimated by applying future year to 2002 VOC ratios to 2002 air toxic 
419 
estimates.  Air toxics from fires were estimated by applying toxics-to-VOC ratios to the VOC 
emissions from a fire inventory developed for air quality modeling.  2002 and future year ethanol 
emissions were estimated by speciating the VOC estimates.  This was done using the Sparse 
Matrix Operator Kernel Emissions (SMOKE) modeling system, version 2.3.  More details on the 
methods and data used to develop these inventories are found in a memo included in the docket 
for this rule.562 
 
Air toxic emission estimates for agricultural equipment (mainly diesel agricultural 
tractors) were obtained from the EPA NMIM model, as described for criteria pollutants in 
section 3.1.2.1.1.1.   
 
 
3.1.2.2.2  Upstream Air Toxics Control Cases  
 
As described below, we developed emission factors for several air toxics using the most 
recent available data.  These emission factors were used with estimated of changes in fuel 
volumes and associated energy outputs to estimate inventory changes associated with the 
proposed fuel and vehicle program.  In general, emission factors are expressed as grams per 
million Btu (g/mmBtu) of energy produced or distributed as part of the process.  Underlying data 
are available in the docket for the rule. 
 
 
Agricultural Pesticides and Fertilizers – The estimation of air toxic emissions from production 
and application of pesticides and fertilizers was done using toxic fractions of the corresponding 
VOC emissions described in section 3.1.3.1.1.1.  Table 3.1-23 shows the toxic fractions, which 
were calculated from the 2002 NEI inventories for VOC and each of the listed toxic pollutants. 
All the pollutants except acrolein from pesticide application are based on nationwide inventories. 
California was the only state that reported acrolein emissions associated with pesticide 
application, so the 0.66% value shown in the table represents the sum of acrolein emissions 
divided by the sum of VOC emissions from pesticide application for all counties in California in 
2002.  The fertilizer and pesticide application data come from queries of the NEI area source 
inventories for SCCs like "28017*" (for fertilizer application) and SCCs like "246180*" or like 
"246185*" (for pesticide application).  
 
The production and blending data for fertilizer and pesticides come from queries of the 
NEI point source data that were submitted by 40 states and Puerto Rico for the following MACT 
codes 
 0911 - Pesticide Active Ingredient Production 
 0960 - Agricultural Chemicals and Pesticides Manufacturing 
 1410 - Phosphate Fertilizers Production 
The data for these codes was compiled for the following four categories:  Fertilizer production 
(F), Fertilizer mixing blending (FMB), Pesticide production (P), and Pesticide mixing blending 
(PMB). 
 
 
420 
Table 3.1-23.  Air Toxic Fractions of VOC for Fertilizers and Pesticides 
 Fertilizer 
Production & 
Blending 
Pesticide 
Production & 
Blending 
Fertilizer 
Application 
Pesticide 
Application 
1,3-Butadiene -- 0.0003653 -- -- 
Acetaldehyde 6.530 E-06 5.198 E-05 -- -- 
Acrolein 3.320 E-06 1.513 E-05 -- 0.0066 
Benzene -- 0.002038 -- 0.2615 
Ethanol -- -- -- -- 
Formaldehyde 0.007517 0.011494 -- -- 
 
 
Petroleum Refineries – Total nationwide emissions of air toxics for 153 U. S. petroleum 
refineries in 2002 were obtained from data collected as part of a risk and technology review 
(RTR) for EPA’s proposed rule, “National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants 
From Petroleum Refineries.”563   These emissions were divided by Btus of energy produced by 
those refineries in 2002 to obtain emission factors in g/mmBtu.  Thus the resultant emission 
factors represent 2002 technology and emission standards.  Energy output estimates included all 
refinery products, such as conventional and reformulated gasoline, aviation gasoline, jet fuel, 
kerosene, distillate fuel oil, residual fuel oil, petrochemical feedstocks, naphthas, lubricants, and 
other miscellaneous products.  Energy output was estimated by multiplying volume of each 
product supplied564 by its heating value in Btus per gallon. 
 
Resultant emission factors are provided below in Table 3.1-25, along with those for 
ethanol and electricity production.   
 
Ethanol Production Facilities – There are a number of processes at ethanol production facilities 
that result in emissions of air toxics.  These processes include fermentation, distillation of the 
resultant mash, and drying of spent wet grain to produce animal feed.  Emissions of air toxics 
vary tremendously from facility to facility, due to a variety of factors, and it is difficult to 
determine how differences in the production process individually impact emissions.  Numerous 
production facilities have commenced operation in the last few years.  To develop emission 
factors we used the most recent available inventory for benzene, formaldehyde, acetaldehyde, 
and acrolein, from calendar year 2005.  These data were obtained from two sources: 
 
1) 2005 NEI State submittals for SCCs associated with ethanol production facilities  
2) the 2005 toxics release inventory (TRI) 
 
2005 NEI data submittals were obtained from EPA’s Office of Air Quality Planning and 
Standards.  These data are included in the docket for the rule.  Additional data for facilities not 
included in these submittals were obtained from the 2005 TRI 
(http://www.epa.gov/triexplorer/list-chemical-hap.htm).  Where emissions data were not 
available for a facility, the facility was excluded from subsequent calculations.   
 
Only a few facilities reported very low emissions of 1,3-butadiene, and the rest reported 
no emissions, so emissions of this pollutant from ethanol production facilities were assumed to 
421 
be insignificant.  Almost all of the data were from wet mill plants running on natural gas, so it 
was not possible to develop separate emission factors for wet and dry mill plants, or those 
running on coal or natural gas. 
 
Energy output for each facility was estimated by multiplying production capacity by the 
heating value for ethanol.  Since data on actual production by facility were not available, all 
plants were assumed to operate at capacity.  Estimates of production capacity were obtained 
from data collected by the Renewable Fuels Association 
(http://www.ethanolrfa.org/industry/locations/).  For some major ethanol producers production 
capacity was not available for specific facilities. 
 
Data for facilities where both emissions and production capacity were available were 
used to estimate nationwide emission rates in g/mmBtu.  Table 3.1-24 lists the number of ethanol 
production facilities with emissions data for various air toxics, as well as production capacity 
estimates. 
 
Table 3.1-24.  Number of facilities with emission inventory data  
by pollutant and production capacity estimates. 
 
Pollutant No. of Facilities with Emissions Data and 
Production Capacity Estimates.  
Benzene 30 
Formaldehyde 35 
Acetaldehyde 50 
Acrolein 22 
 
An emission factor for ethanol was estimated using data collected in Minnesota from 16 
facilities, all of which were dry mill plants.565  Since most ethanol emissions occur during 
fermentation, and new production of ethanol is likely to occur at dry mill facilities, these data are 
likely to provide representative estimates of future year increases in ethanol emissions under the 
control scenarios modeled. 
 
The resultant emission factors for ethanol production facilities are provided in Table 3.1-
25. 
 
Distillers’ grains with solubles (DGS) is a co-product of dry mill corn ethanol production 
that can be used as animal feed.  Corn oil remaining in the DGS can be extracted and sold for 
commercial uses, such as biodiesel production, at a relatively high value compared to the DGS 
itself.  The oil can be extracted by gravimetric methods or by extraction with n-hexane, which is 
a potentially important toxic emission associated with increased ethanol production.  Capital 
costs for solvent extraction are higher, but so are yields.  
 
Corn oil for food grade use is produced by a process wherein corn is separated into 
component parts, prior to fermentation, with the starch heavy dehulled-degermed corn portion 
fed to the ethanol plant and the corn germ fed to a hexane-based corn oil extraction facility.  This 
422 
process is capital intensive and must be designed into the plant.  We expect the food grade 
extraction process to be less widespread than commercial grade processes for these reasons. 
 
VeraSun recently submitted an application to the Iowa Department of Natural Resources 
(IDNR) to add a facility for solvent extraction of corn oil to an ethanol plant in Fort Dodge 
Iowa.566  In this application, Verasun proposed to control particulate matter emissions from the 
process using a baghouse, and to minimize VOC emissions through good design and operating 
processes.  Verasun estimated that this plant, with an annual DDGS capacity of 455,000 tons of 
DDGS per year, would produce 305 tons of VOCs per year, with n-hexane emissions of 295 tons 
per year.  PM10 emissions would be about 13 tons. 
 
EPA used the Verasun application data to develop an estimate of potential nationwide n-
hexane emissions from ethanol plants nationwide.  EPA estimates that about 40% of ethanol 
production will have corn oil extraction by 2022; thus, we assumed that about half of this would 
be from solvent extraction and 20% of dry mill plants would employ this process.  It is likely a 
number of plants will use gravimetric recovery, since it can be easily retrofitted to any size plant 
at modest capital cost.  First, we developed emission rates per ton of DDGS production.  Then 
we developed an estimate of DDGS produced nationwide, using industry characterization 
estimates of 13.67 billion gallons of dry mill ethanol production in 2022, and 0.00334 tons 
DDGS per gallon of ethanol produced by dry mills.567  Multiplying the emission rate from the 
Verasun application by total production of DDGS, EPA estimates these facilities could emit 
about 9,000 tons of n-hexane nationwide.  However, given the very limited data on emissions 
from such facilities and the nascent nature of this process at ethanol production facilities, such 
estimates should be regarded as highly uncertain.  
 
Biodiesel Production Facilities -- To estimate emission factors for biodiesel production facilities, 
we identified air toxic emission data for individual facilities developed for the 2005 NEI.  
Unfortunately, only toxics data for two existing biodiesel facilities could be found.  These data 
were used to develop toxic to VOC ratios, then applied to VOC emission factors for biodiesel 
plants obtained from GREET, with modifications to add energy used in crushing soybeans.  
VOC emission rates vary by feedstock.  Toxic to VOC ratios, VOC emission rates, and resultant 
toxic emission rates in grams per gallon are give in Table 3.1-26. 
 
 
Transportation and Distribution of Gasoline, Ethanol, Gasoline/Ethanol Blends and Biodiesel --  
Air toxic emissions associated with distributing fuel and fuel blends come from two sources.  
The first source is evaporative, spillage and permeation emissions from storage and transfer 
activities, and the second source is emissions from vehicles and pipeline pumps used to transport 
the fuels.  Since a pipeline system does not exist for ethanol, increased ethanol use is likely to 
increase toxic emissions from vehicles used to transport it, while a corresponding decrease in 
gasoline distribution would decrease any emissions related to pipeline pumping.  
 
Storage and transfer activities result in evaporative emissions of benzene and ethanol 
from gasoline, ethanol, and gasoline/ethanol blends.  Evaporative emissions from biodiesel fuel 
are not expected to be significant.  Emissions of ethanol occur both during transport of ethanol 
from production facilities to bulk terminals, and after blending, at bulk terminals.  In addition, 
423 
emission factors for benzene must be estimated separately for fuel before and after it is blended.  
As previously discussed, we assumed bulk terminal emissions were associated with unblended 
gasoline.  We then divided emissions into a refinery to bulk terminal component and a bulk 
terminal to dispensing facility component.   Benzene emission factors for gasoline transport from 
refinery to bulk terminals were weighted by the fraction of 2002 VOC emissions for this part of 
the process, whereas emission factors for E0 gasoline, E10 gasoline, and E85 were weighted by 
the fraction of 2002 VOC from the bulk terminal to the pump.  Benzene emission rates from 
these activities also vary with the year being modeled, since phase-in of the recently finalized 
mobile source air toxics rule will substantially reduce the amount of benzene in gasoline, 
beginning in 2011.568  Thus, one set of emission factors were developed for 2002, and a separate 
set of emission factors for the reference case in that year.  The reference case also includes 
impacts of the 2007 renewable fuels standard as well.569  Thus, the reference case already reflects 
ethanol volumes mandated by RFS1. 
 
The emission factors used for 2002 were derived from the estimated gasoline distribution 
inventory for benzene in 1999, estimated for the mobile source air toxics rule.570  Total 
nationwide emissions were divided by the energy content of the total volume of gasoline 
distributed in 1999, to obtain the emission factor in g/mmBtu.  Total volume of gasoline was 
based on gasoline sales as reported by the Energy Information Administration.571   To estimate 
the energy content, sales of fuel types (conventional, Federal reformulated, California 
reformulated) were multiplied by their respective heating values. 
 
The emission factors used for the reference case in 2022 were derived from an estimated 
gasoline distribution inventory for that year.  This inventory estimate was calculated by linear 
interpolation of 2020 and 2030 inventories from the mobile source air toxics rule.  Total 
nationwide emissions were divided by the energy content of the total volume of gasoline 
projected for 2022 by the Energy Information Administration.572  To estimate the energy content, 
the projected gasoline volume was multiplied by the heating value for low-sulfur gasoline 
(115,000 BTU/gallon). 
 
We assumed that in order to attain the fuel benzene standard for gasoline promulgated in 
the mobile source air toxics rule, further reductions in fuel benzene would not occur with 
increased E10 production.  However, the E0 emission factor was adjusted to account for the 
lower energy content of E10.  For E85, the emission factor was adjusted to account for 66% 
lower benzene emissions, as well as the lower energy content for E85.   
 
The emission factors for benzene are provided in Table 3.1-27. 
 
To estimate ethanol emissions associated with the distribution of E10 and E85, ethanol to 
benzene emission ratios were applied to benzene estimates.  The ratios were 14.8 for E10 and 
112.8 for E85.  The ratio for E10 was obtained from the profile for composite evaporative 
emissions from U. S. EPA’s SPECIATE database, profile 1301.573  The ratio for E85 was 
obtained from analyses of evaporative emissions from three vehicles tested as part of the 
Auto/Oil program in the early 1990’s.574  These emission factors are reported in Table 3.1-27. 
 
 
424 
Table 3.1-25.  Air Toxic Emission Factors for petroleum refineries, ethanol  
refineries, and electricity production (g/mmBtu of fuel or electricity produced) 
 
Pollutant 
Petroleum 
Refinery 
Ethanol 
refinery 
Electricity 
Production 
1,3-butadiene 0.0014 N. A. 0.0001 
Acetaldehyde 0.0002 3.0585 0.0297 
Acrolein 0.0001 0.1323 0.0115 
Benzene 0.0264 0.0998 0.0443 
Ethanol 0.0000 21.6858  
Formaldehyde 0.0042 0.5263 0.0629 
Naphthalene 0.0029   
 
 
Table 3.1-26.  Air Toxic Emission Factors for Biodiesel  
Production Facilities (g/gallon produced) 
 
Pollutant Toxic/VOC Ratio 
Biodiesel 
Soybean Oil EF 
(g/gal) 
Biodiesel Yellow 
Grease/tallow 
(g/gal) 
Renewable 
Biodiesel Soybean 
Oil (g/gal) 
VOC 
 0.040 0.042 0.029 
Benzene 7.4x10-7 3.0x10-8 3.1x10-8 2.1x10-8 
1,3-Butadiene 0 0 0 0 
Formaldehyde 3.5x10-5 1.4x10-6 1.5x10-6 1.0x10-6 
Acetaldehyde 5.6x10-6 2.3x10-7 2.4x10-7 1.6x10-7 
Acrolein 4.8x10-6 1.9x10-7 2.0x10-7 1.4x10-7 
Ethanol 0 0 0 0 
Naphthalene 6.3x10-7 2.5x10-8 2.6x10-8 1.8x10-8 
  
 
425 
Table 3.1-27.  Air Toxic Evaporative Emission Factors for gasoline, ethanol,  
and blend transport and distribution (g/mmBTU of fuel transported) 
 
Pollutant Process Year Fuel EF (g/mmBtu) 
Benzene Refinery to 
Bulk Terminal 2002 E0 0.0488 
 Refinery to 
Bulk Terminal 2022 E0 0.0270 
 Bulk Terminal 
to Pump 2002 E0 0.0908 
 Bulk Terminal 
to Pump 2022 E0 0.0502 
 Bulk Terminal 
to Pump 2022 E10 0.0519 
 Bulk Terminal 
to Pump 2022 E85 0.0228 
Ethanol Bulk Terminal 
to Pump 2022 E10 1.8591 
 Bulk Terminal 
to Pump 2022 E85 7.1432 
 
 
As mentioned previously, ethanol vapor emissions during transport from the ethanol plant 
to the bulk terminal are based on an adjustment to the gasoline transport VOC emissions to 
account for the much lower vapor pressure and molecular weight.   
 
 There are also toxic emissions associated with combustion of fuels used in transport and 
distribution of feedstocks and fuels.  The emission factors for these are shown in Table 3.1-28 as 
fractions of exhaust VOC, or PM10 for exhaust naphthalene.  The VOC and PM10 emission 
factors that these fractions are applied to are presented above in Table 3.1-22.  The locomotive, 
marine distillate, and residual boiler estimates come from a 2005 EPA report.575  The heavy-duty 
diesel truck emission fractions come from a 2002 report documenting the toxics module of 
EPA's MOBILE6.2 model,576 and the pipeline values come from the EPA AP-42 document.577  
 
 
426 
Table 3.1-28.  Toxic Fractions of exhaust VOC  (or fraction of PM10 for exhaust 
Naphthalene) 
(grams toxics per gram of VOC or PM10) 
 
Mode Source 
1,3-
Butadiene Acetaldehyde Acrolein Benzene Formaldehyde Naphthalene 
Rail 
Diesel 
Locomotive 0.003246519 0.018786 0.0031238 0.002587511 0.04328653 0.0018716 
Barge 
Marine 
Diesel -- 
Distillate 0.00061 0.074298 0.0035 0.020344 0.1496 0.0018716 
Ocean 
Tanker 
Residual 
Boiler 0 0.003858 0 0.000165354 0.02645669 0.0025885 
Truck 
HD Diesel 
Trucks 0.00061 0.0288 0.0035 0.0105 0.0782 0.00128892 
Pipeline 
Natural Gas 
Turbines 0 0.019048 0.0030476 0.005714286 0.33809524   
Gasoline 
Farm Equip 
HD Gasoline 
Trucks 
     0.088005387 
 
 
3.2.  Non-GHG Emission Impact Results  
 
The reference case emission inventories used for this proposed rule are based on different 
sources depending on sector.  
 For stationary/area sources and aircraft we used the 2002 National Emissions Inventory 
(NEI), Version 3, including the NEI projections for 2020.  The development of these inventories 
is documented in the November 27, 2007, memo titled, "Approach for Developing 2002 and 
Future Year National Emission Summaries," from Madeleine Strum to Docket EPA-HQ-OAR-
2007-0491.  That memo summarizes the methodologies and additional reference documents for 
criteria air pollutants (CAP) and mobile source air toxics (MSATs). 
For onroad mobile sources we used a special version of the MOVES model that estimates 
emissions from light-duty and heavy-duty gasoline vehicles, except for motorcycles.  For other 
onroad vehicles including diesel vehicles and motorcycles, we relied on the MOBILE6.2 model 
as run using the NMIM platform with county specific fuel properties and temperatures.  Most 
nonroad equipment was modeled with NONROAD2005d using NMIM, which is a version of the 
NONROAD that includes the benefits of the two nonroad regulations published in 2008 (the 
locomotive and marine diesel rule and the small spark-ignition and recreational marine engine 
rule).   
Inventories for locomotives and commercial marine vessels are not covered by the 
NONROAD model, and they have been updated since the 2002 NEI was published.  Thus we 
used the more recent inventories published in the regulatory impact analyses of their respective 
recent rulemakings.  Locomotives and C1/C2 commercial marine vessel inventories come from 
the spring 2008 final rule, and the C3 commercial marine emission inventory is from the 
Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (ANPRM) published in late 2007.  
427 
Table 3.2-1 shows the total 2022 mobile and non-mobile source inventory projections 
that were used as the basis for the impact percentages shown above in Table 3.2-1 through 3.2-4.  
The mobile source values in this table use the inventory values of the AEO2007 reference case.  
 
 
Table 3.2-1.  2022 Reference case emissions by sector 
 VOC CO NOx PM10 PM2.5 SO2 NH3 
Onroad 
Gasoline 909,960 26,250,531 1,333,977 48,472 44,633 34,031 390,486 
Onroad Diesel 140,854 243,820 501,660 29,894 16,533 4,352 11,426 
Nonroad 
Gasoline 1,434,660 14,718,809 228,632 54,432 50,077 1,422 1,112 
Other Nonroada 276,526 1,608,678 3,379,781 232,711 212,053 1,027,440 3,035 
Stationary/Area 8,740,057 11,049,239 5,773,927 3,194,610 3,047,714 7,864,681 3,839,925 
Total 11,502,057 53,871,078 11,217,977 3,560,119 3,371,010 8,931,926 4,245,983 
 
 
Table 3.2-1 
continued Benzene Ethanol 
1,3-
Butadiene 
Acetal-
dehyde 
Formal-
dehyde Naphthalene Acrolein 
Onroad 
Gasoline 25,363 43,875 3,282 6,623 7,866 4,037 384 
Onroad Diesel 1,749 0 958 3,857 10,589 20 513 
Nonroad 
Gasoline 26,193 71,433 4,935 4,033 7,245 713 436 
Other Nonroada 3,815 12 939 9,549 22,355 24 1,021 
Stationary/Area 111,337 462,566 1,847 13,118 23,846 9,404 3,412 
Total 168,457 577,885 11,961 37,181 71,901 14,198 5,766 
a
 Nonroad diesel, LPG, CNG engines and all locomotive, aircraft, and commercial marine 
 
 
Our projected overall emission impacts for the less sensitive and more sensitive cases are 
shown in Table 3.2-2 and 3.2-3 for 2022, showing the expected emission changes for the U.S. in 
that year, and the percent contribution of this impact relative to the total U.S. inventory across all 
sectors relative to each of the reference cases.   
 
428 
Table 3.2-2. 
RFS2 “Less Sensitive” Case Emission Impacts in 2022 Relative to each Reference Case 
RFS1 Base RFS1 Mandate AEO2007 
Pollutant Annual 
Short Tons 
% of Total 
US 
Inventory 
Annual 
Short Tons 
% of Total 
US 
Inventory 
Annual 
Short Tons 
% of Total 
US 
Inventory 
NOx 312,400 2.8% 274,982 2.5% 195,735 1.7% 
HC 112,401 1.0% 72,362 0.6% -8,193 -0.07% 
PM10 50,305 1.4% 37,147 1.0% 9,276 0.3% 
PM2.5 14,321 0.4% 11,452 0.3% 5,376 0.16% 
CO -2,344,646 -4.4% -1,669,872 -3.1% -240,943 -0.4% 
Benzene -2,791 -1.7% -2,507 -1.5% -1,894 -1.1% 
Ethanol 210,680 36.5% 169,929 29.4% 83,761 14.5% 
1,3-Butadiene 344 2.9% 255 2.1% 65 0.5% 
Acetaldehyde 12,516 33.7% 10,369 27.9% 5,822 15.7% 
Formaldehyde 1,647 2.3% 1,348 1.9% 714 1.0% 
Naphthalene 5 0.03% 3 0.02% -1 -0.01% 
Acrolein 290 5.0% 252 4.4% 174 3.0% 
SO2 28,770 0.3% 4,461 0.05% -47,030 -0.5% 
NH3 -27,161 -0.6% -27,161 0.3% -27,161 -0.64% 
 
 
Table 3.2-3. 
RFS2 “More Sensitive” Case Emission Impacts in 2022 Relative to each Reference Case 
RFS1 Base RFS1 Mandate AEO2007 
Pollutant Annual 
Short Tons 
% of Total 
US 
Inventory 
Annual 
Short Tons 
% of Total 
US 
Inventory 
Annual 
Short Tons 
% of Total 
US 
Inventory 
NOx 402,795 3.6% 341,028 3.0% 210,217 1.9% 
HC 100,313 0.9% 63,530 0.6% -15,948 -0.14% 
PM10 46,193 1.3% 33,035 0.9% 5,164 0.15% 
PM2.5 10,535 0.3% 7,666 0.2% 1,589 0.05% 
CO -3,779,572 -7.0% -3,104,798 -5.8% -1,675,869 -3.1% 
Benzene -5,962 -3.5% -5,494 -3.3% -4,489 -2.7% 
Ethanol 228,563 39.6% 187,926 32.5% 105,264 18.2% 
1,3-Butadiene -212 -1.8% -282 -2.4% -430 -3.6% 
Acetaldehyde 16,375 44.0% 14,278 38.4% 9,839 26.5% 
Formaldehyde 3,373 4.7% 3,124 4.3% 2,596 3.6% 
Naphthalene -175 -1.2% -178 -1.3% -187 -1.3% 
Acrolein 253 4.4% 218 3.8% 143 2.5% 
SO2 28,770 0.3% 4,461 0.05% -47,030 -0.5% 
NH3 -27,161 -0.6% -27,161 -0.6% -27,161 -0.6% 
 
 
429 
Fuel production and distribution emission impacts of the proposed program were 
estimated in conjunction with the development of life cycle GHG emission impacts, and the 
GHG emission inventories discussed in chapter 2.  These emissions are calculated according to 
the breakdowns of agriculture, feedstock transport, fuel production, and fuel distribution; the 
basic calculation is a function of fuel volumes in the analysis year and the emission factors 
associated with each process or subprocess.  Additionally, the emission impact of displaced 
petroleum is estimated, using the same domestic/import shares discussed in chapter 2.   
 
In general the basis for this life cycle evaluation was the analysis conducted as part of the 
Renewable Fuel Standard (RFS1) rulemaking, but enhanced significantly.  While our approach 
for the RFS1 was to rely heavily on the “Greenhouse Gases, Regulated Emissions, and Energy 
Use in Transportation” (GREET) model, developed by the Department of Energy’s Argonne 
National Laboratory (ANL), we are now able to take advantage of additional information and 
models to significantly strengthen and expand our analysis for this proposed rule.  In particular, 
the modeling of the agriculture sector was greatly expanded beyond the RFS1 analysis, 
employing economic and agriculture models to consider factors such as land-use impact, 
agricultural burning, fertilizer, pesticide use, livestock, crop allocation, and crop exports.   
 
Other updates and enhancements to the GREET model assumptions include updated 
emission factors for NOx, CO, and SO2 from new cellulosic ethanol plant modeling by the 
National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL), and updated fuel and feedstock transport 
emission factors that account for recent EPA emission standards and modeling, such as the Tier 4 
diesel truck standards published in 2004 and the locomotive and commercial marine standards 
finalized in 2008.  Emission factors for new corn ethanol plants continue to use the values 
developed for the RFS1 rule, which were based on data submitted by states for dry mill plants.  
There are no new standards planned at this time that would offer any additional control of 
emissions from corn or cellulosic ethanol plants.  In addition, GREET does not include air toxics 
or ethanol.  Thus emission factors for ethanol and the following air toxics were added: benzene, 
1,3-butadiene, formaldehyde, acetaldehyde, acrolein and naphthalene. 
 
Results of these calculations relative to each of the reference cases for 2022 are shown in 
Table 3.2-4 for the criteria pollutants, ammonia, ethanol and individual air toxic pollutants.  It 
should be noted that the impacts relative to the two RFS1 reference cases (3.64 and 6.7 billion 
gallons) rely on applying ethanol volume proportions to the modeling results of the AEO2007 
reference case (13.2 billion gallons).  Due to the complex interactions involved in projections in 
the agricultural modeling, we cannot say how reliable this simple proportional methodology is, 
and the modeling that had been done for the RFS1 rule itself was much simpler and inconsistent 
with the new modeling.  Thus, we plan to conduct additional agricultural modeling specifically 
for the RFS1 mandate case prior to finalizing this rule.     
 
The fuel production and distribution impacts of the proposed program on VOC are 
mainly due to increases in emissions connected with biofuel production, countered by decreases 
in emissions associated with gasoline production and distribution as ethanol displaces some of 
the gasoline.  Increases in NOx, PM2.5, and SOx are driven by combustion emissions from the 
substantial increase in corn and cellulosic ethanol production.  Ethanol plants (corn and 
cellulosic) tend to have greater combustion emissions relative to petroleum refineries on a per-
430 
BTU of fuel produced basis.  Increases in SOx emissions are primarily due to corn ethanol 
production.  Ammonia emissions are expected to decrease substantially due to lower livestock 
counts, which more than offsets increased ammonia from fertilizer use.   
 
Ethanol vapor and most air toxic emissions associated with fuel production and 
distribution are projected to increase.  Relative to the US total reference case emissions with 
RFS1 mandate ethanol volumes, increases of 10 - 20 percent for acetaldehyde and ethanol vapor 
are especially significant because they are driven directly by the increased ethanol production 
and distribution.  Formaldehyde and acrolein increases are smaller, on the order of 1 - 5 percent.  
Benzene emissions are estimated to decrease by 1 percent due to decreased gasoline use.  There 
are also very small increases in 1,3-butadiene and decreases in naphthalene relative to the US 
total emissions.  
 
 
Table 3.2-4.   
Fuel Production and Distribution Impacts in 2022 Relative to each Reference Case 
RFS1 Base RFS1 Mandate AEO2007 
Pollutant Annual 
Short Tons 
% of Total 
US 
Inventory 
Annual 
Short Tons 
% of Total 
US 
Inventory 
Annual 
Short Tons 
% of Total 
US 
Inventory 
NOx 241,041 2.1% 222,732 2.0% 183,951 1.6% 
HC 77,295 0.7% 46,702 0.4% -17,501 -0.2% 
PM10 50,482 1.4% 37,324 1.1% 9,453 0.3% 
PM2.5 14,419 0.4% 11,550 0.3% 5,473 0.16% 
CO 186,559 0.3% 179,855 0.3% 165,656 -0.5% 
Benzene -1,670 -1.0% -1,686 -1.0% -1,719 -1.0% 
Ethanol 115,187 19.9% 100,134 17.3% 68,379 11.8% 
1,3-Butadiene 16 0.13% 16 0.14% 17 0.14% 
Acetaldehyde 7,460 20.1% 6,680 18.0% 5,029 13.5% 
Formaldehyde 877 1.2% 800 1.1% 638 0.9% 
Naphthalene -6 -0.04% -5 -0.04% -4 -0.03% 
Acrolein 278 4.8% 244 4.2% 174 3.0% 
SO2 28,770 0.3% 4,461 0.05% -47,030 -0.5% 
NH3 -27,161 -0.6% -27,161 -0.6% -27,161 -0.6% 
 
 
A breakout of these upstream emissions by where they occur in the 
production/distribution chain is shown in Table 3.2-5.  The displaced gasoline line of this table 
refers to the impacts of decreasing the petroleum based gasoline and diesel fuel production as 
some of the needed energy is replaced with ethanol and biodiesel fuels.   
 
431 
Table 3.2-5. Emission Inventory Impacts by Fuel Production/Distribution segment 
relative to the AEO2007 reference case (annual short tons) 
 VOC CO NOx PM10 PM2.5 SO2 NH3 
Agriculture -4,619 15,449 -8,454 17,074 4,108 12,773 -27,161 
Biofuel Feedstock 
Transport 534 786 2,201 348 149 917 0 
Biofuel 
Production 32,278 159,188 217,975 5,372 6,150 -37,629 0 
Biofuel Transport 
& Distribution -2,217 3,610 12,755 470 355 1,147 0 
Displaced gasoline -43,477 -13,377 -40,526 -13,812 -5,288 -24,238 0 
Total Upstream -17,501 165,656 183,951 9,453 5,473 -47,030 -27,161 
 
Table 3.2-5 
continued Benzene Ethanol 
1,3-
Butadiene 
Acetal-
dehyde 
Formal-
dehyde Naphthalene
b
 Acrolein 
Agriculture -1,665 0 17.71 75 179 -1.25 -13 
Biofuel 
Feedstock 
Transport 
6 0 0.33 15 42 0.45 2 
Biofuel 
Production 156 37,856 -0.01 4,986 835 0.01 191 
Biofuel 
Transport & 
Distribution 
-89 30,523 1.78 17 40 0.84 2 
Displaced 
gasoline -127 0 -3.22 -64 -458 -4.21 -8 
Total Upstream -1,719 68,379 16.59 5,029 638 -4.17 174 
 
 
 Tables 3.2-6 and 3.2-7 summarize the vehicle and equipment emission impacts in 2022 
for the less sensitive and more sensitive cases, including the biodiesel impacts.  Table 3.2-8 
shows that the biodiesel contribution to these impacts is quite small.  While the three fuel effect 
scenarios were only modeled for passenger cars and trucks, these totals reflect the net emissions 
from all mobile sources, including passenger cars and trucks, heavy duty trucks, off-road sources 
and portable fuel containers, using the same emissions in all three cases for the non-passenger 
car/truck categories.  A full description of the basis of these vehicle and equipment emission 
impacts is given in section 3.1.1 of this document.  
 
 
432 
Table 3.2-6. 
2022 Vehicle and Equipment Emission Impacts by Fuel Type  
for the “Less Sensitive” Case Relative to each Reference Case 
 
RFS1 Base RFS1 Mandate AEO2007 
Pollutant Annual 
Short Tons 
% of Total 
US 
Inventory 
Annual 
Short Tons 
% of Total 
US 
Inventory 
Annual 
Short Tons 
% of Total 
US 
Inventory 
NOx 71,359 0.6% 52,250 0.5% 11,784 0.11% 
HC 35,106 0.3% 25,659 0.2% 9,308 0.08% 
PM10 -177 0.00% -177 0.00% -177 0.00% 
PM2.5 -98 0.00% -98 0.00% -98 0.00% 
CO -2,531,205 -4.7% -1,849,728 -3.4% -406,599 -0.8% 
Benzene -1,122 -0.7% -821 -0.5% -174 -0.1% 
Ethanol 95,493 16.5% 69,795 12.1% 15,383 2.7% 
1,3-Butadiene 328 2.7% 238 2.0% 48 0.4% 
Acetaldehyde 5,057 13.6% 3,689 9.9% 793 2.1% 
Formaldehyde 771 1.1% 548 0.8% 76 0.11% 
Naphthalene 10 0.07% 8 0.05% 3 0.02% 
Acrolein 12 0.2% 8 0.14% -0.4 -0.01% 
SO2 0 0.0% 0 0.0% 0 0.0% 
NH3 0 0.0% 0 0.0% 0 0.0% 
 
 
433 
Table 3.2-7.  
2022 Vehicle and Equipment Emission Impacts by Fuel Type 
for the “More Sensitive” Case Relative to each Reference Case 
RFS1 Base RFS1 Mandate AEO2007 
Pollutant Annual 
Short Tons 
% of Total 
US 
Inventory 
Annual 
Short Tons 
% of Total 
US 
Inventory 
Annual 
Short Tons 
% of Total 
US 
Inventory 
NOx 161,754 1.4% 118,295 1.1% 26,266 0.2% 
HC 23,018 0.2% 16,828 0.15% 1,553 0.01% 
PM10 -4,289 -0.12% -4,289 -0.12% -4,289 -0.12% 
PM2.5 -3,884 -0.12% -3,884 -0.12% -3,884 -0.12% 
CO -3,966,131 -7.4% -3,284,654 -6.1% -1,841,524 -3.4% 
Benzene -4,293 -2.6% -3,808 -2.3% -2,770 -1.6% 
Ethanol 113,376 19.6% 87,792 15.2% 36,886 6.4% 
1,3-Butadiene -228 -1.9% -298 2.5% -446 -3.7% 
Acetaldehyde 8,915 24.0% 7,598 20.4% 4,809 12.9% 
Formaldehyde 2,497 3.5% 2,324 3.2% 1,958 2.7% 
Naphthalene -170 -1.2% -172 -1.2% -182 -1.3% 
Acrolein -25 -0.4% -27 -0.5% -31 -0.5% 
SO2 0 0.0% 0 0.0% 0 0.0% 
NH3 0 0.0% 0 0.0% 0 0.0% 
 
 
Table 3.2-8.  
2022 Biodiesel Emission Impacts Relative to All Reference Cases 
(these impacts are included in Tables 3.2-5 and 3.2-6) 
Biodiesel 
Impacts Pollutant 
Annual Short 
Tons 
NOx 418 
HC -753 
PM10 -177 
PM2.5 -98 
CO -1,275 
Benzene -9.4 
Ethanol 0.0 
1,3-Butadiene -5.1 
Acetaldehyde -21 
Formaldehyde -57 
Naphthalene -0.12 
Acrolein -2.7 
SO2 0.0 
NH3 0.0 
 
434 
 
 
 Table 3.2-9 shows a breakout of the relative impacts of this proposal on the various types 
of vehicle and equipment emissions for the more sensitive case relative to the AEO2007 
reference case.  The gasoline vehicle exhaust emission values were generated by MOVES, while 
the NMIM model was used to generate the other vehicle and equipment emission impacts.  The 
impacts on portable fuel container emissions were estimated using an analysis of available data, 
adjusted for the fuel volumes and ethanol and gasoline fuel volumes in this proposal.  The 
methods used are described above in section 3.1.1.  The substantial CO and PM reductions from 
light-duty vehicles are due to the effects of E85.  Evaporative and refueling vapor emissions only 
include VOC, benzene, and naphthalene.  
 
Table 3.2-9.  Vehicle and Equipment Emission Inventory Impacts by Source Type 
for the “More Sensitive” case relative to the AEO2007 reference case (annual short tons) 
 VOCa CO NOx PM10 PM2.5 SO2 NH3 
Light-duty gasoline 
vehicle exhaust -1,945 -1,418,363 14,258 -4,112 -3,786 0 0 
Light-duty gasoline 
vehicle evap -2,549 n/a 
b
 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 
Light-duty gasoline 
vehicle refueling 4,476 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 
Heavy-duty 
gasoline vehicle 
exhaust 
-141 839 1,060 0 0 0 0 
Heavy-duty 
gasoline vehicle 
evap 
44 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 
Heavy-duty 
gasoline vehicle 
refueling 
977 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 
Nonroad gasoline 
equipment exhaust -6,810 -422,725 10,530 0 0 0 0 
Nonroad gasoline 
equipment evap 7,216 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 
Nonroad gasoline 
equipment refueling 6,609 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 
Portable fuel 
containers 1,037 n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 
Onroad diesel 
vehicles -753 -1,275 418 -177 -98 0 0 
 
 
435 
Table 3.2-9 
continued Benzene Ethanol 
1,3-
Butadiene 
Acetal-
dehyde 
Formal-
dehyde 
Naph-
thaleneb Acrolein 
Light-duty gasoline 
vehicle exhaust -2,758 19,850 -474 4,489 1,948 -180 -29 
Light-duty gasoline 
vehicle evap 27 7,981 n/a n/a n/a -4 n/a 
Light-duty gasoline 
vehicle refueling 15 1,034 n/a n/a n/a 2 n/a 
Heavy-duty 
gasoline vehicle 
exhaust 
-19 109 0.46 33 4.6 0 0 
Heavy-duty 
gasoline vehicle 
evap 
0.39 77 n/a n/a n/a 0.02 n/a 
Heavy-duty 
gasoline vehicle 
refueling 
3 214 n/a n/a n/a 0.11 n/a 
Nonroad gasoline 
equipment exhaust -156 3,071 32 308 63 0 1.2 
Nonroad gasoline 
equipment evap 128 4,937 n/a n/a n/a 0 n/a 
Nonroad gasoline 
equipment refueling 108 1,645 n/a n/a n/a 0 n/a 
Portable fuel 
containers -0.30 646 n/a n/a n/a 0.13 n/a 
Onroad diesel 
vehicles -9 0 -5 -21 -57 -0.12 -3 
a
 "VOC" values shown are actually THC for onroad gasoline exhaust and evaporative emissions.  
b
 n/a = Not applicable 
 
 
 Table 3.2-10 shows the relative impacts of various types of renewable fuels on the basis 
of tons per million BTUs of renewable fuel consumed.  These values include all 
vehicle/equipment as well as upstream fuel production/distribution impacts.   
 
436 
Table 3.2-10.  Emission Inventory Impacts (tons per mmBTU)  
by type of renewable fuel relative to the AEO2007 reference case 
 VOC CO NOx PM10 PM2.5 SO2 NH3 
Ethanol from 
domestic corn 
(except coal) 
32.50 -1,131 57.45 41.72 3.62 111.30 -18.85 
Ethanol from 
domestic corn 
(coal) 
-72.28 -1,038 -12.47 332.23 79.56 -131.38 -11.85 
Ethanol from 
domestic 
cellulosic  
-9.32 -1,035 131.30 -0.40 1.69 -55.03 -18.88 
Ethanol from 
imported 
sugarcane 
-23.82 -1,174 -30.37 -10.54 -5.33 -13.71 0.29 
Biodiesel -37.11 -15.20 5.02 4.97 0.35 10.78 -11.04 
Renewable Diesel -24.37 -3.85 -10.63 -2.69 -0.82 -4.85 0.00 
 
Table 3.2-10 
continued Benzene Ethanol 
1,3-
Butadiene 
Acetal-
dehyde 
Formal-
dehyde Naphthalene
b
 Acrolein 
Ethanol from 
domestic corn 
(except coal) 
-0.94 43.35 0.0120 3.42 0.50 -0.0025 0.64 
Ethanol from 
domestic corn 
(coal) 
-0.60 43.35 0.0073 3.40 0.44 -0.0022 0.46 
Ethanol from 
domestic 
cellulosic  
-0.94 47.27 0.0119 3.67 0.51 -0.0026 0.63 
Ethanol from 
imported 
sugarcane 
0.12 19.39 -0.0008 -0.0272 -0.25 -0.0020 0.505 
Biodiesel -0.61 2.89E-07 0.0057 0.0095 -0.15 -0.0026 0.289 
Renewable 
Diesel -0.072 0 -0.0012 -0.0273 -0.25 -0.0022 -0.0035 
 
 
 
3.3 Air Quality Impacts 
 
Section 3.2 of this DRIA presents the projected emissions changes due to the proposed 
rule.  Once the emissions changes are projected, the next step is to look at how the ambient air 
437 
quality would be impacted by those emissions changes.  This section presents information about 
ambient air quality, including discussion of the methodology that we will use to perform ambient 
air quality modeling for the final rule.  Section 3.4 describes the health effects associated with 
criteria and air toxic pollutants.  Section 5.4 describes the methodology for calculating monetized 
benefits of this rule due to reductions in adverse health effects associated with PM2.5 and ozone. 
 
3.3.1 Air Quality Modeling 
 
Air quality models use mathematical and numerical techniques to simulate the physical 
and chemical processes that affect air pollutants as they disperse and react in the atmosphere. 
Based on inputs of meteorological data and source information, these models are designed to 
characterize primary pollutants that are emitted directly into the atmosphere and secondary 
pollutants that are formed as a result of complex chemical reactions within the atmosphere.  
Photochemical air quality models have become widely recognized and routinely utilized tools for 
regulatory analysis by assessing the effectiveness of control strategies.  These models are applied 
at multiple spatial scales - local, regional, national, and global.  Section 3.3.1.2 of this DRIA 
provides more detail on the photochemical model, the Community Multi-scale Air Quality 
(CMAQ) model, which will be utilized for the final rule analysis. 
 
3.3.1.1 Current and Projected Ambient Levels of Pollutants 
 
Although the purpose of this proposal is to implement the renewable fuel requirements 
established by the Energy Independence and Security Act (EISA) of 2007, this proposed rule 
would also impact emissions of criteria and air toxic pollutants.  This section describes current 
and recently projected ambient levels of ozone, PM and some air toxics without the standards 
being proposed in this rule.   
 
3.3.1.1.1 Particulate Matter (PM2.5 and PM10) 
 
As of June 2, 2008, approximately 88 million people live in the 39 areas that are 
designated as nonattainment for the 1997 PM2.5 National Ambient Air Quality Standard 
(NAAQS).  These PM2.5 nonattainment areas are comprised of 208 full or partial counties.  The 
1997 PM2.5 NAAQS were recently revised and the 2006 PM2.5 NAAQS became effective on 
December 18, 2006.  Nonattainment areas will be designated with respect to the 2006 PM2.5 
NAAQS in 2009.  Table 3.3-1 presents the number of counties in areas currently designated as 
nonattainment for the 1997 PM2.5 NAAQS as well as the number of additional counties which 
have monitored data that is greater than the 2006 PM2.5 NAAQS. 
438 
 
Table 3.3-1. 
Counties with Design Values Greater than the 2006 PM2.5 NAAQS Based on 2003-2005 Air 
Quality Data 
 
 
Number of 
Counties 
 
Populationa 
1997 PM2.5 Standards: counties within the 39 areas currently 
designated as nonattainment 
208 88,394,000 
2006 PM2.5 Standards: additional counties that would not 
meet the 2006 PM2.5 NAAQSb 
49 18,198,676 
Total 257 106,592,676 
a
 Population numbers are from 2000 census data.  
b
 Attainment designations for the 2006 PM2.5 NAAQS have not yet been made.  Nonattainment for the 2006 PM2.5 
NAAQS will be based on 3 years of air quality data from later years.  Also, the county numbers in the summary 
table include only the counties with monitors violating the 2006 PM2.5 NAAQS.  The numbers in this table may be 
an underestimate of the number of counties and populations that will eventually be included in areas with multiple 
counties designated nonattainment. 
 
As of June 2, 2008, approximately 29 million people live in the 47 areas that are 
designated as nonattainment for the PM10 NAAQS.  There are 46 full or partial counties that 
make up the PM10 nonattainment areas. 
 
EPA has already adopted many mobile source emission control programs that are 
expected to reduce ambient PM levels.  These control programs include the Marine Spark-
Ignition and Small Spark-Ignition Engine rule (73 FR 59034, October 8, 2008), Locomotive and 
Marine Compression-Ignition Engine Rule (73 FR 25098, May 6, 2008), the Clean Air Nonroad 
Diesel rule (69 FR 38957, June 29, 2004), the Heavy Duty Engine and Vehicle Standards and 
Highway Diesel Fuel Sulfur Control Requirements (66 FR 5002, Jan. 18, 2001) and the Tier 2 
Motor Vehicle Emissions Standards and Gasoline Sulfur Control Requirements (65 FR 6698, 
Feb. 10, 2000).  As a result of these programs, the number of areas that fail to meet the PM2.5 
NAAQS in the future is expected to decrease.  This decrease is shown in the PM air quality 
analyses that were performed for the Marine Spark-Ignition and Small Spark-Ignition Engine 
rule.165  That analysis projected that there would be 11 counties (down from 208 counties 
currently designated as nonattainment), where 24 million people are projected to live, with PM2.5 
design values at or above the 2006 annual PM2.5 standard in 2020. 
 
3.3.1.1.2 Ozone 
 
As of June 2, 2008, approximately 132 million people live in the 57 areas that are 
designated as nonattainment for the 1997 8-hour ozone NAAQS.  There are 293 full or partial 
counties that make up the 8-hour ozone nonattainment areas.  The 1997 ozone NAAQS was 
recently revised and the 2008 ozone NAAQS was finalized on March 12, 2008.  Table 3.3-2 
presents the number of counties in areas currently designated as nonattainment for the 1997 
                                                 
165
 Details on the air quality modeling are provided in the RIA for the Marine Spark-Ignition and Small Spark-
Ignition Engine final rule, included in the docket for this proposed rule. 
439 
ozone NAAQS as well as the number of additional counties that have monitored data that is 
greater than the 2008 ozone NAAQS. 
 
Table 3.3-2. 
Counties with Design Values Greater than the 2008 Ozone
 
NAAQS based on 2004-2006 Air 
Quality Data 
 Number of Counties Populationa 
1997 Ozone Standard:  counties within the 57 
areas currently designated as nonattainment 
293 131,977,890 
2008 Ozone
 
Standard:  additional counties that 
would not meet the 2008 NAAQSb 
74 15,984,135 
Total 367 147,962,025 
Notes: 
a
 Population numbers are from 2000 census data. 
b
 Attainment designations for the 2008 ozone NAAQS have not yet been made.  Nonattainment for the 2008 Ozone 
NAAQS will be based on three years of air quality data from later years.  Also, the county numbers in the table 
include only the counties with monitors violating the 2008 Ozone NAAQS.  The numbers in this table may be an 
underestimate of the number of counties and populations that will eventually be included in areas with multiple 
counties designated nonattainment. 
 
EPA has already adopted many mobile source emission control programs that are 
expected to reduce ambient ozone levels.  These control programs include the Marine Spark-
Ignition and Small Spark-Ignition Engine rule (73 FR 59034, October 8, 2008), Locomotive and 
Marine Compression-Ignition Engine Standards (73 FR 25098, May 6, 2008), the Clean Air 
Nonroad Diesel rule (69 FR 38957, June 29, 2004), the Heavy Duty Engine and Vehicle 
Standards and Highway Diesel Fuel Sulfur Control Requirements (66 FR 5002, Jan. 18, 2001) 
and the Tier 2 Motor Vehicle Emissions Standards and Gasoline Sulfur Control Requirements 
(65 FR 6698, Feb. 10, 2000).  As a result of these programs, the number of areas that fail to meet 
the 8-hour ozone NAAQS in the future is expected to decrease.  This decrease in areas that fail to 
meet the 8-hour ozone NAAQS is shown in the ozone air quality analyses that were performed 
for the Marine Spark-Ignition and Small Spark-Ignition Engine rule.166  That analysis projected 
that there would be 8 counties (down from 293 counties currently designated as nonattainment), 
where 22 million people are projected to live, with 8-hour ozone design values at or above 85 
ppb in 2020. 
 
3.3.1.1.3 Air Toxics 
 
 According to the National Air Toxic Assessment (NATA) for 1999, mobile sources were 
responsible for 44 percent of outdoor toxic emissions and almost 50 percent of the cancer risk.  
Benzene is the largest contributor to cancer risk of all 133 pollutants quantitatively assessed in 
the 1999 NATA.  Mobile sources were responsible for 68 percent of benzene emissions in 1999.  
Over the years, EPA has implemented a number of mobile source and fuel controls resulting in 
VOC reductions, which also reduce benzene and other air toxic emissions.  Recent fuel and 
vehicle standards were implemented to specifically control benzene emissions, and it is expected 
                                                 
166
 Details on the air quality modeling are provided in the RIA for the Marine Spark-Ignition and Small Spark-
Ignition Engine final rule, included in the docket for this proposed rule. 
440 
that overall levels of air toxics will decrease through 2020, after which concentrations start to 
increase slowly due to expected increases in vehicle and engine activity.578    
 
However, as presented in section 3.2 of this DRIA, there would be a substantial increase 
in emissions of ethanol and acetaldehyde from the proposed fuels standards.  This suggests a 
likely increase in ambient levels of acetaldehyde.  Formaldehyde and acrolein emissions would 
also increase somewhat, while emissions of benzene and 1,3-butadiene would decrease as a 
result of the proposed standards.  Full-scale photochemical modeling is necessary to provide the 
needed spatial and temporal detail to more completely and accurately estimate the changes in 
ambient levels of both criteria and non-criteria pollutants.  The plans for full-scale photochemical 
air quality modeling are discussed immediately below in section 3.3.1.2. 
 
3.3.1.2  Community Multi-scale Air Quality (CMAQ) Modeling Plans  
 
Full-scale photochemical air quality modeling is necessary to accurately project levels of 
PM2.5, ozone and air toxics.  For the final rule, a national-scale air quality modeling analysis will 
be performed to analyze the impacts of the standards on PM2.5, ozone, and selected air toxics.  
The length of time needed to prepare necessary inventory and model updates precluded us from 
performing air quality modeling for this proposal. 
 
The atmospheric chemistry related to ambient concentrations of PM2.5, ozone and air 
toxics is very complex, and making predictions based solely on emissions changes is extremely 
difficult.  Localized changes in VOC and NOx emissions, as well as direct PM and PM 
precursors may impact concentrations of PM and ozone.  Air quality modeling will allow us to 
account for both changes in the spatial distribution of PM and PM precursors, and changes in 
VOC speciation which could impact secondary PM formation.  For example, reductions in 
aromatics in gasoline might reduce ambient PM concentrations by reducing secondary PM 
formation.  Section 3.3.3 of this DRIA contains more information on aromatics and secondary 
aerosol formation.  
 
In addition, air quality modeling would account for changes in fuel type and spatial 
distribution of fuels that would change emissions of ozone precursor species and thus could 
affect ozone concentrations.  Section 3.3.2 of this DRIA provides more detail on the atmospheric 
chemistry and potential changes in ozone formation due to increased usage of ethanol fuels. 
 
For the final rule, EPA intends to use a 2005-based CMAQ modeling platform as the tool 
for the air quality modeling.  The CMAQ modeling system is a comprehensive three-dimensional 
grid-based Eulerian air quality model designed to estimate the formation and fate of oxidant 
precursors, primary and secondary PM concentrations and deposition, and air toxics, over 
regional and urban spatial scales (e.g., over the contiguous U.S.).579,580,581  The CMAQ model is 
a well-known and well-respected tool and is commonly used for both regulatory analyses, for 
instance the recent ozone NAAQS rule582, and in developing attainment demonstration State 
Implementation Plans.  The CMAQ model (version 4.6) was peer-reviewed in February of 2007 
for EPA as reported in “Third Peer Review of CMAQ Model.”583 
 
441 
 CMAQ includes many science modules that simulate the emission, production, decay, 
deposition and transport of organic and inorganic gas-phase and particle-phase pollutants in the 
atmosphere.  We intend to use the most recent CMAQ version (v4.7) to be officially released by 
EPA’s Office of Research and Development (ORD) in October 2008, which will reflect updates 
to earlier versions in a number of areas to improve the underlying science.  These include (1) 
enhanced secondary organic aerosol (SOA) mechanism to include chemistry of isoprene, 
sesquiterpene, and aged in-cloud biogenic SOA in addition to terpene; (2) improved vertical 
convective mixing; (3) improved heterogeneous reaction involving nitrate formation; and (4) an 
updated gas-phase chemistry mechanism, Carbon Bond 05 (CB05), with extensions to model 
explicit concentrations of air toxic species as well as chlorine and mercury.  This mechanism, 
CB05-toxics, also computes concentrations of species that are involved in aqueous chemistry and 
that are precursors to aerosols.  Section 3.3.3 of the DRIA for this proposal discusses SOA 
formation and details about the improvements being made to the SOA mechanism within this 
upcoming release of CMAQ. 
 
As shown in Figure 3.3-3 the CMAQ modeling domain covers the continental U.S. and 
portions of Canada and Mexico.  There are two 12 x 12 km horizontal grid resolution modeling 
domains, an Eastern US domain (outlined in red) and a Western US domain (outlined in blue).  
The modeling domain contains 14 vertical layers with the top of the modeling domain at about 
16,200 meters, or 100 millibars (mb). 
 
442 
Figure 3.3-3.  CMAQ 12-km Eastern and Western US Modeling Domains 
 
 
The key inputs to the CMAQ model include emissions from anthropogenic and biogenic 
sources, meteorological data, and initial and boundary conditions.  The CMAQ meteorological 
input files will be derived from a simulation of the Pennsylvania State University / National 
Center for Atmospheric Research Mesoscale Model584 for the entire year of 2005.  This model, 
commonly referred to as MM5, is a limited-area, nonhydrostatic, terrain-following system that 
solves for the full set of physical and thermodynamic equations which govern atmospheric 
motions.  The meteorology for the national 36 km grid and the 12 km Eastern and Western U.S. 
grids will be developed by EPA and described in more detail within the Air Quality Modeling 
Technical Support Document for the final rule.585  The meteorological outputs from MM5 will 
be processed to create model-ready inputs for CMAQ using the Meteorology-Chemistry 
Interface Processor (MCIP) version 3.4 to derive the specific inputs to CMAQ, for example: 
horizontal wind components (i.e., speed and direction), temperature, moisture, vertical diffusion 
rates, and rainfall rates for each grid cell in each vertical layer.586 
 
The lateral boundary and initial species concentrations will be provided by a three-
dimensional global atmospheric chemistry model, the GEOS-CHEM model.587  The global 
GEOS-CHEM model simulates atmospheric chemical and physical processes driven by 
assimilated meteorological observations from the NASA’s Goddard Earth Observing System 
443 
(GEOS).  This model will be run for 2005 with a grid resolution of 2 degree x 2.5 degree 
(latitude-longitude) and 30 vertical layers.  The predictions will be used to provide one-way 
dynamic boundary conditions and an initial concentration field for the 36 km CMAQ 
simulations.  The future base conditions from the 36 km coarse grid modeling will be used as the 
initial/boundary state for all subsequent 12 km finer grid modeling. 
 
3.3.2 Atmospheric Reactions Associated with Ethanol in Gasoline 
 
Ethanol, molecular formula CH3CH2OH, is a volatile organic hydrocarbon and is present 
in the gas-phase in the atmosphere.588  Complete combustion of ethanol in fuel produces carbon 
dioxide (CO2) and water (H2O). 
 
Incomplete combustion results in the production of other air pollutants, such as 
acetaldehyde and other aldehydes, and the release of unburned ethanol.  Ethanol is also present 
in evaporative emissions.  In the atmosphere, ethanol from unburned fuel and evaporative 
emissions can undergo photodegradation to form aldehydes (acetaldehyde and formaldehyde) 
and peroxyacetyl nitrate (PAN), and also plays a role in ground level ozone formation. 
 
Based on kinetic data for molecular reactions, the only important chemical loss process 
for ethanol (and other alcohols) is reaction with the hydroxyl radical (·OH).589  This reaction 
produces acetaldehyde (CH3CHO) with a 90% yield.590  The lifetime of ethanol in the 
atmosphere can be calculated from the rate coefficient, k, and due to reaction with the OH 
radical, occurs on the order of hours in polluted urban areas or several days in unpolluted areas.  
(All rate coefficients are listed at 298 K and, if applicable, 1 bar of air.) 
 
CH3CH2OH + ·OH → CH3C·HOH + H2O  k = 3.2 x 10-12 cm3molecule-1s-1  591 
CH3C·HOH + O2 → CH3CHO + HO2 
 
Reactions of ethanol (and other alcohols) with nitrate radical, ozone, and photolysis are 
slow and of negligible importance in the atmosphere. 
 
3.3.2.1 Aldehydes 
 
3.3.2.1.1 Acetaldehyde  
 
Acetaldehyde is the main photodegradation product of ethanol (see section 3.3.2 of this 
DRIA) as well as other precursor hydrocarbons.  Acetaldehyde is also a product of fuel 
combustion.  In the atmosphere, acetaldehyde can react with the OH radical and O2 to form the 
acetyl peroxy radical [CH3C(O)OO·].167  This radical species can then further react with nitric 
oxide (NO), to produce formaldehyde (HCHO), or with nitrogen dioxide (NO2), to produce PAN 
[CH3C(O)OONO2].  An overview of these reactions and the corresponding reaction rates are 
provided below. 
 
                                                 
167
 Acetaldehyde is not the only source of acetyl peroxy radicals in the atmosphere. For example, dicarbonyl 
compounds (methylglyoxal, biacetyl, and others) also form acetyl radicals, which can further react to form 
peroxyacetyl nitrate (PAN). 
444 
CH3CHO + ·OH → CH3C·O + H2O  k = 1.5 x 10-11 cm3molecule-1s-1  592 
CH3C·O + O2 + M → CH3C(O)OO· + M 
 
CH3C(O)OO· + NO → CH3C(O)O· + NO2  k = 2.0 x 10-11 cm3molecule-1s-1  593 
CH3C(O)O· → ·CH3 + CO2  
·CH3 + O2 + M → CH3OO· + M  
CH3OO· + NO → CH3O· + NO2 
CH3O· + O2 → HCHO + HO2 
 
CH3C(O)OO· + NO2 + M → CH3C(O)OONO2 + M k = 1.0 x 10-11 cm3molecule-1s-1  594 
 
Acetaldehyde can also photolyze (hν), which predominantly produces ·CH3 and HCO: 
 
CH3CHO + hν → ·CH3 + HCO  λ = 240-380 nm 595 
 
As described above, ·CH3 is oxidized in the atmosphere to produce formaldehyde (HCHO). 
 
3.3.2.1.2 Formaldehyde 
 
Formaldehyde is the photodegradation product of acetaldehyde (DRIA section 3.3.2.1.1 
above) as well as other precursor hydrocarbons.  Formaldehyde is also a product of hydrocarbon 
combustion.  In the atmosphere, formaldehyde undergoes photolysis and reaction with the OH 
radical, NO3 radical, and ozone, and the resulting lifetimes are ~4 hours, 1.2 days, 83 days, and 
>4.5 years, respectively.168  Formaldehyde is removed mainly by photolysis whereas the higher 
aldehydes, those with two or more carbons such as acetaldehyde, react predominantly with OH 
radicals.  The photolysis of formaldehyde is important since it is a source of additional radicals. 
 
HCHO + hν → H + HCO  λ = 240-360 nm 596 
 
3.3.2.2 Peroxyacetyl Nitrate (PAN) 
 
PAN is a reservoir and carrier of NOx.  PAN is the product of acetyl radicals reacting 
with NO2 in the atmosphere.  One source of PAN is the photooxidation of acetaldehyde (see 
section 3.3.2.1.1 of this DRIA), but any hydrocarbon having a methyl group has the potential for 
forming acetyl radicals and therefore PAN.169  PAN can undergo thermal decomposition with a 
lifetime of approximately 1 hour at 298K or 148 days at 250K. 
 
CH3C(O)OONO2 + M → CH3C(O)OO· + NO2 + M  k = 3.3 x 10-4 s-1 597 
 
                                                 
168
 Lifetime calculated using the following: for photolysis, with overhead sun (at noontime during the summer); for 
OH radical reactions, a 12-hour daytime average of 2.0 x 106 molecule cm-3; for NO3 radical reactions, a 12-hour 
nighttime average of 5 x 108 molecule cm-3; and for ozone, a 24-hour average of 7 x 1011 molecule cm-3. 
169
 Many aromatic hydrocarbons, particularly those present in high percentages in gasoline (toluene, m-, o-, p-
xylene, and 1,3,5-, 1,2,4-trimethylbenzene), form methylglyoxal and biacetyl, which are also strong generators of 
acetyl radicals (Smith, D.F., T.E. Kleindienst, C.D. McIver (1999) Primary product distribution from the reaction of 
OH with m-, p-xylene and 1,2,4- and 1,3,5-Trimethylbenzene. J. Atmos. Chem., 34: 339- 364.). 
445 
This temperature sensitivity allows PAN to be stable enough at low temperatures to be 
transported long distances before decomposing to release NO2.  NO2 can then participate in 
ozone formation in regions remote from the original NOx source.598 
 
3.3.2.3 Ozone Formation 
 
The series of reactions described above plays a role in the formation of ground level 
ozone.  In the photodegradation reactions, NO is converted to NO2 (see OH radical reaction of 
acetaldehyde in section 3.3.2.1.1 of this DRIA).  In the thermal decomposition of PAN, NO2 is 
released.  In both cases, NO2 further photolyzes to produce ozone (O3). 
 
NO2 + hν → NO + O(3P)   λ = 300-800 nm 599 
O(3P) + O2 + M → O3 + M 
 
3.3.2.4 Chemical Mechanisms in Modeling 
 
The RFS2 rule is presenting inventories for ethanol and six air toxics -- benzene, 1,3-
butadiene, formaldehyde, acetaldehyde, acrolein, and naphthalene.  All of these compounds are 
explicit model species in the CMAQv4.7 model with carbon bond 5 (CB05) mechanisms.600  
However, CMAQ also requires inventories for a large number of other air toxics and precursor 
pollutants.  Inventories for these other pollutants will be developed either by running the 
National Mobile Inventory Model (NMIM) or by application of speciation profiles to VOC.   
 
Emissions of benzene, 1,3-butadiene, formaldehyde, acetaldehyde, acrolein, and 
naphthalene for light duty gasoline vehicles will be generated using the Motor Vehicle Emissions 
Simulator (MOVES).  Ethanol emissions for air quality modeling will be based on speciation of 
VOC using different ethanol profiles (E0, E10, and E85).  Light duty gasoline vehicle air toxic 
emissions not modeled by MOVES will be based on NMIM outputs, as will emissions of mobile 
source air toxic pollutants from other vehicle classes and nonroad engines.  All other pollutants 
will be modeled by application of speciation profiles to VOC.   MOVES, NMIM, and the 
speciation profiles which will be used all account for impacts of ethanol on emissions. 
 
CMAQ has the capability to track and quantify primary emissions of acetaldehyde 
separately from acetaldehyde formed by secondary reactions.  In determining how much of the 
acetaldehyde in ambient air is from primary (emitted) versus secondary (produced in the 
atmosphere) sources, CMAQ would account for the degradation of primary emissions of 
acetaldehyde (lessening the impact of these emissions on total acetaldehyde) plus the formation 
of secondary acetaldehyde from other precursors. 
 
The CB05 mechanisms also have a species170 representing higher molecular weight 
aldehydes, those with three or more carbons.  These aldehydes form, among other products, 
acetaldehyde.  To the extent that these higher molecular weight aldehydes decrease or increase in 
the exhaust with increased use of ethanol, the amount of acetaldehyde formed in the ambient air 
is affected.  The amount of acetaldehyde, as well as formaldehyde, formed in the ambient air as 
                                                 
170
 The word species represents a technique used to lump several similar compounds into a  single ‘bin’ for 
streamlining the numerical calculations performed by the model. 
446 
well as emitted in the exhaust (the latter being accounted for in emission inventories) would also 
be affected by any changes in alkanes and alkenes due to the addition of ethanol to fuels (i.e., 
decreases in alkanes and alkenes would cause some decrease of acetaldehyde, and to a larger 
extent, formaldehyde).  As mentioned above, the exhaust level of these aldehydes could be 
affected by use of ethanol which would also be incorporated into the modeling. 
 
The addition of ethanol to fuels has been shown to contribute to PAN formation and 
therefore ozone formation (discussed below in DRIA section 3.3.2.5), and these compounds 
would be quantified by CMAQ.  Additionally, other aromatic hydrocarbons (AHC) and 
hydrocarbons are considered because any increase in acetyl peroxy radicals due to ethanol 
increases might be counterbalanced by a decrease in radicals resulting from decreases in AHC 
and other hydrocarbons. 
 
CMAQ includes 63 inorganic reactions to account for the cycling of all relevant oxidized 
nitrogen species and cycling of radicals, including the termination of NO2 and formation of nitric 
acid (HNO3) without PAN formation. 
 
NO2 + ·OH + M → HNO3 + M   k = 1.19 x 10-11 cm3molecule-1s-1  601 
 
The mechanism also includes more than 90 organic reactions that include alternate 
pathways for the formation of acetyl peroxy radical, such as by reaction of methylglyoxal, which 
is also formed from reactions of AHC.  Alternate reactions of acetyl peroxy radical, such as 
oxidation of NO to form NO2, which again leads to ozone formation, are also included. 
 
It is unclear whether ozone and other atmospheric oxidants (such as OH radical) would 
increase or decrease with the increased usage of ethanol fuels, or where the largest impacts 
would occur. The decreases in hydrocarbons other than ethanol in fuels, especially the AHC, 
would counteract the effects of increased acetaldehyde exhaust emissions to some extent, since 
AHC contribute to ozone formation.  NOx increases or decreases would also have a critical 
effect on ozone.  Moreover, changes in CO emissions would also impact regional background 
ozone.  Modeling the ethanol fuels exhaust and evaporative emissions and the complex 
chemistry they undergo in the ambient atmosphere would allow a better assessment of the 
impacts of the changes in fuel composition. 
 
3.3.2.5 Ambient Monitoring and Modeling Data 
 
Ambient monitoring and modeling studies in the US and abroad quantify the relative 
concentrations of ethanol emissions and the potential air quality impacts of using ethanol in 
fuels. 
 
3.3.2.5.1 US Studies 
 
In the late 1980s Denver, Colorado adopted the first regulation in the country that 
required the use of oxygenated fuels to reduce carbon monoxide (CO) emissions.  From the time 
the regulation was first adopted, the fuels used shifted from methyl tertiary butyl ether (MTBE) 
and gasoline to largely ethanol-blended fuels.  By the winter of 1996-1997, nearly all of the fuel 
447 
was blended with ethanol at 10% by volume.  The effect of using oxygenated fuels on 
formaldehyde and acetaldehyde concentrations were monitored from the winter of 1987-1988 
(95% of fuel blended with MTBE) through the winter of 1996-1997 (nearly all fuel blended with 
ethanol).602  Results showed no clear effect on ambient concentrations of formaldehyde and 
acetaldehyde through ten winters of oxygenated fuels use.  It was hypothesized that the 
photochemical destruction of these compounds suppressed the emissions effect. 
 
Albuquerque, NM is another location that mandated the use of oxygenates in the 
wintertime to reduce CO emissions. A field study was conducted in Albuquerque to determine 
the atmospheric impacts of the use of ethanol fuels.603 Atmospheric concentrations of ozone, 
NOx, CO, PAN, aldehydes, and organic acids were measured in the summer of 1993, before the 
use of ethanol fuels, and in the winters of 1994 and 1995, during the use of 10% ethanol fuel 
(>99%). Results showed increased levels of PAN and aldehydes in winter.  Seasonal differences 
were not accounted for.  The authors noted that the daytime temperatures were fairly comparable 
for the summer and winter study periods so it appeared that the significantly higher winter 
values, despite the much lower photochemical reactivity in winter, were primarily due to local 
production of PAN.  For acetaldehyde, winter values were about twice as high as the summer 
values.  These acetaldehyde levels anti-correlated with PAN levels, indicating a primary source 
of aldehydes in the winter. 
 
Grosjean et al (2002) conducted monitoring studies in various California cities and 
measured daily maximum PAN concentrations ranging from 0.2 to 6.9 ppb.604  Peroxypropionyl 
nitrate (PPN, a compound similar to PAN) concentrations were measured at lower levels and 
ranged from 0.33-1.04 ppb.  This study concluded that aromatics and alkene compounds are 
responsible for significant PAN formation with ethanol and acetaldehyde having a minor role. 
 
A modeling analysis performed by the California Air Resources Board suggests PAN 
formation with increased use of ethanol, but the increase was somewhat minimal.605  
Acetaldehyde and ethanol concentrations were shown to increase for the ethanol-blended fuels 
by 1 to 6% and 37 to 121%, respectively.  The changes in acetaldehyde and ethanol 
concentrations were predicted to lead to a 1 to 3% increase in PAN concentration, similar to the 
3% increase in PAN concentration predicted for the non-oxygenated gasoline.  Benzene (0 to -
9%), formaldehyde (-1 to -2%), and NO2 (0 to 1%) concentrations stayed the same or decreased, 
and changes in 1,3-butadiene (-2 to 2%) and PPN (-1 to 4%) were similarly modest.  
Consequently, a sensitivity analysis of PAN formation indicated that increases in acetaldehyde 
and ethanol emissions would not lead to substantially higher PAN concentrations, presumably 
because other VOCs are larger contributors to PAN formation. 
 
Another air quality modeling study investigated the impacts of widespread usage of E85 
in Los Angeles and the US in 2020.606  Overall results showed increases in acetaldehyde and 
formaldehyde and decreases in 1,3-butadiene and benzene in Los Angeles and the US.  Sources 
of acetaldehyde included direct emissions and to a larger degree photooxidation of unburned 
ethanol.  Results of this modeling study also showed increases in unburned ethanol, PAN, and 
ozone for a future E85 scenario. 
 
448 
The US studies discussed here are winter studies and the lack of summer studies makes it 
difficult to quantify the magnitude of air quality impacts of ethanol fuel usage, which are 
expected to be greatest during the summer. 
 
3.3.2.5.2 Brazilian Studies 
 
The following studies investigate changes in ambient concentrations of several air 
pollutants that result from the use of ethanol fuels in Brazil.  These studies are not directly 
relevant to the US due to differences such as vehicles, fuels, and climate; therefore, the EPA 
could not draw upon these conclusions to assess the magnitude of the impact of ethanol fuels on 
air quality.  However, these studies do provide useful information on potential directional 
changes in pollutant levels with widespread ethanol use. 
 
Brazil is the only country in the world where a nationwide, large-scale alcohol fuel 
program has been implemented.  In 1997, approximately 4 million automobiles ran on neat 
ethanol and approximately nine million automobiles ran on a 22% ethanol-blended gasoline 
mixture.607 
 
In Salvador, Bahia, Brazil, ambient levels of formaldehyde and acetaldehyde and their 
relationship with vehicular fleet composition was evaluated.608  The measured concentrations for 
formaldehyde and acetaldehyde ranged from 0.20 to 88 ppbv and from 0.40 to 93 ppbv, 
respectively.  The ratio of formaldehyde to acetaldehyde revealed the relationship of vehicular 
fleet composition to ambient levels.  In locations where ethanol-fueled vehicular emissions 
dominated, the ratio decreased, versus locations where diesel-fueled vehicles dominated.  
Sampling in rural areas showed no relationship between formaldehyde and acetaldehyde. 
 
Acetaldehyde and formaldehyde concentrations were measured in the winter of 1999 in 
Sao Paulo, Brazil.609  Ambient levels of these carbonyls were similar. Higher average mixing 
ratios of acetaldehyde and formaldehyde were found in the morning (18.9 and 17.2 ppbv) than 
midday (9.5 and 11.8 ppbv) and evening (7.2 and 10.2 ppbv). In the morning, direct emission 
from vehicles seemed to be the main primary source, whereas at midday and evening these 
compounds appeared to result mainly from photochemistry. 
 
A survey of volatile organic compounds in areas impacted by heavy traffic, including a 
tunnel, was obtained for Sao Paulo.610  Researchers found the ambient air was dominated by 
ethanol (414 ppbv) with elevated methanol and 1- and 2-propanol.  These levels were well above 
those measurements available for US cities, particularly Los Angeles, CA.  The overall data 
trend also showed levels of C4-C9 n-aldehydes to be approximately 10 times higher than in Los 
Angeles.  They conclude that the use of alcohol-based fuels is the primary source for these 
differences since alcohol comprises about 40% of the mobile fuel by volume compared to 3% in 
Los Angeles.  Also, the single-ring aromatic hydrocarbons (2.6 ppbv benzene, 9.0 ppbv toluene, 
4.6 ppbv m,p-xylene) and the C4-C11 n-alkanes were similar or slightly elevated in concentration 
compared to Los Angeles. 
 
A study in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil some years ago measured and modeled ambient PAN 
concentrations.611  The measurements were as high as 5 ppb over a 200 day period, but typically 
449 
below 1 ppb, at one site; at another site, as high as 3 ppb, but again generally below 1 ppb.  
Modeling estimates were as high as 3 ppb for PAN and 1 ppb for PPN.  This study concluded 
that with increased use of ethanol in fuels there would be increases in ambient PAN. 
 
More recent monitoring studies in Brazil measured daily maximum PAN concentrations 
ranging from 0.19 to 6.67 ppb.612  Also, PPN was measured at lower levels of 0.06 to 0.72 ppb.  
During the 41 days of these measurements, PAN levels accounted for a large fraction of the 
ambient NOx.  This study concluded that aromatics and alkene compounds are responsible for 
significant PAN formation with ethanol and acetaldehyde having a minor role. 
 
Speciated ambient carbonyls have also been measured in Rio de Janeiro.613  The most 
abundant carbonyls were formaldehyde (9.3 ppb) and acetaldehyde (9.0 ppb).  They also 
examined the ambient acetaldehyde to formaldehyde concentration ratio in Brazilian cities since 
mid-1980 in the context of changes in Brazil’s reliance on ethanol as a vehicle fuel.  They 
showed that this ratio has begun to decrease in recent years due to fleet turnover and decrease in 
ethanol-fueled vehicles.  Ethanol-fueled vehicles are being replaced by lower-emitting models 
that run on a gasoline-ethanol blend. 
 
Using an empirical kinetic modeling approach, researchers simulated ozone, 
formaldehyde, and acetaldehyde concentrations for the urban downtown area of Rio de 
Janeiro.614  The simulated ozone peak was in good agreement with monitoring results.  Modeling 
results also showed that acetaldehyde and formaldehyde concentrations were highest in early 
morning, reaching a maximum which coincided with peak vehicular traffic.  Additionally, they 
confirmed monitoring evidence that the high acetaldehyde to formaldehyde ratios were due to 
the use of alcohol-based fuels. 
 
These studies modeled and measured ambient concentrations of several compounds that 
result from the use of ethanol fuels.  However, the direct impacts of ethanol fuel usage on air 
quality in Brazil could not be evaluated since there were no ambient data available prior to the 
use of ethanol fuel. 
 
3.3.3 Aromatics and SOA Formation 
 
Particulate matter (PM) is an air pollutant consisting of a complex mixture of particles 
that can be solid, liquid or both, are suspended in the air, and consist of organic and inorganic 
substances. These particles vary in size, composition and origin.  The major PM components are 
sulfate, nitrates, ammonia, carbon, crustal material and water.  
 
Primary PM is emitted directly into the atmosphere from anthropogenic and biogenic 
processes.  Primary PM includes PM from mobile sources and, on a mass basis, is largely 
carbonaceous in nature.  Various studies have shown that mobile sources are a major source of 
primary PM in urban areas over many portions of the United States.615,616,617,618,619,620,621  Primary 
PM that is carbonaceous is also referred to as primary organic aerosol (POA). 
 
Secondary PM is formed in the atmosphere from chemical transformations of gases.  
Secondary products include sulfates, nitrates and organics.  Secondary organic aerosol (SOA) 
450 
results when products of atmospheric transformation or photooxidation of a volatile organic 
compound (VOC) form or partition to the particle phase.  Current research suggests SOA 
contributes significantly to ambient organic aerosol (OA) concentrations, and in southeast and 
midwest states may make up more than 50% (although the contribution varies from area to area) 
of the organic fraction of PM2.5 during the summer (but less in the winter).622,623  A wide range of 
laboratory studies conducted over the past twenty years show that anthropogenic aromatic 
hydrocarbons and long-chained alkanes, along with biogenic isoprene, monoterpenes, and 
sesquiterpenes, contribute to SOA formation.624  Based on these laboratory results, SOA 
chemical mechanisms have been developed and integrated into air quality models such as the 
Community Multiscale Air Quality (CMAQ) model and have been used to predict OA 
concentrations.625  Studies have also shown that alkanes could be important anthropogenic SOA 
contributors.626,627,628,629 
 
Over the past 10 years, ambient OA concentrations have been routinely measured in the 
U.S. and some of these data have been used to determine, by employing source/receptor 
methods, the contributions of the major OA sources, including biomass burning and vehicular 
gasoline and diesel exhaust.  Since mobile sources are a significant source of VOC emissions, 
currently accounting for approximately 50% of anthropogenic VOC,630 mobile sources are also 
an important source of SOA. 
 
Toluene is an important contributor to anthropogenic SOA, although anthropogenic SOA 
is a small portion of all SOA.  Other aromatic compounds contribute as well, but the extent of 
their contribution has not been quantified.  Mobile sources are the most significant contributor to 
ambient toluene concentrations as shown by analyses done for the 1999 National Air Toxics 
Assessment (NATA)631 and the Mobile Source Air Toxics (MSAT) Rule.632  MSAT rule 
analyses indicate that onroad and nonroad mobile sources accounted for 68% (2.22 µg/m3) of the 
total average nationwide ambient concentration of toluene in 1999 (3.24 µg/m3). 
 
The amount of toluene in gasoline influences the amount of toluene emitted in vehicle 
exhaust and evaporative emissions.  In turn, levels of toluene and other aromatics in gasoline are 
potentially influenced by the amount of ethanol blended into the fuel. Due to the high octane 
quality of ethanol, it greatly reduces the need for and levels of other high-octane components 
such as aromatics including toluene (which is the major aromatic compound in gasoline) when 
ethanol is used as a component of gasoline.  Since toluene contributes to SOA and the toluene 
level of gasoline is decreasing, it is important to assess the effect of these reductions on ambient 
PM.  To do this, EPA plans to run air quality models to assess the overall role of toluene’s 
contribution to ambient PM and the benefits that would accrue from PM reductions associated 
with gasoline/ethanol blends having lower aromatic levels. 
 
There is also the potential for ethanol to directly form SOA or affect SOA formation 
indirectly through changes in the radical populations from increasing ethanol exhausts.  
However, there is a lack of evidence for both.  Scientists at the U.S. EPA’s Office of Research 
and Development’s National Exposure Research Laboratory recently directed a couple of 
experiments to investigate ethanol’s SOA forming potential.633  The experiments were conducted 
under conditions where peroxy radical reactions would predominate (irradiations performed in 
the absence of NOx and OH produced from the photolysis of hydrogen peroxide). This was the 
451 
most likely scenario under which SOA formation could occur, since a highly oxygenated C4 
organic would be potentially made. As expected, no SOA was produced. From these 
experiments, the upper limit for the aerosol yield would have been less than 0.01% based on 
scanning mobility particle sizer data. Given the expected negative result, this data was not 
published. 
 
In general, a review of the literature shows limited data on SOA concentrations, largely 
due to the lack of analytical methods for identifying and determining the concentrations of the 
highly polar organic compounds that make up SOA.  The most widely applied method of 
estimating total ambient SOA concentrations is the EC tracer method using ambient data and 
estimates of the OC/EC ratio in primary source emissions.634,635  SOA concentrations have also 
been estimated using OM (organic mass) to OC (organic carbon) ratios, which can indicate that 
SOA formation has occurred, or by subtracting the source/receptor-based total POA from the 
measured OC concentration.636  Such methods, however, may not be quantitatively accurate and 
provide no information on the contribution of individual biogenic and anthropogenic SOA 
sources, which is critical information needed to assess the impact of specific sources and the 
associated health risk.  In particular, the contributions of anthropogenic SOA sources, including 
those of aromatic precursors, are required to determine exposures and risks associated with 
replacing fossil fuels with biofuels. 
 
Upon release into the atmosphere, numerous VOC compounds can react with free 
radicals in the atmosphere to form SOA.  While this has been investigated in the laboratory, there 
is relatively little information available on the specific chemical composition of SOA compounds 
themselves from specific VOC precursors.  This absence of compositional data has largely 
prevented the identification of aromatically-derived SOA in ambient samples which, in turn, has 
prevented observation-based measurements of the aromatic and other SOA contributions to 
ambient PM levels. 
 
As a first step in determining the ambient SOA concentrations, EPA has developed a 
tracer-based method to estimate such concentrations.637,638  The method is based on using mass 
fractions of SOA tracer compounds, measured in smog chamber-generated SOA samples, to 
convert ambient concentrations of SOA tracer compounds to ambient SOA concentrations.  This 
method consists of irradiating the SOA precursor of interest in a smog chamber in the presence 
of NOx, collecting the SOA produced on filters, and then analyzing the samples for highly polar 
compounds using advanced analytical chemistry methods.  Employing this method, candidate 
tracers have been identified for several VOC compounds which are emitted in significant 
quantities and known to produce SOA in the atmosphere.  Some of these SOA-forming 
compounds include toluene, a variety of monoterpenes, isoprene, and β-caryophyllene; the latter 
three of which are emitted by vegetation.  Smog chamber work can also be used to investigate 
SOA chemical formation mechanisms.639,640,641,642 
 
Although these concentrations are only estimates, due to the assumption that the mass 
fractions of the smog chamber SOA samples using these tracers are equal to those in the ambient 
atmosphere, there are presently no other means available for estimating the SOA concentrations 
originating from individual SOA precursors.  Among the tracer compounds observed in ambient 
PM2.5 samples are two tracer compounds that have been identified in smog chamber aromatic 
452 
SOA samples.643  To date, these aromatic tracer compounds have been identified, in the 
laboratory, for toluene and m-xylene SOA.  Additional work is underway by the EPA to 
determine whether these tracers are also formed by benzene and other alkylbenzenes (including 
o-xylene, p-xylene, 1,2,4-trimethylbenzene, and ethylbenzene). 
 
One caveat regarding this work is that a large number of VOCs emitted into the 
atmosphere, which have the potential to form SOA, have not yet been studied in this way.  It is 
possible that these unstudied compounds produce SOA species which are being used as tracers 
for other VOCs.  This means that the present work could overestimate the amount of SOA 
formed in the atmosphere by the VOCs studied to date.  This approach may also estimate entire 
hydrocarbon classes (e.g. all methylsubstituted-monoaromatics or all monoterpenes) and not 
individual precursor hydrocarbons.  Thus the tracers could be broadly representative and not 
indicative of individual precursors.  This is still unknown.  Also, anthropogenic precursors play a 
role in formation of atmospheric radicals and aerosol acidity, and these factors influence SOA 
formation from biogenic hydrocarbons.  This anthropogenic and biogenic interaction, important 
to EPA and others, needs further study.  The issue of SOA formation from aromatic precursors is 
an important one to which EPA and others are paying significant attention. 
 
For benzene, smog chamber studies show that benzene forms SOA possibly through 
reactions with NOx.  Early smog chamber work suggests benzene might be relatively inert in 
forming SOA, although this study may not be conclusive.644  However, more recent work shows 
that benzene does form SOA in smog chambers.645  This new smog chamber work shows that 
benzene can be oxidized in the presence of NOx to form SOA with maximum mass of SOA 
being 8-25% of the mass of benzene.  As mentioned above, work is needed to determine if a 
tracer compound can be found for benzene SOA which might indicate how much of ambient 
SOA comes from benzene. 
 
The aromatic tracer compounds and their mass fractions have also been used to estimate 
monthly ambient aromatic SOA concentrations from March 2004 to February 2005 in five U.S. 
Midwestern cities.646  The annual tracer-based SOA concentration estimates were 0.15, 0.18, 
0.13, 0.15, and 0.19 μg carbon/m3 for Bondville, IL, East St. Louis, IL, Northbrook, IL, 
Cincinnati, OH and Detroit, MI, respectively, with the highest concentrations occurring in the 
summer.  On average, the aromatic SOA concentrations made up 17 % of the total SOA 
concentration.  Thus, this work suggests that we are finding ambient PM levels on an annual 
basis of about 0.15 μg/m3 associated with present toluene levels in the ambient air in these 
Midwest cities.  Based on preliminary analysis of recent laboratory experiments, it appears the 
toluene tracer could also be formed during photooxidation of some of the xylenes.647 
 
Over the past decade a variety of modeling studies have been conducted to predict 
ambient SOA levels, with most studies focusing on the contributions of biogenic monoterpenes 
and anthropogenic aromatic hydrocarbons.  More recently, modelers have begun to include the 
contribution of the isoprene SOA to ambient OC concentrations.648  In general, the studies have 
been limited to comparing the sum of the POA and SOA concentrations with ambient OC 
concentrations. The general consensus in the atmospheric chemistry community appears to be 
that monoterpene contributions, which are clearly significant, and the somewhat smaller 
aromatic contributions, are insufficient to account for observed ambient SOA levels.  Part of this 
453 
gap has been filled recently by SOA predictions for isoprene.  Furthermore, the identification in 
ambient SOA of a tracer compound for the sesquiterpene β-caryophyllene,649 coupled with the 
high sesquiterpene SOA yields measured in the laboratory,650 suggests this class of hydrocarbons 
should be included in SOA chemical mechanisms.  In addition, recent data on SOA formation 
from aromatic hydrocarbons suggest their contributions could be larger than previously 
thought.651 
 
Based on laboratory experiments, researchers have proposed a new aromatic SOA 
chemical mechanism that takes into account both the impact of NOx on SOA formation and the 
contribution of benzene to SOA formation. EPA has updated the SOA treatment in CMAQ by 
using this new mechanism, along with (1) laboratory-determined thermodynamic enthalpies of 
vaporization and SOA-to-secondary organic carbon ratios, (2) SOA contributions from 
sesquiterpenes and isoprene, (3) an elementary treatment of acid catalyzed SOA from isoprene, 
(4) a simple treatment of SOA oligomerization, and (5) SOA contributions from dicarbonyl 
compounds (glyoxyl, methylglyoxyl) that dissolve in cloud water and are oxidized to form 
oligomers. 
 
This new SOA mechanism was first evaluated by comparing simple box model 
predictions with field measurements, and initial comparisons indicated the mechanism might 
underpredict the ambient SOA data.  This underprediction might be due to potential 
shortcomings in the tracer contribution method as well as difficulties associated with using the 
laboratory-based Odum model approach to predict ambient SOA concentrations.  An 
underprediction in ambient SOA data might result in an underprediction of SOA benefits that 
might result from decreasing aromatic content due to increasing ethanol content in gasoline.  On 
the other hand, aldehydes produced from the oxidation of ethanol could increase the SOA 
formed in cloud water, but only two aldehydes (glyoxal and methylglyoxal) are considered in the 
current SOA treatment.  More fundamental research will be required to further enhance the SOA 
mechanism.  Recently, the EPA awarded seven grants totaling $3.8 million to leading SOA 
researchers for additional mechanistic research. 
 
The new SOA mechanism has been integrated into CMAQ version 4.7 and has undergone 
internal EPA evaluation.  The SOA predictions have been compared with ambient OC 
concentrations measured at PM2.5 monitoring sites across the country, CMAQ version 4.7 with 
the new SOA chemical mechanism will be used in the final rule.  Public release of this version of 
the model is currently scheduled to occur by the end of October 2008. 
 
 
3.4 Health Effects 
 
In this Section we will discuss the health and environmental effects associated with 
particulate matter, ozone, carbon monoxide and air toxics.  The renewable fuel requirements 
established by the Energy Independence and Security Act (EISA) of 2007 will impact emissions 
of criteria and air toxic pollutants. 
 
3.4.1 Health Effects of Particulate Matter 
 
454 
 As stated in EPA’s Particulate Matter Air Quality Criteria Document (PM AQCD), 
available scientific findings “demonstrate well that human health outcomes are associated with 
ambient PM.”171  We are relying on the data and conclusions in the PM AQCD and PM Staff 
Paper, which reflects EPA’s analysis of policy-relevant science from the PM AQCD, regarding 
the health effects associated with particulate matter.652,653  We also present additional recent 
studies published after the cut-off date for the PM AQCD.172654  Taken together this information 
supports the conclusion that PM-related emissions are associated with adverse health effects.   
 
3.4.1.1 Short-term Exposure Mortality and Morbidity Studies 
 
As discussed in the PM AQCD, short-term exposure to PM2.5 is associated with mortality 
from cardiopulmonary diseases (PM AQCD, p. 8-305), hospitalization and emergency 
department visits for cardiopulmonary diseases (PM AQCD, p. 9-93), increased respiratory 
symptoms (PM AQCD, p. 9-46), decreased lung function (PM AQCD Table 8-34) and 
physiological changes or biomarkers for cardiac changes (PM AQCD, Section 8.3.1.3.4).  In 
addition, the PM AQCD describes a limited body of new evidence from epidemiologic studies 
for potential relationships between short term exposure to PM and health endpoints such as low 
birth weight, preterm birth, and neonatal and infant mortality. (PM AQCD, Section 8.3.4). 
 
Among the studies of effects from short-term exposure to PM2.5, several specifically 
address the contribution of mobile sources to short-term PM2.5 effects on daily mortality.  These 
studies indicate that there are statistically significant associations between mortality and PM 
related to mobile source emissions (PM AQCD, p.8-85).  The analyses incorporate source 
apportionment tools into daily mortality studies and are briefly mentioned here. Analyses 
incorporating source apportionment by factor analysis with daily time-series studies of daily 
death indicated a relationship between mobile source PM2.5 and mortality.655,656  Another recent 
study in 14 U.S. cities examined the effect of PM10 exposures on daily hospital admissions for 
cardiovascular disease.  This study found that the effect of PM10 was significantly greater in 
areas with a larger proportion of PM10 coming from motor vehicles, indicating that PM10 from 
these sources may have a greater effect on the toxicity of ambient PM10 when compared with 
other sources.657  These studies provide evidence that PM-related emissions, specifically from 
mobile sources, are associated with adverse health effects. 
 
3.4.1.2 Long-term Exposure Mortality and Morbidity Studies 
 
Long-term exposure to elevated ambient PM2.5 is associated with mortality from 
cardiopulmonary diseases and lung cancer (PM AQCD, p. 8-307), and effects on the respiratory 
                                                 
171
 Personal exposure includes contributions from many different types of particles, from many sources, and in many 
different environments.  Total personal exposure to PM includes both ambient and nonambient components; and 
both components may contribute to adverse health effects. 
172
 These additional studies are included in the 2006 Provisional Assessment of Recent Studies on Health Effects of 
Particulate Matter Exposure.  The provisional assessment did not and could not (given a very short timeframe) 
undergo the extensive critical review by EPA, CASAC, and the public, as did the PM AQCD.  The provisional 
assessment found that the “new” studies expand the scientific information and provide important insights on the 
relationship between PM exposure and health effects of PM.  The provisional assessment also found that “new” 
studies generally strengthen the evidence that acute and chronic exposure to fine particles and acute exposure to 
thoracic coarse particles are associated with health effects. 
455 
system such as decreased lung function or the development of chronic respiratory disease (PM 
AQCD, pp. 8-313, 8-314).  Of specific importance to this proposal, the PM AQCD also notes 
that the PM components of gasoline and diesel engine exhaust represent one class of 
hypothesized likely important contributors to the observed ambient PM-related increases in lung 
cancer incidence and mortality (PM AQCD, p. 8-318). 
 
The PM AQCD and PM Staff Paper emphasize the results of two long-term studies, the 
Six Cities and American Cancer Society (ACS) prospective cohort studies, based on several 
factors – the inclusion of measured PM data, the fact that the study populations were similar to 
the general population, and the fact that these studies have undergone extensive reanalysis (PM 
AQCD, p. 8-306, Staff Paper, p.3-18).658,659,660  These studies indicate that there are significant 
associations for all-cause, cardiopulmonary, and lung cancer mortality with long-term exposure 
to PM2.5. One analysis of a subset of the ACS cohort data, which was published after the PM 
AQCD was finalized but in time for the 2006 Provisional Assessment, found a larger association 
than had previously been reported between long-term PM2.5 exposure and mortality in the Los 
Angeles area using a new exposure estimation method that accounted for variations in 
concentration within the city.661 
 
As discussed in the PM AQCD, the morbidity studies that combine the features of cross-
sectional and cohort studies provide the best evidence for chronic exposure effects.  Long-term 
studies evaluating the effect of ambient PM on children’s development have shown some 
evidence indicating effects of PM2.5 and/or PM10 on reduced lung function growth (PM AQCD, 
Section 8.3.3.2.3).  In another recent publication included in the 2006 Provisional Assessment, 
investigators in southern California reported the results of a cross-sectional study of outdoor 
PM2.5 and measures of atherosclerosis in the Los Angeles basin.662  The study found significant 
associations between ambient residential PM2.5 and carotid intima-media thickness (CIMT), an 
indicator of subclinical atherosclerosis, an underlying factor in cardiovascular disease. 
 
3.4.1.3  Roadway-Related PM Exposure and Health Studies 
 
 A recent body of studies examines traffic-related PM exposures and adverse health 
effects.  However, note that the near-road environment is influenced by both gasoline spark-
ignition (SI) and diesel vehicles, as well as re-entrained road dust and brake and tire wear.  One 
study was done in North Carolina looking at concentrations of PM2.5 inside police cars and 
corresponding physiological changes in the police personnel driving the cars.  The authors report 
significant elevations in markers of cardiac risk associated with concentrations of PM2.5 inside 
police cars on North Carolina state highways.663  Other studies have found associations between 
traffic-generated particle concentrations at residences and adverse effects, including all-cause 
mortality, infant respiratory symptoms, and reduced cognitive functional 
development.664,665,666,667  There are other pollutants present in the near roadway environment, 
including air toxics which are discussed in Section 3.4.5, and it is important to note that current 
studies do not identify a single pollutant that is most associated with adverse health effects.  
Additional information on near-roadway health effects can be found in the recent Mobile Source 
Air Toxics rule (72 FR 8428, February 26, 2007). 
 
456 
3.4.2 Health Effects of Ozone  
 
Exposure to ambient ozone contributes to a wide range of adverse health effects.173  
These health effects are well documented and are critically assessed in the EPA ozone air quality 
criteria document (ozone AQCD) and EPA staff paper.668,669  We are relying on the data and 
conclusions in the ozone AQCD and staff paper, regarding the health effects associated with 
ozone exposure. 
 
Ozone-related health effects include lung function decrements, respiratory symptoms, 
aggravation of asthma, increased hospital and emergency room visits, increased asthma 
medication usage, and a variety of other respiratory effects.  Cellular-level effects, such as 
inflammation of lungs, have been documented as well.  In addition, there is suggestive evidence 
of a contribution of ozone to cardiovascular-related morbidity and highly suggestive evidence 
that short-term ozone exposure directly or indirectly contributes to non-accidental and 
cardiopulmonary-related mortality, but additional research is needed to clarify the underlying 
mechanisms causing these effects.  In a recent report on the estimation of ozone-related 
premature mortality published by the National Research Council (NRC), a panel of experts and 
reviewers concluded that short-term exposure to ambient ozone is likely to contribute to 
premature deaths and that ozone-related mortality should be included in estimates of the health 
benefits of reducing ozone exposure.670  People who appear to be more susceptible to effects 
associated with exposure to ozone include children, asthmatics and the elderly.  Those with 
greater exposures to ozone, for instance due to time spent outdoors (e.g., children and outdoor 
workers), are also of concern. 
 
Based on a large number of scientific studies, EPA has identified several key health 
effects associated with exposure to levels of ozone found today in many areas of the country.  
Short-term (1 to 3 hours) and prolonged exposures (6 to 8 hours) to ambient ozone 
concentrations have been linked to lung function decrements, respiratory symptoms, increased 
hospital admissions and emergency room visits for respiratory problems.671, 672, 673, 674, 675, 676  
Repeated exposure to ozone can increase susceptibility to respiratory infection and lung 
inflammation and can aggravate preexisting respiratory diseases, such as asthma.677, 678, 679, 680, 681 
Repeated exposure to sufficient concentrations of ozone can also cause inflammation of the lung, 
impairment of lung defense mechanisms, and possibly irreversible changes in lung structure, 
which over time could affect premature aging of the lungs and/or the development of chronic 
respiratory illnesses, such as emphysema and chronic bronchitis.682, 683, 684, 685 
 
Children and adults who are outdoors and active during the summer months, such as 
construction workers, are among those most at risk of elevated ozone exposures.686  Children and 
outdoor workers tend to have higher ozone exposure because they typically are active outside, 
working, playing and exercising, during times of day and seasons (e.g., the summer) when ozone 
levels are highest.687  For example, summer camp studies in the Eastern United States and 
Southeastern Canada have reported statistically significant reductions in lung function in 
children who are active outdoors.688, 689, 690, 691, 692, 693, 694, 695  Further, children are more at risk of 
                                                 
173
 Human exposure to ozone varies over time due to changes in ambient ozone concentration and because people 
move between locations which have notable different ozone concentrations.  Also, the amount of ozone delivered to 
the lung is not only influenced by the ambient concentrations but also by the individuals breathing route and rate. 
457 
experiencing health effects from ozone exposure than adults because their respiratory systems 
are still developing.  These individuals (as well as people with respiratory illnesses, such as 
asthma, especially asthmatic children) can experience reduced lung function and increased 
respiratory symptoms, such as chest pain and cough, when exposed to relatively low ozone levels 
during prolonged periods of moderate exertion.696, 697, 698, 699 
3.4.3  Health Effects of Carbon Monoxide 
 We are relying on the data and conclusions in the EPA Air Quality Criteria Document for 
CO (CO Criteria Document), which was published in 2000, regarding the health effects 
associated with CO exposure.174700  Carbon monoxide enters the bloodstream through the lungs 
and forms carboxyhemoglobin (COHb), a compound that inhibits the blood’s capacity to carry 
oxygen to organs and tissues.701,702  Carbon monoxide has long been known to have substantial 
adverse effects on human health, including toxic effects on blood and tissues, and effects on 
organ functions.  Although there are effective compensatory increases in blood flow to the brain, 
at some concentrations of COHb somewhere above 20 percent, these compensations fail to 
maintain sufficient oxygen delivery, and metabolism declines.703  The subsequent hypoxia in 
brain tissue then produces behavioral effects, including decrements in continuous performance 
and reaction time.704 
 
 Carbon monoxide has been linked to increased risk for people with heart disease, reduced 
visual perception, cognitive functions and aerobic capacity, and possible fetal effects.705  Persons 
with heart disease are especially sensitive to CO poisoning and may experience chest pain if they 
breathe the gas while exercising.706  Infants, elderly persons, and individuals with respiratory 
diseases are also particularly sensitive.  Carbon monoxide can affect healthy individuals, 
impairing exercise capacity, visual perception, manual dexterity, learning functions, and ability 
to perform complex tasks.707 
 
 Several epidemiological studies have shown a link between CO and premature morbidity 
(including angina, congestive heart failure, and other cardiovascular diseases).  Several studies in 
the United States and Canada have also reported an association between ambient CO exposures 
and frequency of cardiovascular hospital admissions, especially for congestive heart failure 
(CHF).  An association between ambient CO exposure and mortality has also been reported in 
epidemiological studies, though not as consistently or specifically as with CHF admissions.  EPA 
reviewed these studies as part of the CO Criteria Document review process and noted the 
possibility that the average ambient CO levels used as exposure indices in the epidemiology 
studies may be surrogates for ambient air mixes impacted by combustion sources and/or other 
constituent toxic components of such mixes.  More research will be needed to better clarify CO’s 
role.708  
 
3.4.4  Environmental Effects of Criteria Pollutants 
 
In this section we discuss some of the environmental effects of PM and its precursors 
such as visibility impairment, atmospheric deposition, and materials damage and soiling, as well 
                                                 
174
 The NAAQS review process is underway for CO and the CO Integrated Science Assessment 
is scheduled to be completed in January 2010.   
458 
as environmental effects associated with the presence of ozone in the ambient air, such as 
impacts on plants, including trees, agronomic crops and urban ornamentals. 
 
3.4.4.1 Visibility Impairment 
 
 Visibility can be defined as the degree to which the atmosphere is transparent to visible 
light.709  Visibility impairment manifests in two principal ways: as local visibility impairment 
and as regional haze.710  Local visibility impairment may take the form of a localized plume, a 
band or layer of discoloration appearing well above the terrain as a result of complex local 
meteorological conditions.  Alternatively, local visibility impairment may manifest as an urban 
haze, sometimes referred to as a “brown cloud.”  This urban haze is largely caused by emissions 
from multiple sources in the urban area and is not typically attributable to only one nearby source 
or to long-range transport.  The second type of visibility impairment, regional haze, usually 
results from multiple pollution sources spread over a large geographic region.  Regional haze can 
impair visibility over large regions and across states. 
 
Visibility is important because it has direct significance to people’s enjoyment of daily 
activities in all parts of the country.  Individuals value good visibility for the well-being it 
provides them directly, where they live and work and in places where they enjoy recreational 
opportunities.  Visibility is also highly valued in significant natural areas such as national parks 
and wilderness areas, and special emphasis is given to protecting visibility in these areas. 
 
 Fine particles are the major cause of reduced visibility in parts of the United States.  To 
address the welfare effects of PM on visibility, EPA sets secondary PM2.5 standards which work 
in conjunction with the regional haze program.  The secondary (welfare-based) PM2.5 NAAQS is 
equal to the suite of primary (health-based) PM2.5 NAAQS.  The regional haze rule (64 FR 
35714, July 1999) was put in place to protect the visibility in mandatory class I federal areas.  
These areas are defined in Section 162 of the Act as those national parks exceeding 6,000 acres, 
wilderness areas and memorial parks exceeding 5,000 acres, and all international parks which 
were in existence on August 7, 1977.  Visibility is impaired in both PM2.5 nonattainment areas 
and mandatory class I federal areas. 
 
3.4.4.2 Particulate Matter Deposition 
 
Particulate matter contributes to adverse effects on vegetation and ecosystems, and to 
soiling and materials damage.  These welfare effects result predominately from exposure to 
excess amounts of specific chemical species, regardless of their source or predominant form 
(particle, gas or liquid).  Reflecting this fact, the PM AQCD concludes that regardless of size 
fractions, particles containing nitrates and sulfates have the greatest potential for widespread 
environmental significance, while effects are also related to other chemical constituents found in 
ambient PM, such as trace metals and organics.  The following characterizations of the nature of 
these welfare effects are based on the information contained in the PM AQCD and PM Staff 
Paper.711,712 
 
3.4.4.2.1 Deposition of Nitrates and Sulfates 
 
459 
Nitrogen and sulfur interactions in the environment are highly complex.  Both are 
essential, and sometimes limiting, nutrients needed for growth and productivity.  Excesses of 
nitrogen or sulfur can lead to acidification, nutrient enrichment, and eutrophication.713   
 
The process of acidification affects both freshwater aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems.  
Acid deposition causes acidification of sensitive surface waters. The effects of acid deposition on 
aquatic systems depend largely upon the ability of the ecosystem to neutralize the additional 
acid. As acidity increases, aluminum leached from soils and sediments, flows into lakes and 
streams and can be toxic to both terrestrial and aquatic biota. The lower pH concentrations and 
higher aluminum levels resulting from acidification make it difficult for some fish and other 
aquatic organisms to survive, grow, and reproduce.  Research on effects of acid deposition on 
forest ecosystems has come to focus increasingly on the biogeochemical processes that affect 
uptake, retention, and cycling of nutrients within these ecosystems. Decreases in available base 
cations from soils are at least partly attributable to acid deposition. Base cation depletion is a 
cause for concern because of the role these ions play in acid neutralization and, because calcium, 
magnesium and potassium are essential nutrients for plant growth and physiology. Changes in 
the relative proportions of these nutrients, especially in comparison with aluminum 
concentrations, have been associated with declining forest health. 
 
At current ambient levels, risks to vegetation from short-term exposures to dry deposited 
particulate nitrate or sulfate are low.  However, when found in acid or acidifying deposition, such 
particles do have the potential to cause direct leaf injury.  Specifically, the responses of forest 
trees to acid precipitation (rain, snow) include accelerated weathering of leaf cuticular surfaces, 
increased permeability of leaf surfaces to toxic materials, water, and disease agents; increased 
leaching of nutrients from foliage; and altered reproductive processes—all which serve to 
weaken trees so that they are more susceptible to other stresses (e.g., extreme weather, pests, 
pathogens).  Acid deposition with levels of acidity associated with the leaf effects described 
above are currently found in some locations in the eastern U.S.714  Even higher concentrations of 
acidity can be present in occult depositions (e.g., fog, mist or clouds) which more frequently 
impacts higher elevations. Thus, the risk of leaf injury occurring from acid deposition in some 
areas of the eastern U.S. is high.  Nitrogen deposition has also been shown to impact ecosystems 
in the western U.S.  A study conducted in the Columbia River Gorge National Scenic Area 
(CRGNSA), located along a portion of the Oregon/Washington border, indicates that lichen 
communities in the CRGNSA have shifted to a higher proportion of nitrophilous species and the 
nitrogen content of lichen tissue is elevated.715  Lichens are sensitive indicators of nitrogen 
deposition effects to terrestrial ecosystems and the lichen studies in the Columbia River Gorge 
clearly show that ecological effects from air pollution are occurring. 
 
Some of the most significant detrimental effects associated with excess reactive nitrogen 
deposition are those associated with a syndrome known as nitrogen saturation.  These effects 
include: (1) decreased productivity, increased mortality, and/or shifts in plant community 
composition, often leading to decreased biodiversity in many natural habitats wherever 
atmospheric reactive nitrogen deposition increases significantly above background and critical 
thresholds are exceeded; (2) leaching of excess nitrate and associated base cations from soils into 
streams, lakes, and rivers, and mobilization of soil aluminum; and (3) fluctuation of ecosystem 
460 
processes such as nutrient and energy cycles through changes in the functioning and species 
composition of beneficial soil organisms.716 
 
In the U.S. numerous forests now show severe symptoms of nitrogen saturation.  These 
forests include:  the northern hardwoods and mixed conifer forests in the Adirondack and 
Catskill Mountains of  New York; the red spruce forests at Whitetop Mountain, Virginia, and 
Great Smoky Mountains National Park, North Carolina; mixed hardwood watersheds at Fernow 
Experimental Forest in West Virginia; American beech forests in Great Smoky Mountains 
National Park, Tennessee;  mixed conifer forests and chaparral watersheds in southern California 
and the southwestern Sierra Nevada in Central California; the alpine tundra/subalpine conifer 
forests of the Colorado Front Range; and red alder forests in the Cascade Mountains in 
Washington. 
 
Excess nutrient inputs into aquatic ecosystems (i.e. streams, rivers, lakes, estuaries or 
oceans) either from direct atmospheric deposition, surface runoff, or leaching from nitrogen 
saturated soils into ground or surface waters can contribute to conditions of severe water oxygen 
depletion; eutrophication and algae blooms; altered fish distributions, catches, and physiological 
states; loss of biodiversity; habitat degradation; and increases in the incidence of disease. 
 
Atmospheric deposition of nitrogen is a significant source of total nitrogen to many 
estuaries in the United States. The amount of nitrogen entering estuaries that is ultimately 
attributable to atmospheric deposition is not well-defined. On an annual basis, atmospheric 
nitrogen deposition may contribute significantly to the total nitrogen load, depending on the size 
and location of the watershed. In addition, episodic nitrogen inputs, which may be ecologically 
important, may play a more important role than indicated by the annual average concentrations.  
Estuaries in the U.S. that suffer from nitrogen enrichment often experience a condition known as 
eutrophication. Symptoms of eutrophication include changes in the dominant species of 
phytoplankton, low levels of oxygen in the water column, fish and shellfish kills, outbreaks of 
toxic alga, and other population changes which can cascade throughout the food web. In 
addition, increased phytoplankton growth in the water column and on surfaces can attenuate light 
causing declines in submerged aquatic vegetation, which serves as an important habitat for many 
estuarine fish and shellfish species. 
 
Severe and persistent eutrophication often directly impacts human activities.  For 
example, losses in the nation’s fishery resources may be directly caused by fish kills associated 
with low dissolved oxygen and toxic blooms.  Declines in tourism occur when low dissolved 
oxygen causes noxious smells and floating mats of algal blooms create unfavorable aesthetic 
conditions.  Risks to human health increase when the toxins from algal blooms accumulate in 
edible fish and shellfish, and when toxins become airborne, causing respiratory problems due to 
inhalation.  According to a NOAA report, more than half of the nation’s estuaries have moderate 
to high expressions of at least one of these symptoms – an indication that eutrophication is well 
developed in more than half of U.S. estuaries.717 
 
3.4.4.2.2 Materials Damage and Soiling 
 
461 
The effects of the deposition of atmospheric pollution, including ambient PM, on 
materials are related to both physical damage and impaired aesthetic qualities.  The deposition of 
PM (especially sulfates and nitrates) can physically affect materials, adding to the effects of 
natural weathering processes, by potentially promoting or accelerating the corrosion of metals, 
by degrading paints, and by deteriorating building materials such as concrete and limestone.  
Only chemically active fine particles or hygroscopic coarse particles contribute to these physical 
effects.  In addition, the deposition of ambient PM can reduce the aesthetic appeal of buildings 
and culturally important articles through soiling.  Particles consisting primarily of carbonaceous 
compounds cause soiling of commonly used building materials and culturally important items 
such as statues and works of art. 
 
3.4.4.3 Impacts of Ozone on Vegetation 
 
 The Air Quality Criteria Document for Ozone and related Photochemical Oxidants notes 
that “ozone affects vegetation throughout the United States, impairing crops, native vegetation, 
and ecosystems more than any other air pollutant.  Like carbon dioxide (CO2) and other gaseous 
substances, ozone enters plant tissues primarily through apertures (stomata) in leaves in a process 
called “uptake”.718  Once sufficient levels of ozone, a highly reactive substance, (or its reaction 
products) reaches the interior of plant cells, it can inhibit or damage essential cellular 
components and functions, including enzyme activities, lipids, and cellular membranes, 
disrupting the plant's osmotic (i.e., water) balance and energy utilization patterns.719,720  This 
damage is commonly manifested as visible foliar injury, such as chlorotic or necrotic spots, 
increased leaf senescence (accelerated leaf aging) and/or reduced photosynthesis.  All these 
effects reduce a plant’s capacity to form carbohydrates, which are the primary form of energy 
used by plants.721  With fewer resources available, the plant reallocates existing resources away 
from root growth and storage, above ground growth or yield, and reproductive processes, toward 
leaf repair and maintenance.  Studies have shown that plants stressed in these ways may exhibit a 
general loss of vigor, which can lead to secondary impacts that modify plants' responses to other 
environmental factors.  Specifically, plants may become more sensitive to other air pollutants, 
more susceptible to disease, insect attack, harsh weather (e.g., drought, frost) and other 
environmental stresses.  Furthermore, there is evidence that ozone can interfere with the 
formation of mycorrhiza, essential symbiotic fungi associated with the roots of most terrestrial 
plants, by reducing the amount of carbon available for transfer from the host to the 
symbiont.722,723 
 
 Ozone can produce both acute and chronic injury in sensitive species depending on the 
concentration level and the duration of the exposure. Ozone effects also tend to accumulate over 
the growing season of the plant, so that even lower concentrations experienced for a longer 
duration have the potential to create chronic stress on sensitive vegetation.  Not all plants, 
however, are equally sensitive to ozone.  Much of the variation in sensitivity between individual 
plants or whole species is related to the plant’s ability to regulate the extent of gas exchange via 
leaf stomata (e.g., avoidance of O3 uptake through closure of stomata).724,725,726  Other resistance 
mechanisms may involve the intercellular production of detoxifying substances.  Several 
biochemical substances capable of detoxifying ozone have been reported to occur in plants 
including the antioxidants ascorbate and glutathione.  After injuries have occurred, plants may be 
capable of repairing the damage to a limited extent.727 
462 
 
 Because of the differing sensitivities among plants to ozone, ozone pollution can also 
exert a selective pressure that leads to changes in plant community composition.  Given the range 
of plant sensitivities and the fact that numerous other environmental factors modify plant uptake 
and response to ozone, it is not possible to identify threshold values above which ozone is 
consistently toxic for all plants.  The next few paragraphs present additional information on 
ozone damage to trees, ecosystems, agronomic crops and urban ornamentals. 
 
 Ozone also has been conclusively shown to cause discernible injury to forest trees.728,729  
In terms of forest productivity and ecosystem diversity, ozone may be the pollutant with the 
greatest potential for regional-scale forest impacts.  Studies have demonstrated repeatedly that 
ozone concentrations commonly observed in polluted areas can have substantial impacts on plant 
function.730,731 
 
 Because plants are at the center of the food web in many ecosystems, changes to the plant 
community can affect associated organisms and ecosystems (including the suitability of habitats 
that support threatened or endangered species and below ground organisms living in the root 
zone). Ozone impacts at the community and ecosystem level vary widely depending upon 
numerous factors, including concentration and temporal variation of tropospheric ozone, species 
composition, soil properties and climatic factors.732  In most instances, responses to chronic or 
recurrent exposure in forested ecosystems are subtle and not observable for many years.  These 
injuries can cause stand-level forest decline in sensitive ecosystems.733,734,735  It is not yet 
possible to predict ecosystem responses to ozone with much certainty; however, considerable 
knowledge of potential ecosystem responses has been acquired through long-term observations 
in highly damaged forests in the United States. 
 
 Laboratory and field experiments have also shown reductions in yields for agronomic 
crops exposed to ozone, including vegetables (e.g., lettuce) and field crops (e.g., cotton and 
wheat).  The most extensive field experiments, conducted under the National Crop Loss 
Assessment Network (NCLAN) examined 15 species and numerous cultivars.  The NCLAN 
results show that “several economically important crop species are sensitive to ozone levels 
typical of those found in the Unites States.”736  In addition, economic studies have shown 
reduced economic benefits as a result of predicted reductions in crop yields associated with 
observed ozone levels.737,738,739 
 
 Urban ornamentals represent an additional vegetation category likely to experience some 
degree of negative effects associated with exposure to ambient ozone levels.  It is estimated that 
more than $20 billion (1990 dollars) are spent annually on landscaping using ornamentals, both 
by private property owners/tenants and by governmental units responsible for public areas.740  
This is therefore a potentially costly environmental effect.  However, in the absence of adequate 
exposure-response functions and economic damage functions for the potential range of effects 
relevant to these types of vegetation, no direct quantitative analysis has been conducted. 
 
 
3.4.5 Health Effects of Air Toxics 
 
463 
Motor vehicle emissions contribute to ambient levels of air toxics known or suspected as 
human or animal carcinogens, or that have noncancer health effects.  The population experiences 
an elevated risk of cancer and other noncancer health effects from exposure to air toxics.  These 
compounds include, but are not limited to, benzene, 1,3-butadiene, formaldehyde, acetaldehyde, 
acrolein, polycyclic organic matter (POM), naphthalene, ethanol and PAN.  These compounds, 
except acetaldehyde, ethanol and PAN, were identified as national or regional risk drivers in the 
1999 National-Scale Air Toxics Assessment (NATA) and have significant inventory 
contributions from mobile sources. 
  
According to NATA for 1999, mobile sources were responsible for 44 percent of outdoor 
toxic emissions and almost 50 percent of the cancer risk.  Benzene is the largest contributor to 
cancer risk of all 133 pollutants quantitatively assessed in the 1999 NATA and mobile sources 
were responsible for 68 percent of benzene emissions in 1999.  In response, EPA has recently 
finalized vehicle and fuel controls that address this public health risk.741 
 
 Noncancer health effects can result from chronic,175 subchronic,176 or acute177 inhalation 
exposures, and include neurological, cardiovascular, liver, kidney, and respiratory effects as well 
as effects on the immune and reproductive systems.  According to the 1999 NATA, nearly the 
entire U.S. population was exposed to an average concentration of air toxics that has the 
potential for adverse noncancer respiratory health effects.  This will continue to be the case in 
2030, even though toxics concentrations will be lower.  Mobile sources were responsible for 74 
percent of the noncancer (respiratory) risk from outdoor air toxics in 1999.  The majority of this 
risk was from exposure to acrolein.  The confidence in the RfC for acrolein is medium and 
confidence in NATA estimates of population noncancer hazard from ambient exposure to this 
pollutant is low.742,743 
 
 The NATA modeling framework has a number of limitations which prevent its use as the 
sole basis for setting regulatory standards.  These limitations and uncertainties are discussed on 
the 1999 NATA website.744  Even so, this modeling framework is very useful in identifying air 
toxic pollutants and sources of greatest concern, setting regulatory priorities, and informing the 
decision making process. 
  
Benzene:  The EPA’s IRIS database lists benzene as a known human carcinogen (causing 
leukemia) by all routes of exposure, and concludes that exposure is associated with additional 
health effects, including genetic changes in both humans and animals and increased proliferation 
of bone marrow cells in mice.745,746,747  EPA states in its IRIS database that data indicate a causal 
relationship between benzene exposure and acute lymphocytic leukemia and suggest a 
relationship between benzene exposure and chronic non-lymphocytic leukemia and chronic 
lymphocytic leukemia.  The International Agency for Research on Carcinogens (IARC) has 
                                                 
175
 Chronic exposure is defined in the glossary of the Integrated Risk Information (IRIS) database 
(http://www.epa.gov/iris) as repeated exposure by the oral, dermal, or inhalation route for more than approximately 
10% of the life span in humans (more than approximately 90 days to 2 years in typically used laboratory animal 
species). 
176
 Defined in the IRIS database as exposure to a substance spanning approximately 10% of the lifetime of an 
organism. 
177
 Defined in the IRIS database as exposure by the oral, dermal, or inhalation route for 24 hours or less.   
464 
determined that benzene is a human carcinogen and the U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services (DHHS) has characterized benzene as a known human carcinogen.748,749 
 
A number of adverse noncancer health effects including blood disorders, such as 
preleukemia and aplastic anemia, have also been associated with long-term exposure to 
benzene.750,751  The most sensitive noncancer effect observed in humans, based on current data, 
is the depression of the absolute lymphocyte count in blood.752,753  In addition, recent work, 
including studies sponsored by the Health Effects Institute (HEI), provides evidence that 
biochemical responses are occurring at lower levels of benzene exposure than previously 
known.754,755,756,757  EPA’s IRIS program has not yet evaluated these new data. 
 
1,3-Butadiene:  EPA has characterized 1,3-butadiene as carcinogenic to humans by 
inhalation.758,759  The IARC has determined that 1,3-butadiene is a human carcinogen and the 
U.S. DHHS has characterized 1,3-butadiene as a known human carcinogen.760,761  There are 
numerous studies consistently demonstrating that 1,3-butadiene is metabolized into genotoxic 
metabolites by experimental animals and humans.  The specific mechanisms of 1,3-butadiene-
induced carcinogenesis are unknown; however, the scientific evidence strongly suggests that the 
carcinogenic effects are mediated by genotoxic metabolites.  Animal data suggest that females 
may be more sensitive than males for cancer effects associated with 1,3-butadiene exposure; 
there are insufficient data in humans from which to draw conclusions about sensitive 
subpopulations.  1,3-butadiene also causes a variety of reproductive and developmental effects in 
mice; no human data on these effects are available.  The most sensitive effect was ovarian 
atrophy observed in a lifetime bioassay of female mice.762 
 
Formaldehyde:  Since 1987, EPA has classified formaldehyde as a probable human 
carcinogen based on evidence in humans and in rats, mice, hamsters, and monkeys.763  EPA is 
currently reviewing recently published epidemiological data.  For instance, research conducted 
by the National Cancer Institute (NCI) found an increased risk of nasopharyngeal cancer and 
lymphohematopoietic malignancies such as leukemia among workers exposed to 
formaldehyde.764,765  NCI is currently performing an update of these studies.  A recent National 
Institute of Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) study of garment workers also found 
increased risk of death due to leukemia among workers exposed to formaldehyde.766  Extended 
follow-up of a cohort of British chemical workers did not find evidence of an increase in 
nasopharyngeal or lymphohematopoietic cancers, but a continuing statistically significant excess 
in lung cancers was reported.767 
 
 In the past 15 years there has been substantial research on the inhalation dosimetry for 
formaldehyde in rodents and primates by the CIIT Centers for Health Research (formerly the 
Chemical Industry Institute of Toxicology), with a focus on use of rodent data for refinement of 
the quantitative cancer dose-response assessment.768,769,770  CIIT’s risk assessment of 
formaldehyde incorporated mechanistic and dosimetric information on formaldehyde. 
 
Based on the developments of the last decade, in 2004, the working group of the IARC 
concluded that formaldehyde is carcinogenic to humans (Group 1), on the basis of sufficient 
evidence in humans and sufficient evidence in experimental animals - a higher classification than 
previous IARC evaluations.  After reviewing the currently available epidemiological evidence, 
465 
the IARC (2006) characterized the human evidence for formaldehyde carcinogenicity as 
“sufficient,” based upon the data on nasopharyngeal cancers; the epidemiologic evidence on 
leukemia was characterized as “strong.”771  EPA is reviewing the recent work cited above from 
the NCI and NIOSH, as well as the analysis by the CIIT Centers for Health Research and other 
studies, as part of a reassessment of the human hazard and dose-response associated with 
formaldehyde. 
 
Formaldehyde exposure also causes a range of noncancer health effects, including 
irritation of the eyes (burning and watering of the eyes), nose and throat.  Effects from repeated 
exposure in humans include respiratory tract irritation, chronic bronchitis and nasal epithelial 
lesions such as metaplasia and loss of cilia`.  Animal studies suggest that formaldehyde may also 
cause airway inflammation – including eosinophil infiltration into the airways. There are several 
studies that suggest that formaldehyde may increase the risk of asthma – particularly in the 
young.772,773 
 
Acetaldehyde:  Acetaldehyde is classified in EPA’s IRIS database as a probable human 
carcinogen, based on nasal tumors in rats, and is considered toxic by the inhalation, oral, and 
intravenous routes.774  Acetaldehyde is reasonably anticipated to be a human carcinogen by the 
U.S. DHHS in the 11th Report on Carcinogens and is classified as possibly carcinogenic to 
humans (Group 2B) by the IARC.775,776  EPA is currently conducting a reassessment of cancer 
risk from inhalation exposure to acetaldehyde. 
 
The primary noncancer effects of exposure to acetaldehyde vapors include irritation of 
the eyes, skin, and respiratory tract.777  In short-term (4 week) rat studies, degeneration of 
olfactory epithelium was observed at various concentration levels of acetaldehyde 
exposure.778,779  Data from these studies were used by EPA to develop an inhalation reference 
concentration.  Some asthmatics have been shown to be a sensitive subpopulation to decrements 
in functional expiratory volume (FEV1 test) and bronchoconstriction upon acetaldehyde 
inhalation.780  The agency is currently conducting a reassessment of the health hazards from 
inhalation exposure to acetaldehyde.   
 
Acrolein:  EPA determined in 2003 that the human carcinogenic potential of acrolein 
could not be determined because the available data were inadequate.  No information was 
available on the carcinogenic effects of acrolein in humans and the animal data provided 
inadequate evidence of carcinogenicity.781  The IARC determined in 1995 that acrolein was not 
classifiable as to its carcinogenicity in humans.782 
 
Acrolein is extremely acrid and irritating to humans when inhaled, with acute exposure 
resulting in upper respiratory tract irritation, mucus hypersecretion and congestion.  Levels 
considerably lower than 1 ppm (2.3 mg/m3) elicit subjective complaints of eye and nasal 
irritation and a decrease in the respiratory rate.783,784  Lesions to the lungs and upper respiratory 
tract of rats, rabbits, and hamsters have been observed after subchronic exposure to acrolein.  
Based on animal data, individuals with compromised respiratory function (e.g., emphysema, 
asthma) are expected to be at increased risk of developing adverse responses to strong respiratory 
irritants such as acrolein.  This was demonstrated in mice with allergic airway-disease by 
comparison to non-diseased mice in a study of the acute respiratory irritant effects of acrolein.785 
466 
 
EPA is currently in the process of conducting an assessment of acute exposure effects for 
acrolein.  The intense irritancy of this carbonyl has been demonstrated during controlled tests in 
human subjects, who suffer intolerable eye and nasal mucosal sensory reactions within minutes 
of exposure.786 
 
Naphthalene:  Naphthalene is found in small quantities in gasoline and diesel fuels.  
Naphthalene emissions have been measured in larger quantities in both gasoline and diesel 
exhaust compared with evaporative emissions from mobile sources, indicating it is primarily a 
product of combustion.  EPA recently released an external review draft of a reassessment of the 
inhalation carcinogenicity of naphthalene based on a number of recent animal carcinogenicity 
studies.787  The draft reassessment recently completed external peer review.788  Based on external 
peer review comments received to date, additional analyses are being undertaken.  This external 
review draft does not represent official agency opinion and was released solely for the purposes 
of external peer review and public comment.  Once EPA evaluates public and peer reviewer 
comments, the document will be revised.  The National Toxicology Program listed naphthalene 
as "reasonably anticipated to be a human carcinogen" in 2004 on the basis of bioassays reporting 
clear evidence of carcinogenicity in rats and some evidence of carcinogenicity in mice.789  
California EPA has released a new risk assessment for naphthalene, and the IARC has 
reevaluated naphthalene and re-classified it as Group 2B: possibly carcinogenic to humans.790  
Naphthalene also causes a number of chronic non-cancer effects in animals, including abnormal 
cell changes and growth in respiratory and nasal tissues.791 
 
Ethanol: EPA is conducting an assessment of the cancer and noncancer effects of 
exposure to ethanol, a compound which is not currently listed in EPA’s IRIS.  A description of 
these effects will be presented, as required by Section 1505 of the Energy Policy Act of 2005, in 
a Report to Congress on public health, air quality and water resource impacts of fuel additives.  
We expect to release that report in early 2008. 
 
Extensive data are available regarding adverse health effects associated with the ingestion 
of ethanol while data on inhalation exposure effects are sparse.  As part of the IRIS assessment, 
pharmacokinetic models are being evaluated as a means of extrapolating across species (animal 
to human) and across exposure routes (oral to inhalation) to better characterize the health hazards 
and dose-response relationships for low levels of ethanol exposure in the environment. 
 
The IARC has classified “alcoholic beverages” as carcinogenic to humans based on 
sufficient evidence that malignant tumors of the mouth, pharynx, larynx, esophagus, and liver are 
causally related to the consumption of alcoholic beverages.792  The U.S. DHHS in the 11th Report 
on Carcinogens also identified “alcoholic beverages” as a known human carcinogen (they have 
not evaluated the cancer risks specifically from exposure to ethanol), with evidence for cancer of 
the mouth, pharynx, larynx, esophagus, liver and breast.793  There are no studies reporting 
carcinogenic effects from inhalation of ethanol.  EPA is currently evaluating the available human 
and animal cancer data to identify which cancer type(s) are the most relevant to an assessment of 
risk to humans from a low-level oral and inhalation exposure to ethanol. 
 
Noncancer health effects data are available from animal studies as well as epidemiologic 
467 
studies.  The epidemiologic data are obtained from studies of alcoholic beverage consumption.  
Effects include neurological impairment, developmental effects, cardiovascular effects, immune 
system depression, and effects on the liver, pancreas and reproductive system.794  There is 
evidence that children prenatally exposed via mothers’ ingestion of alcoholic beverages during 
pregnancy are at increased risk of hyperactivity and attention deficits, impaired motor 
coordination, a lack of regulation of social behavior or poor psychosocial functioning, and 
deficits in cognition, mathematical ability, verbal fluency, and spatial 
memory.795,796,797,798,799,800,801,802  In some people, genetic factors influencing the metabolism of 
ethanol can lead to differences in internal levels of ethanol and may render some subpopulations 
more susceptible to risks from the effects of ethanol. 
 
N-Hexane:  N-Hexane is associated with polyneuropathy in humans.  Effects observed in 
rodents include nasal lesions as well as neurotoxic effects.  EPA has developed a reference 
concentration of 700 μg/m3 from a study of peripheral neuropathy.803  There is inadequate data to 
assess its carcinogenic potential.  
 
Peroxyacetyl nitrate (PAN): PAN has not been evaluated by EPA’s IRIS program.  
Information regarding the potential carcinogenicity of PAN is limited.  As noted in the EPA air 
quality criteria document for ozone and related photochemical oxidants, cytogenetic studies 
indicate that PAN is not a potent mutagen, clastogen (a compound that can cause breaks in 
chromosomes), or DNA-damaging agent in mammalian cells either in vivo or in vitro. Some 
studies suggest that PAN may be a weak bacterial mutagen at high concentrations much higher 
than exist in present urban atmospheres.804 
 
Effects of ground-level smog causing intense eye irritation have been attributed to 
photochemical oxidants, including PAN.805  Animal toxicological information on the inhalation 
effects of the non-ozone oxidants has been limited to a few studies on PAN.  Acute exposure to 
levels of PAN can cause changes in lung morphology, behavioral modifications, weight loss, and 
susceptibility to pulmonary infections.  Human exposure studies indicate minor pulmonary 
function effects at high PAN concentrations, but large inter-individual variability precludes 
definitive conclusions.806 
 
Pesticides: There are potential toxicity concerns with volatilization of pesticide active 
ingredients,807 in addition to concerns with contamination of foods and drinking water.  
Furthermore, raising acreage under corn production may increase the quantity of pesticide 
products in use.  As the domestic corn supply grows between the years of 2005 and 2022, the 
percentage of corn used for ethanol production in the US is expected to increase, though the 
agricultural impacts of this shifting of crop production domestically are anticipated to be small.  
Whether there is the potential for adverse human health effects from any increase in pesticide use 
associated with increased corn production domestically warrants further assessment.  Additional 
information on pesticides and health effects is included in section 6.1 of this DRIA.  
 
Other Air Toxics: In addition to the compounds described above, other compounds in 
gaseous hydrocarbon and PM emissions from vehicles will be affected by today’s proposed 
action.  Mobile source air toxic compounds that will potentially be impacted include 
468 
ethylbenzene, polycyclic organic mater, propionaldehyde, toluene, and xylene.  Information 
regarding the health effects of these compounds can be found in EPA’s IRIS database.808 
 
3.4.6 Environmental Effects of Air Toxics 
 
Fuel combustion emissions contribute to ambient levels of pollutants that contribute to 
adverse effects on vegetation.  PAN is a well-established phytotoxicant causing visible injury to 
leaves that can appear as metallic glazing on the lower surface of leaves with some leafy 
vegetables exhibiting particular sensitivity (e.g., spinach, lettuce, chard).809,810,811 PAN has been 
demonstrated to inhibit photosynthetic and non-photosynthetic processes in plants and retard the 
growth of young navel orange trees.812,813 In addition to its oxidizing capability, PAN contributes 
nitrogen to forests and other vegetation via uptake as well as dry and wet deposition to surfaces.  
As noted above in Section 3.4.2.2, nitrogen deposition can lead to saturation of terrestrial 
ecosystems and research is needed to understand the impacts of excess nitrogen deposition 
experienced in some areas of the country on water quality and ecosystems.814 
 
Volatile organic compounds (VOCs), some of which are considered air toxics, have long 
been suspected to play a role in vegetation damage.815  In laboratory experiments, a wide range 
of tolerance to VOCs has been observed.816  Decreases in harvested seed pod weight have been 
reported for the more sensitive plants, and some studies have reported effects on seed 
germination, flowering and fruit ripening.  Effects of individual VOCs or their role in 
conjunction with other stressors (e.g., acidification, drought, temperature extremes) have not 
been well studied.  In a recent study of a mixture of VOCs including ethanol and toluene on 
herbaceous plants, significant effects on seed production, leaf water content and photosynthetic 
efficiency were reported for some plant species.817 
 
Research suggests an adverse impact of vehicle exhaust on plants, which has in some cases been 
attributed to aromatic compounds and in other cases to nitrogen oxides.818,819,820  The impacts of 
VOCs on plant reproduction may have long-term implications for biodiversity and survival of 
native species near major roadways.  Most of the studies of the impacts of VOCs on vegetation 
have focused on short-term exposure and few studies have focused on long-term effects of VOCs 
on vegetation and the potential for metabolites of these compounds to affect herbivores or 
insects.  
469 
Chapter 4:  Impacts on Cost of Renewable Fuels, Gasoline, 
and Diesel 
 
 
4.1 Renewable Fuel Production Costs 
 
4.1.1 Ethanol Production Costs 
 
4.1.1.1 Corn Ethanol  
 
 Corn ethanol costs for our work were estimated using a model developed by USDA that 
was documented in a peer-reviewed journal paper on cost modeling of the dry-grind corn ethanol 
process.821  The USDA model considers a 40 MMgal/yr corn plant producing ethanol with a 
primary co-product of distillers dried grains with solubles (DDGS).  The ethanol yield used in 
the model is 2.76 gallons per bushel with 2.0% gasoline denaturant.  The model is based on work 
done in chemical process simulation software to generate equipment sizes, stream flowrates, and 
material and energy balances.  These results were then put together with feedstock, energy, and 
equipment cost information in a spreadsheet format to arrive at a final per-gallon cost estimate.  
Although the model is current in terms of technology, yields, and capital estimates, we made 
some modifications to allow estimation of costs for ethanol plants of different sizes and 
operating under different energy and feedstock prices.  We believe that these updates, in 
combination with the industry and supplier surveys done by USDA in developing the model, 
result a reasonable estimate for projected ethanol production costs. 
 
 We estimate an average corn ethanol production cost of $1.43 per gallon in 2022 (2006 
dollars) for the policy case.  The cost of ethanol production is most sensitive to the prices of corn 
and the primary co-product, DDGS.  Utilities, capital, and labor expenses also have an impact, 
although to a lesser extent.  Corn feedstock minus DDGS sale credit represents about 57% of the 
final per-gallon cost, while utilities, facility, and labor comprise about 22%, 11%, and 4%, 
respectively.  For this work, we used corn and DDGS price projections generated by the Forestry 
and Agricultural Sector Optimization Model, which is described in Section 5.1.1 of this RIA.  
Figure 4.1-1 shows the cost breakdown for production of a gallon of ethanol.  Note that this 
production model does not account for the cost to ship the DDGS.  Those costs are external and 
are expected to increase the price of DDGS an end user located far from the plant.   
 
470 
Figure 4.1-1. 
Cost Breakdown of Natural Gas Dry Mill Corn Ethanol Production (2006$). 
-0.46
0.81
0.31
0.16
0.09
0.06
-$0.50
-$0.25
$0.00
$0.25
$0.50
$0.75
$1.00
$1.25
$1.50
$/g
a
l
Labor
Chemicals, enzymes
Facilty cost, maint
Utilities
Corn minus DDGS
DDGS sale
Corn 
cost
Corn price $3.34/bu
DDGS price $139.78/ton
Natural gas price $6.21/MMBtu
Electricity price $0.059/kWh
 
 
 The effect of plant scaling on production cost can be estimated by applying an 
engineering scaling factor to all plant equipment.  In past rulemakings involving modifications to 
refineries we have used a material scaling factor of 0.65.  This factor is applied as an exponent to 
the ratio of the new size to the original size, the result of which is then multiplied by the original 
capital cost.  The fact that this figure is less than 1.0 reflects the per-unit or per-gallon savings 
that is often realized when processes are scaled up.  However, there is information suggesting 
that a general factor may be considerably higher for ethanol plants.  A factor of 0.84 was put 
forth in a recent publication on dry mill ethanol production.822  Using this larger factor, we find 
that the change in per-gallon production cost due to economies of scale is very small over the 
range of typical plant sizes, on the order of $0.02 between 40 and 100 MMgal/yr.  Thus, in 
computing production costs for this rulemaking we chose to ignore effects of any changes 
average plant size.  Capital cost for a 40 million gal/yr facility is estimated at $58.1 million 
(2006$) based on the USDA production model. 
 
 We considered the per-gallon cost impact of coal, biomass, and biogas as a process 
energy source rather than natural gas.  Our industry characterization and forecast work suggests 
that ethanol production in the timeframe of our analysis will use a mix of feedstocks for process 
energy. We assumed that on average, coal and biomass combustion systems would have the 
capital cost due to similarities in feed, ash handling, and emission controls; the same argument 
can be made for use of biogas combustion relative to natural gas combustion (excluding the 
digesters or other source).  Tables 4.1-2 and 4.1-3 show the breakdown of fuel sources and their 
cost impacts in cents per gallon.  The weighted average cent per gallon change to baseline for 
ethanol production is given at the bottom of Table 4.1-3. 
 
471 
Table 4.1-2.   
Breakdown of fuel types used in estimating production cost of corn ethanol. 
 Fuel Type Total by Plant Type 
Plant Type Biomass Coal Natural Gas Biogas All Fuels 
Coal/Biomass Boiler 11% 0% - - 11% 
Coal/Biomass Boiler + CHP 10% 4% - - 14% 
Natural Gas Boiler - - 49% 14% 63% 
Natural Gas Boiler + CHP - - 12% - 12% 
Total by Fuel Type 21% 4% 61% 14% 100% 
 
 
Table 4.1-3.   
Breakdown of cost impacts by fuel type used in estimating production cost of corn ethanol. 
 Fuel Type Total by Plant Type 
Plant Type Biomass a Coal Natural Gas Biogas b All Fuels 
Coal/Biomass Boiler -$0.02 -$0.02 - - - 
Coal/Biomass Boiler + CHP +$0.14 +$0.14 - - - 
Natural Gas Boiler - - baseline +$0.00 - 
Natural Gas Boiler + CHP - - +$0.16 - - 
Total by Fuel Type - - - - $0.04 
 
 
 Table 4.1.3 shows that we made the assumption that biomass firing has the same overall 
cost impact on ethanol production as coal firing.  One reason for this is that our analysis of 
biomass feedstock costs suggests a range of $72 per ton in future years which is comparable to 
the cost of coal supplied to non-electric-power industries after transportation is included.823  
Wood and stover biomass has on average approximately 85% of the energy content of coal on a 
mass basis, varying by type of biomass and coal, again suggesting that they are comparable on an 
energy per mass basis.824  Thus, it is plausible that some ethanol producers near biomass sources 
(such as the Midwest and Southeast) may have a cost incentive to transition from coal to biomass 
for process heat.  A second reason the assumption of biomass replacing coal in ethanol plants a 
desire for ethanol plant owners to comply with or hedge against potential fossil carbon emission 
limits for stationary sources and/or transportation fuel producers. 
 
 Similarly, we made the assumption that biogas combustion for process heat would have 
the same cost impact on ethanol production as natural gas combustion.  Use of biogas is 
somewhat different from biomass in that it would require some capital investment for on-site 
anaerobic digesters and related feedstock and gas handling equipment.  However, we anticipate 
the digester feedstock itself would have very low or no cost, thus it is reasonable to assume that 
the ongoing operating costs besides capital would be considerably less than purchasing natural 
gas.  As with biomass combustion, most plants utilizing biogas would take advantage of 
situations such as co-location with feedlots or MSW facilities where suitable biomass resources 
are available. 
 
 Energy prices used in the model were taken from EIA Annual Energy Outlook 2008, and 
are shown in Table 4.1-4. 825  Gasoline denaturant was assumed to cost $2.05 per gallon in all 
cases, and coal was assumed to be $1.94/MMBtu in all cases.  The impact of coal firing and CHP 
were figured as changes from baseline.  Table 4.1-5 shows the feedstock prices used for the 
reference and low-yield agricultural cases.  The low-yield case refers to a reduction of per-acre 
472 
corn yields by approximately 12%, which has a higher impact on prices than the AEO high oil 
case. 
 
Table 4.1-4. 
Energy Prices Used for Ethanol Cost Modeling for 2022 (2006$) 
EIA Price Case Crude Oil Natural Gas Electricity 
 $/bbl $/MMBtu $/kWh 
Reference 53 6.21 0.059 
High oil 92 7.21 0.061 
 
 
Table 4.1-5. 
Feedstock Prices Used for Ethanol Cost Modeling for 2022 (2006$) 
AEO Price Case Agricultural Case Corn DDGS 
  $/bu $/ton 
Reference Reference 3.34 139.78 
Reference Low yield 3.84 160.32 
High Reference 3.42 141.68 
 
 
4.1.1.2 Cellulosic Ethanol  
 
Crop Residue Costs 
 
We could have used any of the crop residues as an example feedstock in the following 
discussion, since similar logistics apply to all of them.  We chose to use corn stover, e.g., the 
stalks, leaves, and cobs that remain following grain harvest, since it is likely to represent a 
significant portion of cellulosic feedstocks in the future.  Since there is no equipment specifically 
designed to harvest corn, the system we describe below uses combines, mowers, rakes, balers, 
and bale haulers already in use for harvesting hay or straw.  Differences in stalk or stem diameter 
and density, bale density, moisture content, machine field speeds and efficiencies are a few 
things that make it relatively more difficult to harvest stover than hay or straw.  One of the main 
concerns is that the density of the large stover bales, whether round or rectangular, can be as 
little as one-half that of similar dimension hay bales, which usually translates into higher 
transportation costs.826 
Most biomass feedstocks must be harvested, stored, and transported to a processing 
facility before they can be converted into ethanol.  At present, there are no commercial sized 
cellulosic ethanol plants in the U.S.  Likewise, there are no commercially proven, fully-
integrated feedstock supply systems dedicated to providing any of the crop residues or other 
feedstocks to ethanol facilities of any size.  We emphasize ‘integrated feedstock supply systems’ 
because logistically the delivery of a feedstock to a processing facility will require the planning, 
executing, and controlling of several different, closely integrated operations, e.g., feedstock 
harvesting, gathering, storing, and moving by road and rail.  Apart from the large numbers and 
wide variety of equipment, these operations will require professional and technical support 
services and personnel such as office space, staff, and office equipment such as computers and 
printers.  Also, engineers, light- and heavy-duty equipment operators, vehicle maintenance 
473 
personnel and repair and storage facilities for tractors, rakes, balers, loaders, and trucks and 
trailers, as well as transportation infrastructure planning and management.   
Ordinarily, to determine the operational sufficiency and efficiency of such a system, we 
would ‘analyze’ it.  We would first break it down into its component parts or essential features 
and then study them, e.g., how much they cost, and how and/or whether they operate efficiently 
within the ‘system.’  However, no such system currently exists.  Therefore, we ‘synthesized’ a 
feedstock supply system in order to analyze it.  We used a Purdue University, School of 
Industrial Engineering simulation study of corn stover logistics from satellite storage to an 
ethanol plant, to set up our feedstock harvesting and gathering operation.  Purdue’s notional 
cellulosic ethanol plant was to be constructed next to an actual existing corn grain plant in 
northern Indiana.  They used discrete event simulation software and GIS tools to study the 
transportation logistics associated with supplying the conversion facility directly from satellite 
storage.  They identified 785,200 available acres out of 848,453 potential acres, on 2,052 actual 
farms, of 200-, 400-, or 800-acres, in 12-northern Indiana counties, within 50-miles of the 
production facility (they disregarded fields or farms of less than 200-acres).  We reproduced their 
original table as Table. 4.1-6.  
Table 4.1-6. 
Feedstock Availability at Various Distances From South Bend, IN 
 Average Farm Size  
200 400 800 Average 
Distance County 
Actual 
Acres 
Cumulative 
Acres 
 Acres  
Available 
Acres 
Cumulative 
Acres 
bales/ 
day 
bales/day 
/farm set 
12 St Joseph 69 69 74 51 35 63 63 4,956 4,956 
25 Elkhart 150 219 90 47 23 55 118 4,328 10,257 
 Marshall   110 52 41 76 194 5,928  
30 La Porte 113 332 113 73 70 108 302 8,453 8,453 
35 Starke 60 392 34 39 41 55 357 4,328 4,328 
40 Kosciusk
o 
93 485 108 66 43 82 439 6,461 6,461 
45 Lagrange 132 617 53 47 20 45 485 3,560 9,049 
 Fulton   86 66 43 70 555 5,489  
50 Porter 225 842 76 59 34 66 621 5,175 18,224 
 Noble   115 47 21 59 679 4,595  
 Pulaski   39 72 64 108 787 8,453  
  842  998 619 435 787  61,726 61,728 
 
We initially assumed that the stover had been harvested (square bales), gathered, field-
transported, and stored at seven-satellite storage areas located near the corn fields.827  However, 
upon further study, we determined the counties that Purdue combined into each of the farm sets, 
weren’t anywhere near each other.  In reality, it would have been far too costly to gather all the 
bales from the Porter, Noble, and Pulaski counties into one site, because these three counties are 
actually separated by other counties.  Rather than try to construct seven satellite storage sites, we 
constructed a site at the center of each county.  This was done in order to estimate the cost to 
collect the bales from all the fields in each county.  We determined that the distance from the 
center of each of  the Porter, Noble, and Pulaski counties, as well as the other two so-called 
farm-sets, to the ethanol plant was about equal, so regardless of whether we treat them as single 
sites, the transport costs for the bales to the ethanol plant will be the same.  We ‘synthesized’ the 
feedstock system to harvest, gather, field transport, and store stover bales at the 11-notional 
474 
satellite storage units rather than the seven farm-set units used in the Purdue transportation model 
(our study was not done in conjunction with the Purdue study; rather we used their 
information/data as the basis from which to synthesize our notional operation).  The format we 
chose to analyze was to shred, rake, square-bale, gather,  field-side, and then load and haul the 
bales to satellite storage; then, as needed, haul the bales to the processing plant.   
Rather than guess at how such a system should look and function, we carefully studied 
several similar systems that were put forward by various agricultural and biological experts.828, 829, 
830, 831, 832, 833,  834, 835, 836
  We used the American Society of Agricultural and Biological Engineers 
(ASABE), 2007 Standards, Engineering Practices, and Data as the primary source for our 
equipment capital and operating cost estimates.  It has a machinery management section, ASE 
EP496.3, FEB2006, devoted to providing helpful information in making management decisions 
involving machine power requirements, capacities, cost, selection, and replacement, as well 
section ASAE D497.5 FEB2006, with data which includes representative values of farm 
machinery operating parameters, to aid managers, planners, and designers in estimating the 
performance of field machines.  These data are intended for use with ASAE EP496 (some data 
are also presented in equation form for easier use with computers, etc.).837  We used these 
sections along with other examples by other experts to estimate the machinery capital and 
operating costs for our analysis.838, 839, 840, 841, 842  We were able to get some machinery purchase 
prices from vendors whose identities are confidential.  We reduced the equipment listed price by 
10% to determine the purchase price, a standard industry estimating practice.  Otherwise, most of 
the data used to calculate machinery costs were generated with equations and appropriate data 
from the ASABE 2007 Standards.  We used the equipment, list and purchase prices, along with 
their power and size estimates, with the suggested data and equations, mentioned previously, to 
calculate the lifetime hours and years, annual use, field efficiency, salvage value, fuel and oil use 
and cost (we obtained vendor quotes for oil cost), capital charge, repairs, insurance, housing, 
taxes, and labor.  We compared our data, where appropriate, with the USDA 2006 Price 
Summary, published July 2007.843  We also compared our results with those generated by the 
experts we listed earlier in this paragraph. 
The Purdue study was based on supplying a 100-million gallon per year ethanol 
production facility, which they assumed would convert the stover-to-ethanol at 72-gallons per 
ton; they assumed that the on-farm stover yield was 2-dry tons per acre, as did we.  We used 
National Agricultural Statistical Service (NASS) data to determine the actual corn grain yield in 
2005 (the data year for the Purdue study) for the counties studied in the simulation.  We 
determined how much corn each county produced and from that how much stover was produced, 
2,455,058 tons or 3.12 dry tons/acre, with an assumed harvest index (HI) of 1:1 (see Table. 
4.1.1.2.2.)844  HI is based on the assumption that, for a single corn plant, half of the above ground 
dry matter is made up of stover and the other half is made up of grain.  This is a fairly common 
assumption, although more than one group of researchers has found that this 1:1 ratio may not be 
the most accurate under some conditions.  When considering above ground dry matter before and 
after full grain physiological maturation, they found that a stover to grain ratio of 0.8 to 1 may be 
more realistic especially when grain moisture is between 18 and 31 percent.845   
 
475 
Table 4.1-7. 
Data Comparison:  NASS Indiana Data with Purdue Data and with  EPA Calculations 
 
USDA-NASS – Counties in State of  Indiana -  2005 
 
 
Purdue Model Year – 2005 
 
 Planted Harvested Yield Production Model Available 
acres 
Prorated 
Production wet tons dry tons 
County acres x 103 acres 
x 103 
bu/ 
acre 
bu x 106 acres x 103 acres x 103 bu x 106 x 103 x 103 
St Joseph 71 70 147 10.2 69 65 9.5 266 225 
Elkhart 60 53 142 7.6 150 52 7.4 206 174 
Marshall 94 89 150 13.4 0 87 13.1 366 309 
La Porte 117 112 137 15.3 113 104 14.2 398 336 
Starke 61 60 137 8.2 60 56 7.7 214 181 
Kosciusko 102 100 149 14.9 93 93 13.8 386 326 
Lagrange 55 51 113 5.8 132 45 5.0 141 119 
Fulton 90 89 159 14.1 0 78 12.3 345 291 
Porter 68 67 137 9.2 225 61 8.4 234 198 
Noble 65 62 142 8.8 0 57 8.0 225 190 
Pulaski 103 101 152 15.3 0 92 13.9 390 330 
  855   842 787  3,172 2,455 
 
However, a professor of agricultural engineering at the University of Wisconsin found 
that several researchers, going back to 1973 reported a grain mass fraction of 45% to 55% of 
total corn crop DM yield.  On average, the variations seem to confirm the common rule of thumb 
of one unit mass of stover for a unit mass of grain.  However, differences among harvesting 
methods, stages of maturity, and harvest dates can no doubt lead to much of the variation the 
researchers found in this estimate.  His research indicates that the ratio of grain dry mass to total 
mass increased from about 38% in late August to about 59% on in mid-October, during a recent 
harvest.  Therefore, the stover to total ratio declined from 62% to 41%.  During the typical 
harvest period in the Upper Midwest when grain moisture is between 20% and 30%, the ratio of 
stover to total dry mass was less than 45% and averaged 43%.  These results are similar to those 
found by others.846   Mainly, because we have no information upon which to base a reason to use 
something different, we chose to use the 1:1 ratio for corn stover to corn grain.  We also assumed 
56-lbs per wet bushel (15.5% moisture) and 47.3-lbs per dry bushel, for the corn grain, to make 
our stover yield calculations.847  Table 4.1-8 summarizes the general operating parameters for our 
study. 
 
 
 
 
 
476 
Table 4.1-8.  Operating Parameters 
EtOH Operating Year 350-days/yr 
   On Stream Factor 0.96  
   Hours per year 8,400-hr/yr 
EtOH Production Rate 100,000,000-gal/yr 
EtOH Yield 72-gal/dry ton 
Feedstock Required  
     per year 1,388,889-dry tons/yr 
     per day 3,968-dry tons/day 
Expected Dry Matter Loss 11.8% 
     Feedstock Harvested 1,574,400-dry tons/yr 
     Feedstock Yield 2-dry tons/acre 
Harvest Period  
     Days, 50-days 
     Hours per Day 16-hr/day 
     Harvest Hours 800-hr 
Format: Shred/Rake, 
Bale - Lg. Sq. - 3'x4'x8' 
Field Side - Self-Propelled  
Wagon 
Satellite Storage –  
Pole Barn on Concrete 
 
Transport to EtOH Facility –  
Truck & Trailer 
 
At 72-gal. per dry ton, the processing plant would require 1,388,889 dry tons of stover 
per year.  However, we believe storage and transportation losses can be significant and should be 
taken into account.  If, as stated in the report, they harvested 2-tons per acre, they actually 
harvested 1,574,400 tons of stover, or 64% of the 2,455,058 tons of available dry stover.  The 
tons of stover used versus the tons harvested represents an 11.8% loss.178  Thus, we assumed that 
with an 11% loss, we would need to harvest 4,498- dry tons of stover per day, which by the time 
it reaches the plant will actually equal 3,968-dry tons – the amount required per day at the 
ethanol plant.  During a 350-day production year, 1.574-million tons of stover would have be 
stored in about 3.499-million, 900-lb bales (Purdue study bale weight), at the various satellite 
storage areas.  For this study, we assumed all the loss took place between the satellite storage 
areas and the ethanol plant, rather than guess what the losses would be at various points within 
the harvest/transport scheme. 
In the following analysis, we did not account for the extra time or equipment that would 
be necessary for inevitable break-downs.  Nor was time and equipment factored in for driving 
between fields and for weather delays.  Stover suppliers face several, in some cases, difficult 
problems.  At best, the actual harvest period is nearly always too short; winter weather can 
suddenly set in, which in some cases may completely stop a potential stover or straw harvest.  
Once the grain is harvested and the stalks are mowed, stover usually must be left in the field for 
three or four days to dry to below 20% moisture before it’s baled, otherwise spoilage or rot as 
well as spontaneous combustion are possible.  If it rains, additional time is required for drying 
and muddy roads and fields can be badly damaged and the field-soil compacted by the increased 
                                                 
178
 We indicated in a previous section that there may be as little as 25% to 50% stover actually available; however, 
since we didn’t have the computer software and database Purdue used and therefore couldn’t rerun the simulation, 
we chose to use the data we had.  
477 
heavy-weight harvest and transport equipment traffic.  One expert commented that, “If there’s a 
rainy harvest, you might as well forget about it. Also, the longer the wet material is left in the 
field, there’s more of a chance for microbes to eat away at the hemicellulose.”848  Also, delayed 
baling raises the chances of dry matter loss.  The stover needs to field-dry, so the stover harvest 
can’t actually begin for at least a few days after the grain harvest starts.  But, once it begins it can 
continue until either it’s finished or until winter weather stops it.  For reasons that weren’t 
explained in the report, the researchers at Purdue chose 50-days for the harvest period, which at 
their 16-hr per day schedule, provided a total of 800-hrs to complete the harvest and store the 
stover.  In this harvest format (800-hrs), most of the machinery will be stored for the balance of 
the year.  Crop harvest schedules in the Midwest and upper-Midwest are determined by the 
length of the growing season, the time of year when the crops are mature enough to harvest, and 
the time when winter weather sets in.  Under ordinary conditions, farmers use their harvesting 
machinery during just a few weeks each year.  During the past few years, as machinery costs 
have risen, many farmers have turned to custom harvesters, that move into an area and harvest 
several farms.  A farmer must always weigh the differences in the custom rates and what it 
would cost him to own the equipment and complete the harvest himself, but then store most of 
the harvesting machinery for the rest of the year.  In the South, winters are more mild and it’s 
possible to harvest some crops all year long.  In such cases, feedstocks could conceivably be 
harvested and shipped to a conversion facility on an ‘as needed’ basis; storage costs could be 
saved and machinery would be used all year long.  However, an important factor, when it comes 
to harvest machinery, is the usable-life of the equipment.  The more hours used each year, the 
more often the machine will need to be replaced.  A machine lasts only so many hours, whether 
it’s used 800-hrs per year or 8,000-hours per year.  We obviously could have arbitrarily chosen 
some longer period, but in order to maintain at least some consistency with the Purdue study, we 
chose to use the 50-day schedule for our study.  This short period means we must harvest and 
store a full year’s inventory within a few weeks. 
Mow, Shred, Rake:  Modern corn combines strip most of the leaves from a corn stalk, but 
leave up to about half of the stalk standing when they cut it off just below the bottom ear.  In the 
combine, the corn grain is stripped from the cob, and the top part of the stalk, the leaves, and the 
cobs are subsequently discharge out the spreader at the rear of the machine.  According to a 
group of researchers, at the time of grain harvest, of the total stover dry mass, 16% resides in the 
cob, 7% in the husk, 16% in the leaves, and 60% in the stalk fractions.  Of the stalk DM, roughly 
45% is found in the bottom one-quarter and 80% in bottom one-half of the stalk.  If stover yield 
is to be maximized, harvesting systems must be developed that allow the bottom half of the stalk 
to be fully harvested 849  We summarized the costs to shred and rake in Table 4.1-9 
 
 
 
 
 
478 
Table 4.1-9.  Corn Stover Shredding & Raking Operation 
 
Tractor – 
245-hp 
Flail- 
Shredder -30’ 
Tractor 
75-hp MFWD 
Wheeled 
V-Rake - 20 ft 
Equipment Factors  
  Purchase price                                 $ 144,502 28,733 59,383 3,660 
  Useful life                                    yrs 11.3 3.1 11.3 15 
  Discounted Salvage value               $ 11,736  0.00 7,861  
  Annual use                                     hr 800 800 800 800 
Fixed Costs                                   $/hr  
  Depreciation and interest 25.47  14.51 10.06  1.87 
  Taxes Insurance Housing (THI) $/hr  3.97  0.79 1.63  0.10 
Total Fixed Costs                          $/hr 29.44 15.30 11.69  1.97 
Variable Costs  
  Repairs and maintenance            $/hr 19.62 14.05 8.06  1.63 
  Fuel consumption                     gal/hr 9.6 8 5.6  
  Fuel and lubrication                    $/hr 23.82 19.87 13.81  4.27 
  Operating Interest  1.70  1.21  0.82  0.21 
  Labor                                           $/hr 15.91 15.91 15.91  4.00 
Total Variable Cost                       $/hr 61.05 51.04 38.60  10.11 
Total Costs  
  Total                                            $/hr 90.49 66.34 50.29 12.08 
  Equipment capacity                 MT/hr 32.7 13.27 
Total                                            $/ton  4.80  4.70 
 
It will likely be necessary to flail-cut or mow the standing-stalks, and then rake and bale 
the windrows.  We estimated that it cost about $4.80 per ton of stover for shredding and about  
$4.70 per ton for raking.  
Bale:  As previously discussed, large square bales will likely be the bale-format for this 
system, although large round bales could be used.  There are currently more round balers than 
square balers in use, mainly because large square balers are more expensive.  However, 
gathering, stacking, and transporting large, round bales is much less efficient.  It is difficult to 
stack round bales more than about three high, since they tend to deform rather badly, during even 
short storage periods; square bale stacks can be stacked up to five or six bales high, which 
translates into a more efficient use of storage area as well as more stable stacks that are far less 
prone to deformation over extended storage periods.  Although large round bales tend to weather 
better out in the open, for the reasons just stated as well as those given in the Purdue report, we 
used large square bales in this analysis.  Table 4.1-10 summarizes the cost of the baling 
operation. 
 
 
 
 
 
479 
Table 4.1-10.  Corn Stover Baling Operation 
 
Tractor  - 
 275-hp 
Lg. Sq.   
Baler - 3' x 4' x 8'  
Equipment Factors  
  Purchase price                                 $ 147,102 110,723 
  Useful life                                    yrs 11.3 3.8 
  Discounted Salvage value               $ 7,553 32,455 
  Annual use                                     hr 800 800 
Fixed Costs                                   $/hr  
  Depreciation and interest 25.93 36.74 
  Taxes Insurance Housing (THI) $/hr  4.05 3.04 
Total Fixed Costs                          $/hr 29.98 39.78 
Variable Costs  
  Repairs and maintenance            $/hr 19.98 45.11 
  Fuel consumption                     gal/hr 10 8 
  Fuel and lubrication                    $/hr 24.84 19.87 
  Operating Interest 1.71 2.38 
  Labor                                           $/hr 15.91 10.66 
Total Variable Cost                       $/hr 62.44 78.02 
Total Costs  
  Total                                            $/hr 92.42 117.80 
  Equipment capacity              DMT/hr 19.4 
Total                                            $/ton 10.87 
 
Another, sometimes overlooked issue, is that when stover is shredded, raked, and baled 
dirt tends to be to picked-up with the bales, which must be removed prior to processing.  Dirt can 
usually be traced back to dirt clods left by the producer’s cultivation practices and when the 
pickup on the harvester is set too low in an attempt to pickup as much stover as possible.  Some 
dirt sticks to the corn stover if the stalks are left on the ground and run over by equipment; 
occasionally roots, attached to the short, cut-off stalks that are left following the shredding 
operation may be tipped out of the ground by harvest equipment and end up in the bales. Exact 
amounts of dirt aren’t easily measured, but are thought to be in the 2% to 5% range.  Areas that 
contain excessive weeds should be avoided, if possible.  Some weed types also contribute to 
additional moisture and dirt and these are thought to be major factors in stover deterioration and 
overall shrinkage.  Furthermore, dirt that’s carried through the harvesting process causes severe 
equipment wear; grinders, mills, valves, pipes, conveyors, and other associated equipment fail 
much sooner, which translates into increased maintenance costs and reduced on-stream operating 
time.  We estimated that baling cost about $10.87 per ton.850, 851,   
Bale Pick-Up & Field Side:  It is important to remove the stover bales from off the fields.  
Few farmers will tolerate bales left for long periods on their fields, especially if there is a chance 
spring planting will be negatively affected.  Nor do we expect farmers will allow random piles of 
bales left at field edges, for retrieval over the winter and spring months.  Aside from the 
likelihood that trucks and other equipment would get stuck in muddy roads and fields, thus 
slowing down deliveries and running up operating costs, farmers would have little tolerance for 
torn-up roads and fields.  This may not be a big problem, if the farmer/grower intends to plow a 
field in the spring.  However, it could be highly problematic for a farmer/grower who “no till” 
farms and would be forced to repair ruts and holes in fields and roads before Spring planting.  
Apart from this, dry matter losses from bales, left out in the open on dirt, can be as high as 10% 
480 
to 20%.  At harvest time, the bales, regardless of format, must be picked up and hauled either to 
a satellite storage site for intermediate storage or hauled directly to the processing plant.   
Several variables must be taken into account for bale pickup and the field-side haul 
operation that could easily affect the cost.  Because the exact location on a field where a bale 
lands as it falls from a baler varies, at a minimum, according to stover yield and harvest 
efficiency, there is no easy or accurate method for predicting the exact location of each bale on 
the field, either relative to each other or to the field edges or entry.  The distance between bales 
and the potential variability in the area, shape, and relative dimensions of each field add to the 
difficulty of estimating bale pickup costs.  If it was possible to somehow tag each bale with GPS 
coordinates as it fell to the ground, theoretically the  coordinates could be used in some type of  
‘bale retrieval’ program to optimize the time and pickup distance traveled.852, 853   
For this study, we used the theoretical stover density on the field, the speed and width of 
the harvester to estimate the distance between bales.  We used a spreadsheet with these data to 
position the bales in a variety of patterns on a notional rectangular 100-acre field.  We devised 
three or four drive-patterns in which the bales could be retrieved, by using simple visual 
inspection.  We calculated the time to pick up the bales using each pattern and the average speed 
of the self-propelled bale-wagon.  There were a few variables for which we couldn’t adjust our 
numbers because we simply had no way of knowing their effect.  For example, if the field was 
furrowed, it seemed that the less time spent driving across the furrows, at, as we assumed a 
slower speed than could be traveled along the furrows, the more efficient would be the pick up.  
Table 4.1-11 summarizes the information we used for our calculations. 
Table 4.1-11.  Bale Pickup and Field-Side 
Ft. Between Each Bale 490 
Pickup One 10-Bale Load - Ft/Load  4,901 
Bales/Acre 4.4 
Bales/Load  10 
Tons/Load 4.5 
Loader Speed - mph 7.5 
Field Size - Acres 200 400 800 
   Number of Loads per Field Size 89 178 356 
   Bales/Field Size - Total 889 1,778 3,556 
   Miles Traveled per Load 1.74 2.05 2.51 
   Tons/Hour 26 22 18 
Cost per Ton – Pickup & Field-Side $2.82 $3.31 $ 4.05 
 
 
In any case, using our basic assumptions, the time it took to retrieve a 10-bale load didn’t 
vary significantly for any of our plots. Table 4.1-12 presents the operating data for the bale 
wagon. 
 
 
481 
Table 4.1-12  Self-Propelled Bale-Wagon 
 Bale Wagon 
Equipment Factors  
  Purchase price                              $ 153,716 
  Useful life                                  yrs 18.1 
  Discounted Salvage value 6,013 
  Annual use                                   hr 800 
Fixed Costs                                  $/hr  
  Depreciation and Interest           $/hr 20.70 
  Taxes Insurance Housing (THI) $/hr 4.23 
Total Fixed Costs                         $/hr 24.93 
Variable Costs  
  Repairs and Maintenance           $/hr 12.96 
  Fuel Consumption gal/hr 7 
  Fuel and Lubrication                  $/hr 17.39 
  Operating Interest  1.21 
  Labor                                          $/hr 15.91 
Total Variable Cost                      $/hr 47.47 
Total Costs                                   $/hr 72.40 
Total                                             $/hr 72.40 
Equipment capacity               DMT/hr 23 
Total                                            $/ton 3.15 
Since the fields were no smaller than 200-acres, we piled the bales at one of the corners, 
which we assumed as the field-entry.  We calculated the cost to haul bales for each of the 200-, 
400-, and 800-acre fields.  We assumed the 20-ft rake made 148-passes across the 200-acre field; 
209-passes across the 400-ft field; and 295-passes across the 800-ft field.  We used the number 
of windrows the rake left to determine the number of passes the baler would make.  The baler 
dropped a bale every 490-ft; to collect a 10-bale load the loader would need to travel 4,900-ft.  
We estimated that the average distance every bale would need to travel to the corner of the field, 
e.g., the field entry, would be the distance from the field center to the corner (field-entry); we 
assumed the fields were square.  The loader would need to travel that distance and then return 
empty, for the next load.  Therefore, each loader would travel 4,900-ft to pickup the load, and 
then an additional 4,174-ft for the 200-acre field; 5,903-ft for the 400-acre field; and 8,348-ft for 
the 800-acre field to haul to the field edge (corner) and return.  We chose to pick up 10-bales per 
load with a self-propelled bale wagon with an average speed of about 10-mph.  We assumed the 
bales would be picked up, transported, and dumped at the field-edge at a cost of $2.82-per ton for 
the 200-acre fields; $3.31-per ton for the 400-acre fields; and $4.05-per ton for the 800-acre 
fields.   We weighted the DM hauled for each field size by the total tons recovered from each 
size, to arrive at 23-weighted dry tons/hr hauled for $3.15-per ton   
Haul to Satellite Storage:  Theoretically, we could store all the bales at the ethanol plant.  
If so, we would need to move 3,148,800-bales or about 101-loads per hour for 16-hrs. each day 
during the 50-day harvest.  It would have required 50-stacks, each, eight-bales wide by 5-bales 
high, by 1,577-bales (12,615-ft.) long, with 51 x 20-ft aprons and isles, between each stack and 
along two-sides of the entire area, plus a 20-ft apron, across the entire front and rear.  The area 
would total ~33-million square feet or 1.19-square miles.   
482 
We stored the bales at satellite facilities near the center of each county. As previously 
discussed, Purdue established ‘farm-sets,’ but did not describe how they were configured, how 
bales were to be hauled to each storage site, nor did they specify exactly where each storage site 
was.  Rather, they only estimated the distance between each storage area and the ethanol plant.  
The following table summarizes the haul to satellite storage. 
Table 4.1-13. 
Haul - Field Side to Satellite Storage 
 
High-Speed  
Tractor 
Bale 
Wagon 
2-
Telescopic 
Handlers 
Equipment Factors    
  Purchase price                               $     133,865 23,851 130,106 
  Useful life                                  yrs     15 15 12.5 
  Discounted Salvage Value            $ 10,782 4,803 6,490 
  Annual use                                   hr     800 800 800 
Fixed Costs                                  $/hr     
  Depreciation and Interest          $/hr    19.62 3.34 21.48 
Taxes Insurance Housing(THI)   $/hr 3.68 0.66 3.58 
Total Fixed Costs                         $/hr 23.30 4.00 25.06 
Variable Costs  
  Repairs and Maintenance          $/hr 13.63 1.94 15.90 
  Fuel Consumption gal/hr 6 0 2 
  Fuel and Lubrication                  $/hr 14.90 0 9.94 
  Operating Interest                      $/hr 1.13 0.09 1.02 
  Labor                                          $/hr 15.91 7.95 31.82 
Total Variable Cost                      $/hr 45.57 9.98 58.68 
 
Total Costs                                   $/hr 68.87 13.98 83.74 
Total                                             $/hr 166.59 
Equipment capacity              DMT/hr 9.3 
Total                                           $/ton 17.91 
We assumed that a telescopic loader would load the bales at the field-edges onto 20-bale, 
2-axle, 30-ft long wagons, each pulled by a high-speed tractor to the storage area located at the 
center of each county, where they were unloaded by another telescopic loader and the bales 
stacked for temporary storage.  Several variables make the cost of this operation difficult to 
estimate.  A cursory inspection of the general outline/shape of many of the counties in the study 
reveals that they are by no means square.  However, to make our calculations manageable, we 
assumed they were in order to determine the average distance each bale would need to be 
transported to its respective storage area in each county.  We estimated that the average distance 
any load would travel from any position in the counties, e.g., from the furthest to the nearest, 
would be equal to one-half the distance from the corner of the county to its center.  We used the 
published area of each county, from which we determined the distance from one-corner to the 
center; that distance equaled the trip to the storage area and the return.  We multiplied each by a 
30% winding factor (rather than a straight-line drive, this accounts for turns and other 
meanderings).854  We estimated the operation would cost about $17.91 per ton.   
483 
Satellite Storage:  We assumed each storage unit would consist of a concrete slab with 
open sides and pole-supported tin roof.  Smooth paved surfaces are safer and make work easier.  
Gravel and dirt do not stick to the bottoms of the bales.  If winter (wet, muddy) access is 
necessary, this cost should be included in the overall costs for storage; particularly from the 
highway to the stack.  Beyond the need to keep the area around the stack accessible and clean, 
the could be problems with local authorities, if trucks leaving the property carry significant 
quantities of mud onto a public highway.  Ordinarily, in an agricultural area a certain amount of 
mud is expected to be left on highways during wet weather.  However, at the truck and trailer  
volumes we’re anticipating, the amount being tracked onto highways and possibly through 
municipalities, would increase rapidly.  We used 1% of construction costs for upkeep, and 2% of 
the construction cost for the storage unit to cover the cost of access. These are incurred costs 
within the overall maintenance of stored stacks of biomass.  These costs are essentially 
insignificant in the overall storage costs, are subject to great fluctuations due to weather and 
equipment availability, and, therefore, were rolled up into a percentage of the overall storage 
costs of stacked bales.  The following table summarizes our storage area construction cost factors 
and costs. 
Table 4.1-14. 
Satellite Storage Construction & Maintenance Costs – For Each of 11-Areas 
Land Rent             $/acre/yr 100 
Land Preparation      $/acre       30,000 
Construction             $/sq ft 3.75 
Upkeep –                          1% of 
Construction        $/t                             0.91 
Access –  
2% of Construction        $/t                  1.81 
Depreciation Period       yrs 12 
 Number 
of 
Bales 
Bale 
Storage 
Area 
sq ft 
Bale 
Storage 
Area 
acres 
Number 
of 
Bales 
per site 
Tons 
Stover 
per site 
Supply 
days 
Total 
Storage 
Cost 
$/dry ton 
St Joseph 280,889 2,943,716 280,889 280,889 126,400 28.1 1,123,463 
Elkhart 245,333 2,571,093 245,333 245,333 110,400 24.5 981,252 
Marshall 336,000 3,521,280 336,000 336,000 151,200 33.6 1,343,889 
La Porte 479,111 5,021,084 479,111 479,111 215,600 47.9 1,916,286 
Starke 245,333 2,571,093 245,333 245,333 110,400 24.5 981,252 
Kosciusko 366,222 3,838,009 366,222 366,222 164,800 36.6 1,464,768 
Lagrange 201,778 2,114,631 201,778 201,778 908,00 20.2 807,044 
Fulton 311,111 3,260,444 311,111 311,111 140,000 31.1 1,244,342 
Porter 293,333 3,074,133 293,333 293,333 132,000 29.3 1,173,236 
Noble 260,444 2,729,458 260,444 260,444 117,200 26.1 1,041,692 
Pulaski 479,111 5,021,084 479,111 479,111 215,600 47.9 1,916,286 
      350  
Total Cost                    $/ton                 8.89       
 With well-paved surfaces, equipment can be maneuvered regardless of weather, and 
surfaces can be sloped to enhance drainage.  We also assumed the bales would be stored in 
multiple stacks, 8-bales wide and 5-bales high, and long enough to accommodate the number of 
bales we expect; there would 20-ft aprons along the outside of the stacks and 20-ft isles between 
stacks for stacking, stack management, and for general and fire safety.855  One researcher 
484 
determined that the economics of size, in the current situation, did not really apply.  In order to 
determine a cost per square foot, we assumed all 3,148,800 bales would be stored on a single 
slab/pole barn.  Stacked five-high, it would require 758-acres or 1.18 sq. miles of concrete and 
roof.  We estimated that storage would cost about $8.89 per ton.856  We used this as the cost per 
ton for the satellite storage as well as for storage at the plant.   
We estimated that to shred, rake, bale, field side, construct satellite storage, and haul to 
satellite storage plus pay the farmer/grower $10/t and replace the nutrients for $11.81/ton, it 
would cost about $72.20 per dry ton.857 858 
We used 11-telehandlers at the storage areas.  (However, once the harvest is complete the 
telehandlers being used for loading and unloading bale wagons during the field-side to storage 
area operation could possibly be pressed into transport – load, unload service (see Table 4.1-15).  
If so, the cost to use the telehandlers could be reduced from $3.28 to $3.08 per ton.)  Plus 11-
telehandlers at the plant to load and unload trucks and trailers that deliver the stover from 
satellite storage to the plant; extra telehandler time at the plant will be used to move feedstock as 
needed.  The following table summarizes the cost associated with the transportation.  The 
following table summarizes the cost associated with the transportation 
 
Table 4.1-15.  Haul From Satellite Storage to Plant 
 Class 8 
Truck 
53-ft Flatbed 
Trailer 
22-Telescopic 
Handlers 
Equipment Factors 
  
 
  Purchase price                               $      103,839 42,173 130,106 
  Useful life                                  yrs      20 22 13 
  Discounted Salvage Value            $ 4,025 931 6,490 
  Annual use                                   hr      5,600 5,600 800 
Fixed Costs                                 $/hr         
  Depreciation and Interest          $/hr     1.91 0.74 236.28 
Taxes Insurance Housing(THI)   $/hr 0.41 0.71 39.38 
Total Fixed Costs                         $/hr 2.31 1.45 275.66 
Variable Costs    
  Repairs and Maintenance          $/hr 1.13 3.16 174.90 
  Fuel Consumption gal/hr 9 0 2 
  Fuel and Lubrication                  $/hr 33.95 0 109.34 
  Operating Interest                      $/hr 0.37 0.14 11.22 
  Labor                                          $/hr 17.46  350.02 
Total Variable Cost                      $/hr 52.91 2.31 $645.48 
Total Costs                                   $/hr 55.22 3.76 921.14 
Total                                             $/hr 58.97 921.14 
Equipment capacity               DMT/hr 4.5 281 
Total, each                                   $/ton 13.10 3.28 
Total                                           $/ton 16.38 
To transport the bales to the ethanol plant, we calculated the ton-weighted average trip-
time to be 4.09 hr.  We plan to ship 4,497-tons of stover to the plant on each of the 350-operating 
days.  At 17.5-tons per load, we anticipate there will be about 256-loads per day.  Using the 4.09-
ton weighted trip time, we estimated that it would require 63-trucks and trailers to haul 4 x 17.5-
485 
ton per day. The cost of transportation plus loading and unloading is estimated to be $16.38 per 
dry ton.  The following table summarizes the total cost to harvest, bale, field-side, haul to 
satellite storage, store, and haul to the plant.  The following table summarizes all the costs. 
Table 4.1-16. 
Ag Residue Cost Summary 
Farm-Set Size, acres 200 400 800 Total Tons 
Tons per Farm-Set,       t 756,4
39 476,402 341,559 1,574,400 
Farmer/Grower           $/t 10.00 10.00 10.00  
Nutrient Replace         $/t 11.81 11.81 11.81  
Shred                           $/t 4.80 4.80 4.80 
Rake                            $/t 4.70 4.70 4.70 
Bale                             $/t   10.84 10.84 10.84 
Haul – Edge                $/t     2.82 3.31 4.05 
Total Farm Edge Cost $/t 44.97 45.46 46.20 
Haul – SS                    $/t    17.91 17.91 17.91 
Storage                        $/t 8.89 8.89 8.89 
Haul to Ethanol Plant  $/t 16.38 16.38 16.38 
Field to Plant – Total  $/t 43.18 43.18 43.18 
    
Per Farm- Set – 
Total                           $/t 88.15 88.64 89.38 
       Avg. Total Cost   $/t 88.71 
 
 
 
 The FASOM agricultural econometric model also estimated the farm edge price for corn 
stover.  Like our analysis, the FASOM model accounted for harvesting, shredding, raking, baling 
and hauling the corn stover to the farm edge, and replenishing the soil with nutrients.  However, 
FASOM did not add on a $10 farmer payment.  Adding on a $10 farmer payment, FASOM’s 
farm edge price for baled corn stover was $42.70/ton.  There was good agreement between our 
cost estimate and FASOM’s.    
As mentioned previously, a supply system organized in the near-term could look 
something like the one we’ve just described, but there are several potential drawbacks;. a  
comment, which we can’t attribute for confidentiality reasons was about the inefficiency of 
expending energy to package biomass just to expend more energy to unpackage this same 
biomass in order to meet the requirements of the conversion process. 
  We anticipate that industry will address most of these drawbacks by 2022 in order to 
improve the delivery and reduce the cost of feedstocks.  The current harvest-system is usually 
referred to as a multipass system: the corn grain is first combined, and then the stover is 
shredded, raked, baled, and the bales hauled to the field side.  Each field-pass adds to the final 
cost and further compacts the soil; soil compaction is especially critical if the soil is prone to 
compaction or in no-till situations.859  Because the combine-spreader drops the stover on to the 
ground, not only are fewer cobs collected, but dirt, dirt clods, and other debris, including metal, 
486 
are inevitably gathered up with the stover by the baler.860, 861  Thus, extra effort and money must 
be expended to remove the debris before processing can begin, apart from the fact that dry matter 
is also lost during this operation.  In their 2002 study report, NREL included a wash table to 
remove dirt and grit and had magnets to remove tramp iron, e.g., wire, etc. from the stover.862  
We discussed many of these issues previously.   
According to a few sources, which for reasons of confidentiality, we can’t quote, there 
appears to be active interest in restructuring the system we just described to move the 
preprocessing (feedstock preparation) forward in the chain, away from the ethanol plant, and 
closer to the fields.  Including the issues highlighted in the previous paragraphs, a major concern 
has to do with the use of standard hay and forage equipment, for which the overall collection 
efficiency of stover (ratio of stover collected to the total above-ground stover excluding grain) 
using flail choppers, rakes, and balers was less than 30%.863  Until now, most research has been 
based on a multipass system similar to the one we synthesized.864,865  In addition, the timeliness 
for collection (weather concerns) and moisture content issues are major problems associated with 
a multipass corn stover harvest.866    
The restructuring efforts also include exploring other methods to more efficiently gather 
the stover that avoids the need to pick it up from the ground, e.g., gather or catch it before it hits 
the ground.867  In one early case, a baler was hitched directly onto a combine, to capture the 
combine effluent and square-bale it. The problem was that there was a strict need to limit 
moisture to under 20% if bales are to be stored, plus the extra equipment slowed the grain 
harvest.868  Ideally, the stover harvest system should be capable of harvesting stover at any level 
of moisture even while the grain is being harvested.  All the cobs would be collected, the stover 
wouldn’t touch the ground and a controlled amount of residue would be left to meet any 
conservation requirements (we believe finding a way to leave the correct amount of residue 
behind will be difficult, and should be a top priority).  
A modification of the system we previously described, would be to use a mobile tub 
grinder that could be towed from one satellite storage area to the next.  A telehandler would feed 
the grinder to directly fill trucks for transport to the production facility.  The ‘walking floor,’ 
rear-dump, or belly-dump trailers would unload the ground-up stover into silos or tanks at the 
facility.  These silos or tanks could be sized to provide as much feed surge capacity as the facility 
required to maintain continuous operation.869   
Again, ideally, the corn stover harvest should be reduced to a single-pass operation 
during which the amount of residue left on the field will be less a function of harvest efficiency 
and more a function of the farmer/grower and the harvesting company being able to determine 
how much residue must be left to maintain soil health.  In reality, most of the equipment doesn’t 
actually exists that could perform some of the operations we will describe.  Nevertheless, we 
believe this reflects some of the forward thinking that is currently taking place.  For example, a 
combine designed specifically for the job must still be constructed.  A single-pass harvester 
would cut the whole stalk a few inches above the soil, leaving some stalk anchored to the 
ground.  It would pull the entire plant, e.g., stalks, leaves, and cobs with grain into the combine, 
where they are mixed into a single, clean, grain and stover stream.  It would then blow the entire 
stream into tractor-pulled grain-carts that run along-side the harvester.  It is important to be able 
487 
to change full carts for empties without stopping the harvester.  As a cart is filled, it is pulled 
from beneath the discharge tube, as an empty cart is pulled under it.  The full cart is hauled  to 
the field side, where the harvested material is unloaded directly into bulk ‘walking-floor’ semi 
trailers, for transport to a co-op or depot type elevator/facility.  After the biomass stream is 
unloaded, equipment at the elevator/depot separates the stover from the grain, following which 
the stover is chopped, dried, and sent to tanks or silos for intermediate storage.  Currently, there 
are no simple methods for drying wet corn stover, other than to let it field-dry.  However, if the 
single-pass harvest is to become a reality, the stover will need to be dried or else stored in much 
the same way silage is stored.870  At harvest, corn grain has a moisture content of 25%, while at 
the same time, the stover ordinarily ranges from 35% to well over 50% moisture.  There have 
been studies to artificially dry corn stover as well as other biomass types; there will likely be 
changes to the reported results of these and other studies, but, then we expect advancements and 
certainly changes in several parts of the feedstock supply system.871, 872, 873   Given that these 
changes take place, the stover, would have flowability characteristics similar to small cereal 
grains, and could be moved by standard grain loading and unloading systems into large 
corrugated steel bins (silos) for intermediate storage.  In this harvest format, the stover is handled 
by only two machines before it reaches the roadside and never hits the ground.  Dry matter losses 
should be significantly reduced.874   
Harvesting, storing, and transporting a more dense feedstock should offer significant 
savings.875  Using this and other anticipated improvements, it appears possible that in the out 
years, e.g., by 2022, corn stover and other residues could be commoditized, much as is the case 
with grain, and then purchased by a processor on an as-needed basis.   
However, commoditization offers its own set of issues, among which are both tangible 
and non-tangible infrastructures.  Although tangible infrastructure with regard to ethanol 
distribution are discussed in greater detail in Section 4.2, we believe the following comments fit 
within the context of our preceding information.  The impact of both feedstock and finished 
ethanol on rural road, highway and railroad infrastructure is likely to be even greater than the 
current and anticipated impact of corn based ethanol.  Raw cellulosic feedstocks have lower 
levels of concentrated fermentable carbohydrates and therefore require a greater mass of 
feedstock to produce an equivalent level of ethanol. Thus, public and private transportation 
infrastructure must move a greater volume of feedstock per gallon of ethanol produced. The 
magnitude of the impact will depend on the field density of feedstocks near the plant and 
whether feedstock densification will make it possible to ship more dense carbohydrate product to 
the cellulosic ethanol plant. 
Intangible infrastructure is essentially absent for crop residue type cellulosic feedstocks. 
Intangible infrastructure includes such things as uniform grade and quality standards, market 
price discovery mechanisms, collateral warehouse receipts, regulatory structure and other 
marketing institutions.  Grain market institutions have been developed and fine-tuned over the 
past century that give corn ethanol plants a decided benefit.  Daily price information, as well as a 
wealth of crop condition, and supply and demand information from a variety of public and 
private sources is available on corn grain.  Well known institutions such Uniform Grade and 
Quality Standards, FGIS, Grain Warehouse Regulations, Collateral Warehouse Receipts, Trade 
Associations, Non-Recourse Government Commodity Loans, and a set of futures markets that 
488 
efficiently price grain over time and space are all readily available. This infrastructure is already 
in place, tested and readily accessible to corn grain ethanol producers. Although not highly 
visible and frequently taken for granted, it plays a critical role in efficient feedstock pricing, risk 
management, trading and financing.  The cellulosic marketing infrastructure required for similar 
efficient commercial transactions will need to be established from top to bottom. 
Pricing infrastructure is one of the most pressing needs.  Large daily volumes of corn and 
other grains are traded on well established exchanges with a great deal of confidence on the part 
of buyers and sellers that the other party will perform.  Initially, it could be difficult, at best, to 
develop these infrastructure benefits for crop residues such as corn stover.  Cellulosic feedstocks 
will be starting from a relatively small production base with no pricing institutions in place. 
There are no existing grades and quality standards to underpin transactions over distance and 
time. Nor are there any trade rules or established patterns for prompt and efficient settlement of 
trade disputes between buyers and sellers.  The absence of these factors does not mean that they 
won’t develop, but there could be a stressful transition period.   
Also, there is no regulatory infrastructure to protect producers who wish to hold 
inventory after harvest in a public warehouse or handlers warehouse. This kind of infrastructure 
serves an important role in underpinning warehouse receipts and producer financing by creating 
a higher and more reliable collateral value for inventory. Nor are there equivalents to the U.S. 
grain grades and quality standards or Federal Grain Inspection Service. While there are other 
ways these functions can be provided some type of commodity grades and standards will be 
necessary to permit trading. Another possibility would be to have the production of cellulosic 
feedstocks and the production of ethanol vertically integrated in some fashion so that the 
responsibility for quality is internalized.876 
Energy Crops 
Energy crops such as switchgrass and miscanthus would be harvested, baled, stored and 
transported very similar to crop residues.  Because of their higher production density per acre, 
though, we would expect that the “farm gate” costs to be slightly lower than crop residues (we 
estimate the costs to be about $1 per dry ton lower).  Also, the higher production density would 
allow for fewer secondary storage facilities compared to crop residue and a shorter transportation 
distance.  For example, we estimate that switchgrass would require less than 30 secondary 
storage facilities which would help to lower the feedstock costs for a 100 million gallon per year 
plant compared to crop residues   As a result the secondary storage and transportation costs are 
estimated to be $9 per ton lower than crop residue such as corn stover.  Thus, we estimate that 
cellulosic feedstock costs sourced from switchgrass would be about $77 per dry ton.  Table 4.1-
17 contains a summary of our feedstock cost estimate for switchgrass.  
 
489 
Table 4.1-17.  Switchgrass Cost Summary 
Farm-Set Size, acres 400 
Tons per Farm-Set,       t 1,891,000 
Farmer/Grower           $/t 10.00 
Nutrient Replace         $/t 11.81 
Shred                           $/t 4.80 
Rake                            $/t 3.95 
Bale                             $/t   10.84 
Haul – Edge                $/t     2.81 
Total Farm Edge Cost $/t 44.20 
Haul – SS                    $/t    15.3 
Storage                        $/t 7.89 
Haul to Ethanol Plant  $/t 9.76 
Field to Plant – Total  $/t 32.95 
  
Per Farm- Set – 
Total                           $/t 77.15 
 
Forestry Residue 
Harvest and transport costs for woody biomass in its different forms vary due to tract 
size, tree species, volumes removed, distance to the wood-using/storage facility, terrain, road 
condition, and other many other considerations.  There is a significant variation in these factors 
within the United States, so timber harvest and delivery systems must be designed to meet 
constraints at the local level.  Harvesting costs also depend on the type of equipment used, 
season in which the operation occurs, along with a host of other factors.  Much of the forest 
residue is already being harvested by logging operations, or is available from milling operations.  
However, the smaller branches and smaller trees proposed to be used for biofuel production are 
not collected for their lumber so they are normally left behind.  Thus, this forest residue would 
simply have to be collected and transported out of the forest, although it would still have to be 
chipped before transport to the biofuel plant.  
In general, most operators in the near future will chip at roadside in the forest, blowing 
the chips directly into a chip van.  When the van is full it will be hauled to an end user's facility 
and a new van will be moved into position at the chipper.  The process might change in the 
future as baling systems become economically feasible or as roll-off containers are proven as a 
way to handle logging slash.  At present, most of the chipping for biomass production is done in 
connection with fuel-reduction treatments.  This could change if the price of raw biomass 
increases to a point where it becomes feasible to recover logging residues associated with normal 
commercial operations.  The major problem associated with collecting logging residues and 
biomass from small trees is handling the material in the forest before it gets to the chipper.  
Balers and roll-off containers offer some promise to reduce this cost.  Whether the material is 
490 
collected from a fuel-reduction treatment or a commercial logging operation, chips from residues 
will be dirty and will require screening or some type of filtration at the end-user's facility.179  
Results from a study in South Georgia show that under the right conditions, a small 
chipper can be added to a larger operation to obtain additional chip production without adversely 
impacting roundwood production, and chips can be produced from limbs and tops of harvested 
trees at costs ranging from $11 per ton and up.  Harvesting understory (the layer formed by 
grasses, shrubs, and small trees under the canopy of larger trees and plants) for use in making 
fuel chips is about $1 per ton more expensive. 
Per ton costs decrease as the volume chipped increases per acre.  Some estimates suggest 
that if no more than 10 loads of roundwood are produced before a load of chips is made, that 
chipper-modified system could break even.  Cost projections suggest that removing only limbs 
and tops may be marginal in terms of cost since one load of chips is produced for about every 15 
loads of roundwood. 
 Instead of conducting our own detailed cost estimate for making forest residue chips 
available at the edge of the harvested forests, we instead relied upon the expertise of the U.S. 
forest service.  The U.S. Forest Service provided us a cost curve for different categories of forest 
residue, including logging residue, other removals (i.e., clearing trees for new building 
construction), timberland trimmings (forest fire prevention strategy) and mill residues.877   The 
data was provided to us on a county-by-county basis.  The national forest lands are omitted from 
consideration, and the urban forest residue is not considered here, but in the section discussing 
MSW.  The information was also provided at different price points.  The quantities of forest 
residue is summarized by source type in Tables 4.1-18, 4.1-19 and 4.1-20.  To avoid presenting a 
huge amount of data, we aggregated the county data by state, and we are presenting the data at 
specific price points:  $30/dry ton, $45/dry ton and $70/dry ton.   
 
 
                                                 
179
 Personal Communication, Eini C. Lowell, Research Scientist, USDA Forest Service 
491 
Table 4.1-18.   
Volume of Forest Residue Available for Producing Biofuel  
Biomass Available at $30/ton (dry tons) 
Logging Other Timberland Primary Total
Residue Removals Thinnings Mill Residue Quantity
Alabama 2,405,083 507,240 867,038 7,117 3,786,478
Arizona 17,698 44,871 66,171 1,351 130,091
Arkansas 1,703,543 770,985 738,165 12,889 3,225,582
California 669,740 0 1,742,702 65,088 2,477,530
Colorado 18,405 14 0 2,302 20,721
Connecticut 8,391 30,678 20,929 3,949 63,948
Delaware 30,101 24,218 9,835 0 64,155
Florida 1,070,430 515,407 481,893 2,202 2,069,932
Georgia 3,113,907 993,262 1,107,254 45,138 5,259,561
Idaho 253,145 0 83,095 6,006 342,247
Illinois 278,202 235,178 230,863 18,523 762,766
Indiana 562,483 104,173 396,225 10,627 1,073,508
Iowa 112,098 55,160 97,983 159 265,400
Kansas 14,658 88,405 19,353 8,720 131,136
Kentucky 1,027,977 664,358 689,896 55,196 2,437,427
Louisiana 2,634,279 880,585 601,848 30,075 4,146,788
Maine 2,412,877 940 160,628 42,483 2,616,927
Maryland 181,443 830 81,988 17,067 281,327
Massachusetts 70,921 62,087 27,602 0 160,610
Michigan 758,926 244,952 655,280 13,763 1,672,922
Minnesota 697,614 662,985 265,424 26,878 1,652,900
Mississippi 3,097,069 710,142 850,688 95,138 4,753,038
Missouri 774,868 530,292 684,154 79,787 2,069,100
Montana 262,670 0 133,185 9,136 404,990
Nebraska 21,145 18,771 23,414 4,971 68,302
Nevada 29 105 0 0 134
New Hampshire 314,642 348 95,604 7,019 417,613
New Jersey 5,918 77 4,847 1,437 12,279
New Mexico 23,858 2,557 51,796 4,902 83,113
New York 734,006 109,342 326,672 27,390 1,197,410
North Carolina 2,026,330 1,259,265 1,121,627 12,811 4,420,033
North Dakota 2,906 15,202 7,644 265 26,017
Ohio 370,795 18,106 167,351 22,600 578,853
Oklahoma 347,738 197,587 106,086 495 651,906
Oregon 1,520,552 63 1,055,405 16,316 2,592,335
Pennsylvania 1,087,327 1,372 449,956 170,972 1,709,626
Rhode Island 1,769 45,721 5,600 389 53,478
South Carolina 1,429,102 696,577 603,700 1,051 2,730,431
South Dakota 13,944 28,873 5,986 2,294 51,096
Tennessee 633,412 489,840 847,812 187,583 2,158,647
Texas 1,233,553 436,927 371,437 3,021 2,044,938
Utah 5,946 0 19,817 4,437 30,200
Vermont 209,752 37,304 96,790 0 343,845
Virginia 1,483,346 813,600 873,740 39,366 3,210,052
Washington 1,282,288 44 1,850,958 21,446 3,154,736
West Virginia 976,712 49,428 323,306 118,779 1,468,225
Wisconsin 1,137,600 982,264 520,587 60,410 2,700,862
Wyoming 22,685 0 28,100 34,014 84,799
Total 37,061,885 12,330,137 18,970,435 1,295,560 69,658,018
 
 
   
492 
Table 4.1-19.   
Tons of Forest Residue Available for Producing Biofuel  
Biomass Available at $45/ton (dry tons) 
Logging Other Timberland Primary Total
Residue Removals Thinnings Mill Residue Quantity
Alabama 2,405,083 507,240 1,012,090 7,117 3,931,530
Arizona 27,131 49,020 69,934 1,351 147,436
Arkansas 1,703,543 770,985 858,827 12,889 3,346,244
California 1,166,955 0 1,898,937 65,088 3,130,980
Colorado 20,112 22 61,238 2,302 83,674
Connecticut 8,601 32,190 20,929 3,949 65,670
Delaware 35,863 28,290 13,400 0 77,554
Florida 1,070,430 515,407 533,194 2,202 2,121,234
Georgia 3,113,907 993,262 1,288,591 45,138 5,440,898
Idaho 432,605 0 105,188 6,006 543,799
Illinois 278,305 235,178 230,863 18,523 762,869
Indiana 562,928 104,173 443,691 10,627 1,121,419
Iowa 112,100 55,215 99,102 159 266,576
Kansas 14,658 88,405 19,353 8,720 131,136
Kentucky 1,027,977 664,358 814,743 55,196 2,562,273
Louisiana 2,634,279 880,585 661,023 30,075 4,205,963
Maine 2,561,023 989 204,885 42,483 2,809,379
Maryland 189,159 842 81,988 17,067 289,054
Massachusetts 78,254 66,382 27,602 0 172,239
Michigan 783,465 257,201 820,603 13,763 1,875,033
Minnesota 717,037 683,787 319,980 26,878 1,747,683
Mississippi 3,097,069 710,142 935,870 95,138 4,838,219
Missouri 774,868 530,292 932,163 79,787 2,317,110
Montana 431,194 0 141,549 9,136 581,879
Nebraska 21,419 18,867 23,414 4,971 68,672
Nevada 44 142 0 0 186
New Hampshire 331,037 395 115,132 7,019 453,583
New Jersey 6,368 79 4,847 1,437 12,731
New Mexico 34,478 2,575 53,724 4,902 95,679
New York 768,914 113,104 379,391 27,390 1,288,799
North Carolina 2,026,330 1,259,265 1,336,840 12,811 4,635,245
North Dakota 2,907 15,202 7,644 265 26,018
Ohio 372,045 18,139 177,144 22,600 589,927
Oklahoma 347,738 197,587 125,400 495 671,220
Oregon 2,502,187 68 1,095,253 16,316 3,613,824
Pennsylvania 1,092,836 1,386 604,355 170,972 1,869,549
Rhode Island 1,913 50,079 5,600 389 57,981
South Carolina 1,429,102 696,577 704,036 1,051 2,830,767
South Dakota 23,743 31,161 6,505 2,294 63,704
Tennessee 633,412 489,840 1,015,395 187,583 2,326,230
Texas 1,233,553 436,927 438,374 3,021 2,111,876
Utah 7,515 0 21,571 4,437 33,524
Vermont 217,084 38,363 107,673 0 363,120
Virginia 1,483,346 813,600 1,048,745 39,366 3,385,057
Washington 2,135,174 46 1,963,678 21,446 4,120,344
West Virginia 976,712 49,428 482,367 118,779 1,627,287
Wisconsin 1,153,876 998,604 654,054 60,410 2,866,943
Wyoming 36,327 0 36,405 34,014 106,745
Total 40,084,609 12,405,402 22,003,291 1,295,560 75,788,862
 
 
 
493 
Table 4.1-20.   
Tons of Forest Residue Available for Producing Biofuels  
Biomass available at $70/ton (dry tons) 
Logging Other Timberland Primary Total
Residue Removals Thinnings Mill Residue Quantity
Alabama 2,405,083 507,240 1,163,309 7,117 4,082,749
Arizona 27,131 49,020 77,357 1,351 154,859
Arkansas 1,703,543 770,985 984,188 12,889 3,471,605
California 1,166,955 0 2,001,231 65,088 3,233,274
Colorado 20,112 22 61,238 2,302 83,674
Connecticut 8,601 32,190 20,929 3,949 65,670
Delaware 35,863 28,290 13,400 0 77,554
Florida 1,070,430 515,407 664,706 2,202 2,252,745
Georgia 3,113,907 993,262 1,553,823 45,138 5,706,130
Idaho 432,605 0 123,852 6,006 562,463
Illinois 278,305 235,178 230,863 18,523 762,869
Indiana 562,928 104,173 443,691 10,627 1,121,419
Iowa 112,100 55,215 99,102 159 266,576
Kansas 14,658 88,405 19,353 8,720 131,136
Kentucky 1,027,977 664,358 927,808 55,196 2,675,339
Louisiana 2,634,279 880,585 750,104 30,075 4,295,044
Maine 2,561,023 989 332,233 42,483 2,936,728
Maryland 189,159 842 81,988 17,067 289,054
Massachusetts 78,254 66,382 27,602 0 172,239
Michigan 783,465 257,201 1,066,214 13,763 2,120,643
Minnesota 717,037 683,787 401,197 26,878 1,828,900
Mississippi 3,097,069 710,142 1,033,196 95,138 4,935,545
Missouri 774,868 530,292 1,287,857 79,787 2,672,803
Montana 431,194 0 166,045 9,136 606,375
Nebraska 21,419 18,867 23,414 4,971 68,672
Nevada 44 142 0 0 186
New Hampshire 331,037 395 116,195 7,019 454,646
New Jersey 6,368 79 4,847 1,437 12,731
New Mexico 34,478 2,575 64,375 4,902 106,330
New York 768,914 113,104 385,701 27,390 1,295,109
North Carolina 2,026,330 1,259,265 1,600,910 12,811 4,899,315
North Dakota 2,907 15,202 7,644 265 26,018
Ohio 372,045 18,139 177,144 22,600 589,927
Oklahoma 347,738 197,587 163,268 495 709,088
Oregon 2,502,187 68 1,133,187 16,316 3,651,758
Pennsylvania 1,092,836 1,386 680,995 170,972 1,946,189
Rhode Island 1,913 50,079 5,600 389 57,981
South Carolina 1,429,102 696,577 791,111 1,051 2,917,842
South Dakota 23,743 31,161 8,258 2,294 65,457
Tennessee 633,412 489,840 1,033,100 187,583 2,343,935
Texas 1,233,553 436,927 507,340 3,021 2,180,841
Utah 7,515 0 29,434 4,437 41,386
Vermont 217,084 38,363 142,210 0 397,658
Virginia 1,483,346 813,600 1,260,733 39,366 3,597,045
Washington 2,135,174 46 2,059,970 21,446 4,216,636
West Virginia 976,712 49,428 575,278 118,779 1,720,198
Wisconsin 1,153,876 998,604 841,550 60,410 3,054,440
Wyoming 36,327 0 43,195 34,014 113,536
Total 40,084,609 12,405,402 25,186,746 1,295,560 78,972,317
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
494 
 The U.S. Forestry Service recommended that we choose $45 per dry ton as the price 
point for our cost analysis.878  This seemed reasonable since this price point was roughly the 
same as farm gate crop residue discussed above, and so we used this price point for our analysis   
Assuming that the wood chips would be ground further in the field adds an additional $11 per 
dry ton to the feedstock cost.   
 
 Delivery of woody biomass from the harvesting site to a conversion facility, like delivery 
of more conventional forest products, accounts for a significant portion of the delivered cost.  In 
fact, transportation of wood fiber (including hauling within the forest) accounts for about 25 to 
50 percent of the total delivered costs and highly depends on fuel prices, haul distance, material 
moisture content, and vehicle capacity and utilization.  Also, beyond a certain distance, 
transportation becomes the limiting factor and the costs become directly proportional to haul 
distance.180  We used the Class 8 over-the-road hauling costs estimated in Table 4.1-15 for 
estimating the hauling costs for forest residue.  As a feedstock, forest residue is expected to be 
available at a higher density per area than corn stover.  Thus, its hauling costs would potentially 
be lower than those for corn stover because the forest residue would be hauled a shorter distance.  
However, forest residue is often located in more remote locations, so it may have to be hauled a 
further distance to reach the plant site.  We anticipate hauling forest residue to a plant will cost 
about $14 per ton.  Totalling up the feedstock cost at the forest edge, the grinding cost and the 
hauling costs results in a total delivered price of $70 per dry ton. 
 
 Municipal Solid Waste 
Million of tons of municipal solid waste (MSW) continue to be disposed of in landfills across 
the country, despite recent large gains in waste reduction and diversion. The biomass fraction of 
this total stream represents a potentially significant resource for renewable energy (including 
electricity and biofuels).  Because this waste material is already being generated, collected and 
transported (it would solely need to be transported to a different location), its use is likely to be 
less expensive than other cellulosic feedstocks.  One important difficulty facing those who plan 
to use MSW fractions for fuel production is that in many places, even today, MSW is a mixture 
of all types of wastes, including biomaterials such as animal fats and grease, tin, iron, aluminum, 
and other metals, painted woods, plastics, and glass.  Many of these materials can’t be used in 
biochemical and thermochemical ethanol production, and, in fact, would inflate the 
transportation costs, impede the operations at the cellulosic ethanol plant and cause an expensive 
waste stream for biofuel producers.   
Thus, accessing sorted MSW would likely be a requirement for firms planning on using 
MSW for producing cellulosic biofuels.  In a confidential conversation, a potential producer who 
plans to use MSW to produce ethanol indicated that their plant plans are based on the obtaining 
cellulosic biowaste which has already been sorted at the waste source (e.g., at the curbside, 
where the refuse hauler picks up waste already sorted by the generating home-owner or 
business).  For example, in a tract of homes, one refuse truck would pick up glass, plastic, and 
perhaps other types of waste destined for a specific disposal depot, whereas a different truck 
would follow to pick up wood, paper, and other cellulosic materials to be hauled to a depot that 
                                                 
180
 Ashton, S.; B. Jackson; R. Schroeder.  Cost Factors in Harvesting and Transporting Woody Biomass, 2007. 
Module 4: Introduction to Harvesting, Transportation, and Processing :: Fact Sheet 4.7 
495 
supplies an ethanol plant.  However, only a small fraction of the MSW generated today is sorted 
at the curbside. 
Another alternative would be to sort the waste either at a sorting facility, or at the landfill, 
prior to dumping.  There are two prominent options here.  The first is that there is no sorting at 
the waste creation site, the home or business, and thus a single waste stream must be sorted at the 
facility.  This operation would likely be done by hand or by automated equipment at the facility.  
To do so by hand is very labor intensive and somewhat slower than using an automated system.  
In most cases the ‘by-hand’ system produces a slightly cleaner stream, but the high cost of labor 
usually makes the automated system more cost-effective.  Perhaps the best approach for low cost 
and a clean stream is the combination of hand sorting with automated sorting.   
The third option is a combination of the two which requires that there is at least some 
sorting at the home or business which helps to prevent contamination of the waste material, but 
then the final sorting occurs downstream at a sorting site, or at the landfill.  
We have little data and few estimates for the cost to sort MSW.  One estimate we 
generated within our Office of Solid Waste for a combination of mechanically and manually 
sorting a single waste stream downstream of where the waste is generated puts the cost in the 
$20 to $30 per ton range.  There is a risk, though, that the waste stream could still be 
contaminated and this would increase the cost of both transporting and using this material at the 
biofuel plant due to the toxic ash produced which would require disposal at a toxic waste facility.  
If a less contaminated stream is desired it would probably require sorting at the generation site – 
the home or business - which would likely be more costly since many more people in society 
would then have to be involved and special trucks would need to be used.  Also, widespread 
participation is difficult when a change in human behavior is required as some may not be so 
willing to participate.  Offering incentives could help to speed the transition to curbside recycling 
(i.e., charging fee for nonsorted waste, or paying a small amount for sorted tree trimmings and 
construction and demolition waste).  Assuming that curbside sorting is involved, at least in a 
minor way, total sorting costs might be in the $30 to $40 per ton range.  We request comment on 
the costs incurred for sorting cellulosic material from the rest of MSW waste. 
These sorting costs would be offset by the cost savings for not disposing of the waste 
material.  Most landfills charge tipping fees, the cost to dump a load of waste, a societal cost that 
would be avoided.  In the United States, the national average nominal tipping fee increased 
fourfold from 1985 to 2000. The real tipping fee almost doubled, up from a national average (in 
1997 dollars) of about $12 per ton in 1985 to just over $30 in 2000.  Equally important, it is 
apparent that the tipping fee is much higher in densely populated regions.  For example, in 2004, 
the trend differed by municipality level, from $9 a ton in Denver to $97 in Spokane.  Statewide 
averages also varied widely, from $8 a ton in New Mexico to $75 in New Jersey.  Tipping fees 
ranged from $21 to 98 per ton in 2006 for MSW and $18/ton to $120/ton for construction and 
demolition waste.  It is likely that the tipping fees are highest for waste contaminated by toxic 
materials that require the disposal at Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) certified 
toxic waste sites as opposed to a composting site.  However, this same contaminated material 
would not be desirable to biofuel producers.  Presuming that only the noncontaminated cellulosic 
waste (yard trimmings, building construction and demolition waste and some paper) is collected 
496 
as feedstocks for biofuel plants, the handling and tipping fees are likely much lower, in the $30 
per ton range.181   
The avoidance of tipping fees, however, is a complex issue since landfills are generally 
not owned by municipalities anymore.  Both large and small municipalities recognized their 
inability to handle the new and complex solid waste regulations at a reasonable cost.  Only 38 
out of the 100 largest cities own their own landfills.  To deal with the solid waste, large private 
companies built massive amounts of landfill capacity.  The economic incentive is for private 
landfill operators to fill their landfills with garbage as early as possible to pay off their capital 
investment (landfill site) quickly.  Also, the longer the landfill is operating the greater is its 
exposure to liability due to leakages and leaching.  Furthermore, landfills can more cost-
effectively manage the waste as the scale of the landfill is enlarged.  As a result, there are fewer 
landfills and landfill owners, and an expansion of market share by large private waste 
management firms, thus decreasing the leverage an ethanol producer may have.182  Hence, 
MSW-ethanol plants could be opposed by landfill operators.  This may also be true in the case of 
a waste-to-energy (WTE) facility, which burns as much garbage as possible to produce 
electricity.  For sustainable operation, a certain amount of daily waste supply should be 
guaranteed.  A MSW-ethanol plant may therefore be seen as an unwelcome competition to both 
landfill owners and WTE facilities.  This competition may increase the cost of cellulosic biomass 
to the biofuel producers.  We request comment on the costs avoided for diverting cellulosic 
material from landfills and WTE facilities. 
Once the cellulosic biomass has been sorted from the rest of MSW, it would have to be 
transported to the biofuels plant.  Transporting is different for MSW biomass compared to forest 
and crop residues.  Forest and crop residues are collected from a forests and farms, which are 
both rural sites, and transported to the biofuel plant which likely is located at a rural site.  The 
trucks which transport the forest and crop residues can be large over-the-road trucks which can 
average moderate speeds because of the lower amount of traffic that they experience.  
Conversely, MSW is being collected from throughout the urban areas and would have to 
transported through those urban areas to the plant site.  If the cellulosic biomass is being 
collected at curbside, it would likely be collected in more conventional refuse trucks.  If the plant 
is nearby, then the refuse trucks could transport the cellulosic biomass directly to the plant.  
However, if the plant is located far away from a portion of the urban area, then the refuse trucks 
would probably to be offloaded to more conventional over-the-road trucks with sizable trailers to 
make transport more cost-effective.  We believe that in most cases, MSW will be transported by 
class 8, over-the-road trucks with operating characteristics like those summarized in Table 4.1-
15.  The trucks would likely need to pick up the sorted MSW at a MSW sorting facility and haul 
the MSW to the cellulosic biofuel plant.  The cellulosic biofuel plant would likely be located on 
the outskirts of the medium or large city, and so the MSW feedstock would have to be hauled 
through the urban area to reach the plant.  Some of the trucks may not have to travel very far and 
would avoid most of the urban traffic since the MSW would be available on the same side of city 
as the plant.  However, another portion of the MSW may be located on the opposite side of city 
                                                 
181
  A much more thorough analysis of tipping fees by waste type is planned for the final rulemaking analysis. 
182
 Osamu Sakamoto, The Financial Feasibility Analysis of Municipal Solid Waste to Ethanol Conversion, Michigan 
State University, Plan B Master Research Paper in partial fulfillment of the requirement for the degree of Master of 
Science, Department of Agricultural Economics, 2004 
497 
from the plant and the trucks may have to endure significant traffic from time-to-time.  We 
estimate that the cost to transport the cellulosic biomass sourced from MSW to the biofuel plant 
would average $15 per ton.    
Cellulosic biomass sourced from MSW can be generated year-round in many parts of the 
U.S.  If a steady enough stream of this material is available, then secondary storage would not be 
necessary, thus avoiding the need to install secondary storage.  We assumed that no secondary 
storage costs would be incurred for MSW-sourced cellulosic biomass.   
The total costs for MSW-sourced cellulosic biomass is estimated to be $30 -$40 per ton 
for sorting costs, $30 per ton for tipping costs avoided, $15 per ton for transportation costs and 
$11 per ton for grinding the cellulose to prepare it as a feedstock - resulting in a total feedstock 
cost of $26 to $36 per ton.  In our cost analysis, we assumed an average cost of $31 per ton.   
Table 4.1-21 below summarizes major cost components for each cellulosic feedstock. 
Table 4.1-21. 
Summary of Cellulosic Feedstock Costs ($53/ton crude oil costs) 
Ag Residue Switchgrass Forest Residue MSW 
60% of Total 
Feedstock 
1% of total 
Feedstock 
25% of Total 
Feedstock 
14% of Total 
Feedstock 
Mowing, 
Raking, Baling, 
Hauling, 
Nutrients and 
Farmer 
Payment 
$43/ton 
 
Mowing, 
Raking, Baling, 
Hauling, 
Nutrients and 
Farmer 
Payment 
$42/ton 
Harvesting, 
Hauling to 
Forest Edge, 
Chipping 
$45/ton 
Sorting, 
Contaminant 
Removal, 
Tipping Fees 
Avoided $0 – 
$10/ton 
Hauling to 
Secondary 
Storage, 
Secondary 
Storage, 
Hauling to 
Plant $45/ton 
Hauling to 
Secondary 
Storage, 
Secondary 
Storage, 
Hauling to 
Plant $37/ton 
Grinding, 
Hauling to 
Plant $25/ton 
Grinding, 
Hauling to 
Plant $26/ton 
Total $88/ton Total $77/ton Total $70/ton Total Avg 
$31/ton 
 
Weighting the cellulosic feedstock costs by their supply quantities results in an average 
cellulosic feedstock cost of $71 per ton which we used at the reference crude oil price of $53/bbl.   
 
We also estimated the feedstock costs assuming that crude oil is priced at $92/bbl.  We 
adjusted the transportation costs higher by 10 percent based on our analysis of how ethanol 
distribution costs would be affected by the higher crude oil price.  We adjusted the farm gate 
498 
costs upwards by about $2 per ton based on FASOM agricultural market modeling at the higher 
crude oil price.   We also increased grinding costs upwards by 10 percent.  Table 4.1-22 
summarized our estimated feedstock costs at $93 per barrel crude oil prices.  
 
Table 4.1-22. 
Summary of Cellulosic Feedstock Costs ($92/ton crude oil costs) 
Ag Residue Switchgrass Forest Residue MSW 
60% of Total 
Feedstock 
1% of total 
Feedstock 
25% of Total 
Feedstock 
14% of Total 
Feedstock 
Mowing, 
Raking, Baling, 
Hauling, 
Nutrients and 
Farmer 
Payment 
$45/ton 
 
Mowing, 
Raking, Baling, 
Hauling, 
Nutrients and 
Farmer 
Payment 
$42/ton 
Harvesting, 
Hauling to 
Forest Edge, 
Chipping 
$47/ton 
Sorting, 
Contaminant 
Removal, 
Tipping Fees 
Avoided $3 – 
$13/ton 
Hauling to 
Secondary 
Storage, 
Secondary 
Storage, 
Hauling to 
Plant $49/ton 
Hauling to 
Secondary 
Storage, 
Secondary 
Storage, 
Hauling to 
Plant $39/ton 
Grinding, 
Hauling to 
Plant $28/ton 
Grinding, 
Hauling to 
Plant $28/ton 
Total $94/ton Total $77/ton Total $75/ton Total Avg 
$36/ton 
 
We estimate that at the crude oil price of $92 per barrel, the average feedstock cost 
increases to $76 per ton 
Cellulosic Ethanol Production Costs 
We contracted with the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) to estimate the 
cost to convert corn stover into ethanol for the years 2010, 2015, and 2022.  It is of particular 
importance for the following discussion, to note the following: NREL used the same feedstock 
mass (772,168 dry tons of corn stover) in all three cases.   
For the three cases, NREL assumed the feedstock, ‘as-needed,’ was hauled to the plant by 
trucks and trailers from satellite storage, already shredded to the appropriate size for processing, 
and free of dirt, iron, and other contaminates; in other words – process ready.  The transport 
vehicles were unloaded into surge tanks, large enough to hold feedstock for three days of 
operation.  The pretreatment and hydrolysis reactors are charged from these feed surge tanks. 
The following is background information for our discussion of both operating and capital 
costs, some of which is also included in our brief discussion of the process flow description and 
499 
capital equipment charges.  The first step was to develop a set of process flow diagrams that set 
the arrangement of the equipment.  Based on the desired production volume, these diagrams, 
were used within an ASPEN Plus4© model to develop complete mass and energy balance. The 
model consists of 164 unit operation blocks, 457 streams (247 material and 210 heat or work), 63 
components, and 82 control blocks.  
The overall model is thermodynamically rigorous and uses physical properties for the 
feedstock and process chemicals included in the ASPEN software as well as property data 
developed at NREL.  The individual unit models are also thermodynamically consistent and can 
be either rigorous (for example, the simulation of the distillation) or simple.  The reactors could 
be modeled with kinetic expressions, but because of the level of development of the 
experimental data, they were modeled as experimentally determined conversions of specific 
reactions.  This type of model still satisfies the rigorous mass and energy balance. Other unit 
operations, such as liquid-solid separations, are typically modeled with fixed solids removal and 
liquid retention (in the solids stream) data from vendor tests.183  Using the process flow diagrams 
and the mass and energy balance information, NREL estimated stream flows and conditions, 
along with the estimated quantities of raw materials and other process chemicals. 
The following table presents NREL’s summary of each of the three year’s total project 
investment.  For each year’s total project investment, NREL provided capital charge, which 
includes income tax, depreciation, and average return on investment, the cost of raw materials, 
waste handling charges, and by-product credits.   
                                                 
183
 A. Aden, M. Ruth, K. Ibsen, J. Jechura, K. Neeves, J. Sheehan, and B. Wallace  
National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL); L. Montague, A. Slayton, and J. Lukas Harris Group, Seattle, 
Washington, Ethanol Process Design and Economics Utilizing Co-Current Dilute Acid Prehydrolysis and Enzymatic 
Hydrolysis for Corn Stover; June 2002; NREL is a U.S. Department of Energy Laboratory Operated by Midwest 
Research Institute • Battelle • Bechtel; Contract No. DE-AC36-99-GO10337 
 
500 
Table 4.1-23.  Summary of NREL’s Capital Charges and Operating Costs 
Year Technology 2010 2015 2022 
Plant Size 
MMgal/yr 56 69 71 
Capital Cost $MM 
(TPI) 232 220 199 
 $MM/yr ¢/gal $MM/yr ¢/gal $MM/yr ¢/gal 
Capital Charge 
10% after tax ROI  42 75 39 56 35 50 
Fixed Costs 9 16 9 12 8 12 
Feedstock Cost 84 46 51 35 50 35 
Other Raw Matl. 
Costs 17 30 4 5 16 16 
Enzyme Cost 18 32 7 10 5 8 
Enzyme Nutrients 8 14 2 3 2 2 
Electricity -6 -10 -7 -9 -12 -16 
Waste Disposal 1 2 3 4 1 1 
Total Costs 173 205 108 116 105 108 
      
  
The quantities of all raw material, generated electricity, and produced wastes were 
determined using the ASPEN mass and energy balance model.  These costs include:  Feedstock – 
corn stover, CSL – purchased corn steep liquor (a nutrient); Cellulase – purchased cellulase 
enzymes; Other Raw Materials – sulfuric acid, diammonium phosphate, make-up water, boiler 
feed water chemicals, cooling water chemicals.  Waste Disposal – waste water chemicals, waste 
water polymers, ash disposal, gypsum disposal.  Electricity – marketing and distribution of 
surplus electricity to the grid for credit.  
We note that the percent change in total project investment from year to year is not 
insignificant and reflects improvements in mechanical process efficiencies among other general 
improvements in the process technology, including the automatic distributed process control 
system, all of which are off-set to some extent by increases in the real cost of the technology 
improvements, as well as those of constructions materials.  We discuss capital costs following 
this discussion of operating costs. 
The most notable reductions in NREL’s operating costs are in the price per dry ton of the 
corn stover feedstock and in the cost of cellulase enzyme.  NREL anticipates significant 
improvement in the efficiency of these enzymes, especially those that saccharify glucan to 
501 
glucose and xylose oligomers184 generated during hydrolysis.  They also expect improvement in 
the yeasts that ferment xylose.  According to the 2007 NREL – State of Technology report, they 
anticipate that as a first step,,the relationship between corn stover hydrolysate conditioning and 
fermentation will be better defined and understood.  Commercial cellulase preparations will 
continue to be analyzed for baseline performance (specific activity), and due to increased 
research efforts, cellulase function will be better understood, which should lead to efficiency 
improvements.  Integrated testing of whole slurry and recycle options will also be conducted 
resulting in potential improvements in that area.  Last, the efficacy of advanced enzyme 
preparations (including oligomerases and/or hemicellulases) will continue to be tested in 
conjunction with alternative pretreatment technologies.  NREL expects that the cost of 
pretreatment will deminish, hydrolysis time will decrease, and the sugar (xylose and glucose) 
yields will increase.185    
As the process costs decline over time, the feedstock costs become a larger fraction of the 
overall costs.  We also note that in the following table that the cost of the feedstock makes up 
50% of the total cost in 2010; 67% in 2015; and 68% in 2022.  The reduction in feedstock cost, 
from $60 per dry ton in 2010, to $45.90 per dry ton in both 2015 and 2022 also has a significant 
effect on operating costs.  In addition, NREL did not include payments to the farmers/growers 
nor for soil nutrients (fertilizer, etc.) that were removed with the harvested corn stover.  The cost 
of the cellulase enzyme is the next highest contributor, with percent reductions contributed to 
total cost that reduced from ~19% in 2010, to 13% in 2015 and 10% in 2022.  It should be 
obvious that any reductions in these costs have significant effects on the total operating cost.  
The majority of research going forward will be focused on these two items, although some work 
will be done to reduce the cost of the others.  Table 4.1-24 summarizes NREL’s operating costs 
for a biochemical cellulosic ethanol plant.  
 
 
                                                 
184
 Xylan polymer chains, with considerably fewer residue numbers in the chain than were in the original xylan 
polymer; they were broken off the polymer as these short chains rather than as single molecule sugars.   
185
 Andy Aden, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, Colorado, Biochemical Production of Ethanol 
from Corn Stover: 2007 State of Technology Model, Technical Report NREL/TP-510-43205, Task No. BB07.2410; 
May 2008  
 
 
502 
Table 4.1-24. 
Percent of the total operating cost for each actual operating cost item 
 2010 2015 2022 
 ¢/gal % of Total ¢/gal % of Total ¢/gal % of Total 
Feedstock 84 50 51 67 50 68 
Biomass to 
Boiler 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 
CSLa 14 8 3 4 2 3 
Cellulase 32 19 9 13 8 10 
Other Raw 
Matl. Costs 31 18 5 7 16 22 
Waste Disposal 2 1 4 5 2 2 
Electricity -10 -6 -9 -12 -16 -22 
Fixed Costs 16 10 12 16 12 16 
 168  76  72  
  
aCorn steep liquor – provides nutrients for the enzymes. 
    
 The following table includes our adjustments to NREL’s variable or operating cost data 
for the three years studied.  We note that the two main differences between NREL’s and our 
estimates are in the feedstock costs and in the way we calculate capital charges.  We adjusted 
NREL’s capital charges which were calculated using a 10% after tax return on investment, to 
reflect a 7 percent before tax rate of return, which is the capital cost basis for our cost analyses.  
We also adjusted the NREL feedstock costs to those that we estimated in Table 4.1-21, which 
was $71.23 per ton.  This significant difference between their and our feedstock cost estimates is 
due to our including payments to farmers/growers plus covering the cost to replace nutrients 
(fertilizer, etc.) removed at the time the stover was harvested.  According to a personal 
communication, NREL used unpublished data from the Idaho National Laboratory that indicate 
feedstock costs will be significantly reduced between 2010 and 2015.   
503 
Table 4.1-25.  Adjusted Capital Charges and Operating Costs 
Year 
Technology 2010 2015 2022 
Plant Size 
MMgal/yr 56 69 71 
Capital Cost $MM 232 220 199 
 $MM/yr ¢/gal $MM/yr ¢/gal $MM/yr ¢/gal 
Capital Cost 7% 
ROI before taxes 25 46 24 35 22 31 
Fixed Costs 9 16 9 12 8 12 
Feedstock Cost 55 99 55 79 55 77 
Other Raw Matl. 
Costs 17 30 4 5 16 16 
Enzyme Cost 18 32 7 10 5 8 
Enzyme Nutrients 8 14 2 3 2 2 
Electricity -6 -10 -7 -9 -12 -16 
Waste Disposal 1 2 3 4 1 1 
Total Costs 127 229 96 139 84 131 
 
 The changes in the minimum ethanol selling prices for the three years studied are 
partially due to the changes in necessary capital investments.  In order to determine capital costs, 
NREL developed specifications pieces of equipment that fall within different areas of a 
biochemical plant.  A biochemical plant is divided up into 8 different areas (Area 200 through 
Area 900)._ For each equipment specification, they developed individual purchased equipment 
and installation costs.  Vendors supplied installation costs where possible; in other cases 
installation factors were used.  Equipment costs were obtained from vendor quotations when 
possible, especially for uncommon equipment such as pretreatment reactors.  These costs reflect 
the base case for which the equipment was designed.  If process changes were made and the 
equipment size changed, the equipment is not generally re-costed, in detail.  Rather, the cost was 
adjusted by scaling using the following exponential scaling expression, [New Cost = Original 
Cost x (New Size/Original Size)^exp].  They also scaled the size of equipment that was known to 
change linearly with a change in inlet flow.  The scaling exponents (exp) were obtained from 
vendor quotes, or from a standard reference, such as Garrett.186  
                                                 
186
 Garrett, D.E., Chemical Engineering Economics, Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York, 1989 
 
504 
Installation costs were taken primarily from Delta-T, a process consultant’s experience. 
Once the scaled, installed equipment costs (total installed capital costs) were determined, they 
applied overhead and contingency factors to determine a total plant investment cost.  That cost, 
along with the plant operating expenses (generally developed from the ASPEN model) was used 
in a discounted cash flow analysis to determine the cost of ethanol production, using a set 
discount rate.  NREL use a discount rate of 10%, whereas we used 7%, a factor generally used in 
our financial calculations.  For this analysis, the minimum ethanol selling price was the primary 
value used to compare cases.   
The total project investment was briefly discussed previously in our summary discussion 
of operating costs; we used NREL’s total project investment for our estimates.  The following 
summarizes the capital expenditures that account for that capital investment. 
Area 200:  Pretreatment and Hydrolysis.  The equipment in this area consists of an 
assortment of pipe, pumps, tanks, tank-agitators, tank-mixers, coolers, 3-pneumapress filters, as 
well as three separate process trains, each of which includes a presteamer, a blow tank, and a 
reactor.  The presteamer uses low-pressure steam to heat the feedstock to about 212 oF.  It 
discharges the hot, saturated mix into a blow tank that serves as a seal between the presteamer 
and the hydrolysis reactor.  The mix is charged to the reactor and dilute sulfuric acid is added; 
the reactor operates at 191 psia and 547 oF.  Most of the hemicellulose, e.g., primarily xylose, 
mannose, arabinose, and galactose are converted into sugars. Glucan in the hemicellulose and a 
small portion of the glucan in the cellulose are converted to glucose.  These conditions also 
solubilize some of the lignin in the feedstock and ‘expose’ the cellulose for subsequent 
enzymatic hydrolysis, in a downstream section. In addition, acetic acid is liberated from the 
hemicellulose hydrolysis. Degradation products of pentose sugars (primarily furfural) and hexose 
sugars (primarily hydroxymethyl furfural (HMF)) are also formed. 
Following the pretreatment reactor, the hydrolyzate liquid and solids are flash cooled, 
which vaporizes a large amount of water, a portion of the acetic acid, and much of the furfural 
and HMF, which can be toxic to downstream fermentation microorganisms.   
In addition to the flash removal of aldehydes, the solids are washed and filter-pressed to 
remove the liquid portion of the hydrolyzate, which contains sulfuric acid. The liquid is then 
neutralized to pH 10 with ammonia and held until the gypsum precipitates and is filtered out. 
The hydrolyzate, which contains the hydrolyzed xylose sugars and some glucose sugars, is 
mixed back with dilution water and the filter cake, which contains the unhydrolyzed cellulose 
and is sent to saccharification and co-fermentation (Area 300) 
An important issue on an industrial scale is accurate pH control. By pH 11, as 
much as 30% of the glucose may be lost to HMF and other side reactions. Several 
factors increase the probability of overshooting pH endpoints during neutralization.  The 
natural buffering capacity of hydrolyzates causes neutralization reactions to be slow.  
Plus, measurements using pH membrane probes are affected by temperature and the 
presence of dissolved organic compounds (sugars and lignin). 
505 
 Since we are handling the same mass of feedstock in each of the modeled years, we don’t 
expect the cost of the equipment for pretreatment and hydrolysis will change much over the 
2010-2022 time period.  The equipment costs for Area 200 – Pretreatment & Hydrolysis are 
2010: $23-million; 2015: $22.7-million; and 2022: $18.9-million.  Neutralization and 
Conditioning costs were separated out from the Pretreatment & Hydrolysis costs, even though 
the NREL’s design report includes both cost centers in Area 200.   Neutralization and 
Conditioning costs are as follows:  2010: $8.4-million; 2015: $9.4-million; and 2022: $7.7-
million.  The combined cost for Area 200 is as follows:  2010: $31.4-million; 2015: $32.1-
million; and 2022: $26.6-million.  In total, this area contributed about 23.5% to the total installed 
capital cost of the project in 2010; about 25.3% in 2015; an 23.2% in 2022  
 Area 300:  Saccharification and Co-Fermentation.  The equipment in this area consists of 
pumps, tanks, tank-agitators, coolers, and heaters.  Two different operations take place in this 
process area — the saccharification of the cellulose to glucose using cellulase enzymes, and the 
fermentation to ethanol of that glucose plus the xylose and glucose sugars from the dilute acid 
pretreatment of hemicellulose from Area 200. 
Glucan from the cellulose undergoes hydrolysis or saccharification, at about 149 oF, prior 
to fermentation.  This slightly higher temperature increases enzyme activity and reduces the time 
and amount of enzyme required for saccharification.  Saccharification or cellulase enzymes, 
purchased from an enzyme manufacturer, and the diluted, detoxified hydrolyzate are 
continuously added to a train of five 1-million gallon saccharification vessels; residence time is 
estimated to be 36-hours.  
Cellulase enzyme is actually a ‘cocktail’ of enzymes, comprised of: (1) endoglucanases, 
which attack randomly along the cellulose fiber to reduce polymer size rapidly; (2) 
exoglucanases, which attack the ends of cellulose fibers, allowing it to hydrolyze highly 
crystalline cellulose; and (3) β-glucosidase, which hydrolyzes cellobiose to glucose.  Several 
bacteria and fungi naturally produce these enzymes, including bacteria in ruminant and termite 
guts and white rot fungus.  The most common organism used to produce cellulase industrially is 
Trichoderma reesei. Genencor International and Novozymes Biotech are developing more cost 
effective cellulase enzymes.  DOE is funding this important work, which should improve the 
economic viability of biomass conversion.  
The recombinant Z. mobilis bacterium is used as the biocatalyst to ferment glucoses and 
xyloses to ethanol.  Several research institutions are genetically engineering strains, such as Z. 
mobilis, to treat additional sugars and identifying other naturally occurring organisms that 
metabolize hemicellulosic sugars.  
The Z. mobilis must be ‘grown’ in increasingly higher volume stages.  Initially, a small 
amount of saccharified slurry and nutrients are combined in a very small vessel with a seed 
inoculum, that’s been grown in the laboratory.  This initial seed batch is used as the inoculum for 
the next larger size seed batch, and so on.  This series of batch scale-ups continues until the last 
batch is large enough to support the actual production fermentation.  
506 
Finally, the seed inoculum, nutrients (corn steep liquor) & (diammonium phosphate – a 
source of nitrogen for the yeast), and saccharified slurry are cooled to about 106 oF and added to 
a train of five 1-million gallon continuous fermentors.  At this point, the process actually 
becomes a simultaneous saccharification and co-fermentation (SSCF) process.  Even though the 
temperature in the fermentation tanks has been reduced to account for the ethanologen’s 
intolerance to heat, the enzymes do continue to hydrolyze cellulose, albeit at a slightly reduced 
rate.  The main byproduct, produced during fermentation is carbon dioxide (CO2), which is 
removed in a later process stage. The ethanol broth called ‘beer’ is collected in a storage tank, 
called a beer well, before it’s pumped to distillation. 
NREL anticipates significant capital savings for saccharification and co-fermentation 
between 2010 and 2015, with fewer between 2015 and 2022.  We note that this area contributed 
15.4% to the total installed capital cost in 2010, but only 8.8% in 2015 and 8.8% in 2022.  The 
equipment costs for Area 300 – Saccharification and Fermentation are 2010: $20.5-million; 
2015: $11.2-million; and 2022: $10.1-million.   
Area 400 – In earlier studies, NREL included plans to produce enzymes in Area 400.  For 
the current studies, Area 400 has been removed and enzymes will be purchased and grown on 
site under licensing agreements with enzyme suppliers.  
Area 500 – Product, Solids, and Water Recovery (Distillation, Dehydration, Evaporation, 
and Solid-Liquid Separation).  The equipment in this area includes distillation and rectification 
columns, pumps, condensers and coolers, pumps, pipe, filter-presses, and evaporators. 
Beer, from the beer well in Area 300, is preheated and fed to a distillation column.  The 
column overhead containing all the CO2 and about 0.2% of the ethanol and a small quantity of 
water is sent to a scrubber, which recovers and recycles about 99% of the vented ethanol.  In the 
tower bottoms, about 90% of the water has been removed and it contains approximately 0.7% of 
the total volume of ethanol fed to the tower.  Over 99% of the total ethanol fed to the tower is 
removed as a 39.4% w/w mixture with water vapor through a side draw and fed directly to a 
rectification column for further ethanol enrichment.  We discuss the distillation column bottoms 
in the evaporation and solid-liquid separation section of this area. 
The rectification tower operating conditions are set to produce an overhead 92.5% w/w 
ethanol/water saturated vapor mixture.  The tower bottoms are a 0.05% w/w ethanol/water 
mixture.  In fact, only 0.1% of the total ethanol from the fermentation area is lost to the bottoms. 
The rectification column overhead is superheated and fed to one of two adsorption 
columns in a molecular sieve adsorption unit.  The two columns operate alternately; while one 
bed is operated to remove water from the ethanol, the other is regenerated by passing a very 
small slipstream of pure ethanol vapor back through the loaded bed that strips the water off the 
adsorbent, while the column is under a vacuum.  The mixture is condensed and returned to the 
rectification column feed stream.  The adsorption column removes 95% of the water and a small 
quantity of ethanol. The 99.5% pure ethanol vapor is condensed, cooled, and pumped to storage.  
507 
Evaporation, and Solid-Liquid Separation:  The beer column bottoms, with about 5.8% 
insoluble solids, are fed to the first effect evaporator, where 24% of the water in the feed is 
evaporated.  The evaporator bottom slurry, cooled from ~243 oF to ~189 oF, is sent to a filter-
press, from which the filtrate is returned to the second evaporator effect; the filter cake is not 
washed.  In the second effect evaporator, 44% of the feed water is evaporated.  The third effect 
evaporates 76% of the remaining water.  The final vapor is condensed and fed to a condensate 
drum.  Of the total feed to the evaporation/separation system, 10.5% remains as syrup, 11.5% is 
removed as a wet cake in the pressure filter, 17% is recycled back to the process as recycle 
water, and 61% is evaporated. The syrup from the third evaporator bottoms is 60% water, e.g., 
the maximum dissolved solids level that can be achieved without rapid fouling of the evaporator; 
the flow of very low-pressure steam to the evaporator is set to achieve this level. This syrup is 
mixed with the cake from the filter-press and sent to the combustor for disposal. Air from the 
filter-press is used for combustion air.  
The equipment costs for Area 500 – Product, Solids, and Water Recovery (Distillation, 
Dehydration, Evaporation, and Solid-Liquid Separation) are for 2010: $23.4-million; 2015: 
$26.1-million; and 2022: $23.3-million.   This area’s contribution to the total installed capital 
cost in 2010 is 17.5%; in 2015, 20.6%; and in 2022, 20.3%.  We believe that some of the 
increase from 2010 to 2015 has to do with the increased liquid flow due to the conversion 
improvements; larger pipe, pumps, tanks, etc may be necessary to handle the increased flow.  
The changes from 2015 to 2022 are not that significant, as reflected by the percent contribution 
of the area to total installed equipment cost. 
Area 600 – Wastewater Treatment:  The equipment in Area 600 consists mainly of 
aerobic and anaerobic digesters, digester agitators, tanks (basins), a biogas emergency flare, 
coolers, and pumps.  The main purpose of the wastewater treatment section is to reduce the plant 
makeup water requirement by recovering, treating and recycling as much process water as 
possible.  The feed to the wastewater treatment section consists of:  condensed pretreatment flash 
vapor, condensate from the hydrolyzate filter-press vent, boiler blowdown, cooling tower 
blowdown, clean-in-place waste, and the non-recycled evaporator condensate.  Rain and snow 
run-off, equipment washing, and other non-process wastewater are assumed to flow to the 
municipal wastewater treatment system.  The stream is screened to remove large waste particles 
that are sent to a landfill; any remaining organic matter is anaerobically and aerobically digested. 
Anaerobic digestion produces a methane rich (75%-methane, 25%-carbon dioxide) biogas that’s 
fed to the combustor.  Aerobic digestion produces relatively clean water that’s recycled back to 
the process and sludge that’s burned in the combustor.   
NREL didn’t expect much change over the 2010 to 2022 time period.  In 2010 the 
installed capital cost for this area was $3.4-million; in 2015, $3.7-million; and in 2022 it was 3.1-
million.  As important as this area is to the entire operation its contribution to the total project 
installed capital cost is relatively minor.  In 2010 the contribution was 2.5%; in 2015, 2.9%; and 
in 2022 it was 2.7%. 
Area 700: Bulk Storage of Chemicals.  This section of the plant stors chemicals in bulk 
for the process and for finished, fuel-grade ethanol.  The feedstock feed surge tanks we discussed 
just prior to the discussion of Area 200 are not included in this area.  Process chemicals stored in 
508 
this area include: corn steep liquor (a nutrient), sulfuric acid, cellulase enzyme, gasoline (used as 
a denaturant finish the fuel grade ethanol), and water for fire suppression.   
There is approximately five-days of  SS316-stainless steel187 tank sulfuric acid storage.  
Corn steep liquor (CSL), a nutrient for fermentation seed growth and ethanol production, also 
has about five-days of  SS304-stainless steel188 storage; NREL expects the plant will require 
about three-25,000 gallon rail cars of CSL every three-days.  There are seven-days of storage for 
diammonium phosphate (DAP), delivered as pellets via rail car.   Appropriate quantities of CSL 
and DAP are mixed in a day-tank and used in Area 300 for fermentation seed production and 
ethanol production.  A producer that supplies cellulase enzymes is expected to set up an enzyme 
production operation either on site or on a nearby location.  Liquid enzyme storage is set for 
four-days in SS304 stainless steel tanks.  The carbon steel fire-fighting water storage tanks 
provide about four-hours of operating time; the firewater pump delivers 2,500 gpm. Other pumps 
are sized per process requirements 
There is seven-days of ethanol product storage in two 600,000 gallon carbon steel tanks.  
Five percent gasoline (v/v), a denaturant, is added to the ethanol as it’s loaded for shipment to 
customers.  The pumps in this section are generally sized to load a 10,000 gallon truck and trailer 
in about 15 min. to 20 min. maximum filling time.  They can also be used to fill process day 
tanks.   
The installed capital costs for bulk storage are, for 2010, $3.8-million; for 2015, $2.4-
million; and for 2022, $2.4-million.  The contribution to total project installed capital costs are, 
for 2010, 2.8%; for 2015, 1.9%; and for 2022, 2.1%. 
Area 800:  Combustor, Boiler, and Turbogenerator.  The purpose of the combustor, 
boiler, and turbogenerator is to burn various by-product or waste streams to produce steam and to 
generate electricity. All of the feedstock lignin and some of the cellulose and hemicellulose are 
not hydrolyzed in Area 300.   
As previously discussed, a high soluble, solids syrup is generated in Area 600 and 
anaerobic and aerobic digestion of the remaining wastewater produced biogas and a small 
quantity of biomass sludge which are burned to generate steam and produce electricity.  This 
contributes to over-all plant energy self-sufficiency, reduces solid waste disposal costs, and 
generates additional revenue through sales of excess electricity.  Because of heightened interest 
in using biomass, pulping wastes, and sewage sludge in place of fossil fuels, new methods are 
being developed to handle higher moisture feeds.  Traditional methods include blending the wet 
feed with dry material or adding auxiliary fuel to maintain the combustion temperature.  When 
the dry solids from the filter-press cake are combined with the high soluble, solids syrup, it helps 
                                                 
187
 SS316 is an improved version of SS304, with the addition of molybdenum and a slightly higher nickel content. 
The resultant composition of 316 gives it much increased corrosion resistance in many aggressive environments.  
The molybdenum makes the steel more resistant to pitting and crevice corrosion in chloride-contaminated media, 
sea water and acid vapors.  
188
 SS304-stainless steel is the most versatile and the most widely used of all stainless steels.  Its chemical 
composition, mechanical properties, weldability and corrosion/oxidation resistance provide the best all-round 
performance stainless steel at relatively low cost.   
509 
ensure a stable combustion bed temperature and improved boiler efficiency.  In these studies 
NREL used a circulating fluidized bed combustor that is suitable for varying feeds and feed 
characteristics; however, this flexibility makes the unit more expensive than a grate or pile 
combustor.  A Lower Heating Value (LHV) of 2,000-2,500 BTU/lb is considered the minimum 
for maintaining combustion.189  The combined feed to the combustor has a LHV of 4,179 Btu/lb.  
Thus, the total higher-heating value energy of the combined feed streams to the combustor is 706 
MMBtu/hr.  The solids contribute 59% of this energy and the syrup contributes 37%.  A 
baghouse removes particulates from the combustion flue gas after it preheats the incoming 
combustion air and before it’s discharged through the stack.   
The boiler feed water (BFW) system includes a softener for makeup and condensate 
water, a deaerator to remove air and other non-condensables, surge tanks and pumps.  The 
amount of water pretreatment necessary depends on the incoming water quality, metallurgy of 
the boiler, and the ratio of makeup to condensate in the feed water.  Pretreatment chemicals for 
pH control, scale removal, and oxygen removal are added.  Treated well water used for makeup 
and condensate are softened, deaerated, preheated and mixed to provide BFW that’s converted to 
steam that’s superheated to 950 oF at 1,265 psia at the rate of 407,420 lb/hr.  Support equipment 
includes BFW pumps, deaerator, automatic water pretreatment chemical injection, and 
condensate gathered from the various heat exchangers in the process.  Boiler efficiency, the 
percentage of the feed heat converted to steam heat, is estimated to be 68%.  Boiler blowdown is 
3% of steam production.  The turbine efficiency was estimated to be 85%.  
The turbogenerator consisting of a multistage turbine with extraction ports, a generator, 
and condenser is used to generate electricity.  After high pressure steam drives the multistage 
turbines, it is extracted at three different conditions for injection into the pretreatment reactor and 
heat exchange in distillation and evaporation.  Twenty-eight percent of the steam is extracted 
from the turbine at 191 psia and 514°F, 60% at 65 psia and 327°F, and 3% at 25 psia and 239°F 
for process needs, as described. The remaining steam (9%) is condensed at 1.5 psia with cooling 
water and returned to the BFW system.  For this design, a total of 30.4 megawatts (MW) of 
power is generated from the system. The process uses 11.7 MW, leaving 18.7 MW that is sold to 
the grid. 
The installed capital cost for Area 800 are, for 2010, $45.5-million; for 2015, $46-
million; and for 2022, $43.3-million.  This area’s contribution to the total installed capital cost is, 
for 2010, 34.1%; for 2015, 36.2%; and for 2022, 37.7%. 
Area 900:  Utilities.  All utilities, except steam and electricity, necessary for the 
production of ethanol are accounted for in this area.  The utilities provided include cooling water, 
chilled water, plant and instrument air, process water, and the clean-in-place (CIP) system.  No 
chilled water is used in the plant; the required process temperatures can be achieved by cooling 
water year-round.  
                                                 
189
 Steam and Electricity Generation Options For the Biomass-To-Ethanol Process, NREL Subcontract ACO-8-
18019-01, Reaction Engineering International, Salt Lake City, UT, March 16, 1998. 
http://www.ott.doe.gov/biofuels/process_engineering.html 
 
510 
The plant and instrument air systems provide compressed air for air-driven equipment, 
instrument operation, for clean up, and the filter-press units in the post-distillation dewatering.  
The process water system mixes fresh well water with treated wastewater and provides water at a 
constant pressure to the facility.  Water is provided to seed production, boiler feed water, cooling 
tower make-up, the CIP system, and the scrubber.  It is also mixed with recycle water for dilution 
before saccharification. Process water is also used throughout the facility for cleaning on an as-
needed basis.  The CIP system provides a solution that can be heated and includes cleaning and 
sterilization chemicals to saccharification and co-fermentation, seed vessels, and the distillation 
system.  
The installed capital costs for the utilities area are, for 2010, $5.6-million; for 2015, $5.5-
million; and for 2022, $6.1-million.  This area’s contribution to the total project installed 
equipment costs are, for 2010, 4.2%; for 2015, 4.3%; and for 2022, 5.3%.   
In review, the totals for each of the three years are: 
2010  2015  2022  
     $mm  $mm  $mm 
Total Capital Investment   133.5   127  114.8 
 Added Costs*     98.2     93.1    83.8 
Total Project Investment  231.7   220.1  198.6 
  
*Added Costs:  
Warehouse: 1.5% of Total Installed Equipment Cost  
Site Development: Includes fencing, curbing, parking, lot, roads, well drainage, rail 
system, soil borings, and general paving. This factor allows for minimum site 
development assuming a clear site, with no unusual problems such as right-of-way, 
difficult land clearing, or unusual environmental problems.   Usually calculated as 9% of 
the installed cost of process equip  
Prorateable Costs:  This includes fringe benefits, burdens, and insurance of the construction 
contractor. Usually calculated as 10% of Total Installed Cost.  
Field Expenses:  Consumables, small tool equip. rental, field services, temporary construction 
facilities, and field construction supervision.  Usually calculated as 10% of Total Installed Cost. 
Home Office and Const.:  Engineering plus incidentals, purchasing, and construction. Usually 
calculated as 25% of Total Installed Cost. 
Project Contingency:  Small because of the detail included in the process design.  Usually 
calculated as 3% of Total Installed Cost. 
Other Costs:  Start-up and commissioning costs. Land, rights-of-way, permits, surveys, and fees. 
Piling, soil compaction/dewatering, unusual foundations.  Sales, use, and other taxes.  Freight, 
insurance in transit and import duties on equipment, piping, steel, instrumentation, etc.  Overtime 
pay during construction. Field insurance.  Project team. Transportation equipment, bulk shipping 
containers, plant vehicles, etc. Escalation or inflation of costs over time. Interest on construction 
loan. Usually calculated as 10% of Total Capital Investment. 
511 
 
4.1.1.3 Imported Sugarcane Ethanol Costs 
 
 Our analysis of imported ethanol costs began with a literature search of recent estimates 
for production costs for sugar cane ethanol in Brazil.  Since the liberalization of ethanol prices in 
Brazil, few cost estimation studies have been made and most of the cost analyses refer to the 
same study.879  This study was carried out by the Brazilian Ministry of Science and Technology 
(MC&T), based on 1990 data, and referred to a production cost of $0.87/gallon.  Table 4.1-26 
gives a breakdown of costs based on this data.   
 
Table 4.1-26. Sugarcane Ethanol Production Costs in Brazil, circa 1990 
 Average cost  
(US$ per gallon) 
Operating costs 
 Labor 
 Maintenance 
 Chemicals 
 Energy 
 Other 
 Interest payments on working capital 
 Feedstock (cane) 
$0.64 
$0.02 
$0.02 
$0.01 
$0.01 
$0.02 
$0.08 
$0.48  
Fixed costs 
 Capital at 12% depreciation rate 
 Other 
$0.23 
$0.19 
$0.04 
Total $0.87 
 
 Since then, there have been significant variations in exchange rates, costs of sugarcane 
and oil products, etc.  For example, earlier estimates may underestimate crude and natural gas 
costs which influence the cost of feedstock as well as energy costs at the plant.  Another possible 
difference in production cost estimates is whether or not the estimates are referring to hydrous or 
anhydrous ethanol.  Costs for anhydrous ethanol (for blending with gasoline) are typically 
several cents per gallon higher than hydrous ethanol (for use in dedicated ethanol vehicles in 
Brazil).880  It is not entirely clear from the majority of studies whether reported costs are for 
hydrous or anhydrous ethanol.  Yet another difference could be the slate of products the plant is 
producing, for example, future plants may be dedicated ethanol facilities while others involve the 
production of both sugar and ethanol in the same facility.  Due to economies of scale, production 
costs are also typically smaller per gallon for larger facilities.  Table 4.1-27 summarizes the 
various estimates reported by others.  Production costs range from as low as $0.57 per gallon of 
ethanol to as high as $1.48 per gallon of ethanol. 
 
512 
Table 4.1-27. Other Sugarcane Ethanol Production Cost Estimates 
Reference Cost (US$ per gallon) 
AgraFNP. 2007.  Sugar and Ethanol in 
Brazil: A Study of the Brazilian Sugar 
Cane, Sugar and Ethanol Industries. 
$0.80-$1.07 per gallon (in 2006 $’s 
depending on region in Brazil), avg. is 
$0.78 per gallon for cane production cost 
and $0.13 per gallon for industrial costs 
IEA. 2004.  Biofuels for Transport: An 
International Perspective. 
$0.87 per gallon (in 1990 $’s) references 
MC&T study; also reports recent 
production cost estimates for hydrous 
ethanol as low as $0.57 per gallon (at the 
prevailing exchange rate in Jan. 2004) 
USDA. 2006.  The Economic Feasibility of 
Ethanol Production from Sugar in the 
United States. 
Avg. is $0.81 per gallon 
 
Von Lampe, Martin. OECD. 2006. 
Working Party on Agricultural Policies and 
Markets: Agricultural Market Impacts of 
Future Growth in the Production of 
Biofuels. 
$0.83 per gallon 
Brazil Institute. April 2007. The Global 
Dynamics of Biofuels: Potential Supply 
and Demand for Ethanol. Issue No. 3. 
$0.83 per gallon. 
 
ESMAP. October 2005.  Potential for 
Biofuels for Transport in Developing 
Countries. 
$.87-$1.10 per gallon 
OECD, March 2008. ITF Round Tables 
No. 138. Biofuels: Linking Support to 
Performance. 
Avg. is $1.40 per gallon 
Bain, R. December 2007. World Biofuels 
Assessment Worldwide Biomass Potential: 
Technology Characterizations.  NREL/MP-
510-42467. 
$1.04-$1.48 per gallon depending on size 
of plant, i.e. 100 MGY-4.6 MGY;  
Sugarcane feedstock costs $0.68 per gallon, 
Variable operating costs $0.27 per gallon, 
Fixed costs $0.02-0.13 per gallon, and 
Capital costs $0.07-0.40 per gallon 
Macedo, I.C. and L.A.H. Nogueira. 2005. 
“Biocombusíveis”. Cadernos NAE, No. 2. 
Núcleo de Assuntos Estratégicos da 
Presidência da República, Brasilia 
$0.79 per gallon in the Center-South Brazil 
Kojima, M. and T. Johnson. 2006. 
“Potential for Biofuels for Transport in 
Developing Countries”. ESMAP 
Knowledge Exchange Series, No. 4. 
$0.87-$1.09 per gallon 
 
 
 
Smeets, E. 2008. The Sustainability of 
Brazilian Ethanol-An Assessment of the 
Possibilities of Certified Production. 
Biomass and Bioenergy 
$1.18 assuming exchange rate of $1.20= 1 
Euro 
513 
 
 The study by OECD (2008) entitled “Biofuels: Linking Support to Performance”, appears 
to provide the most recent and detailed set of assumptions and production costs.  As such, our 
estimate of sugarcane production costs primarily relies on the assumptions made for the study, 
which are shown in Table 4.1-28.  The estimate assumes an ethanol-dedicated mill and is based 
off an internal rate of return of 12%, a debt/equity ratio of 50% with an 8% interest rate and a 
selling of surplus power at $57 per MWh. 
 
Table 4.1-28.  Cost of Production in a Standard Ethanol Project in Brazil 
Sugarcane Productivity 71.5 t/ha 
Sugarcane Consumption 2 million tons/year 
Harvesting days 167 
Ethanol productivity 85 liters/ton (22.5 gal/ton) 
Ethanol Production 170 million liters/year (45 MGY) 
Surplus power produced 40 kWh/ton sugarcane 
Investment cost in mill USD 97 million 
Investment cost for sugarcane production USD 36 million 
O & M (Operating & Maintenance) costs $0.26/gal 
Sugarcane costs $0.64/gal 
Capital costs $0.49/gal 
Total production costs $1.40/gal 
 
 The estimate above is based on the costs of producing ethanol in Brazil on average, 
today.  However, we are interested in how the costs of producing ethanol will change by the year 
2022.  Although various cost estimates exist, analysis of the cost trends over time shows that the 
cost of producing ethanol in Brazil has been steadily declining due to efficiency improvements in 
cane production and ethanol conversion processes.  Between 1980 and 1998 (total span of 19 
years) ethanol cost declined by approximately 30.8%.881 This change in the cost of production 
over time in Brazil is known as the ethanol cost “Learning Curve”.  See Figure 4.1-2. 
 
Figure 4.1-2.  Ethanol Cost “Learning Curve” 
 
  
 
 The change in ethanol costs will depend on the likely productivity gains and 
technological innovations that can be made in the future.  As the majority of learning has already 
514 
occurred, it is likely that the decline in ethanol costs will be less drastic as the production process 
and cane practices have matured.  In fact, there are few perspectives for substantial efficiency 
gains with the sugarcane processing technology.  Industrial efficiency gains are already at about 
85% and are expected to increase to 90% in 2015.882  Most of the productivity growth is 
expected to come from sugarcane production, where yields are expected to grow from the current 
70 tons/ha, to 96 tons/ha in 2025.883  Sugarcane quality is also expected to improve, with sucrose 
content growing from 14.5% to 17.3% in 2025. 884  All productivity gains together could allow 
the increase in the production of ethanol from 6,000 liters/ha (at 85 liters/ton sugarcane) to 
10,400 liters/ha (at 109 liters/ton sugarcane) in 2025. 885   
 
Assuming that ethanol productivity increases to 100 liters/ton by 2015 and 109 liters/ton 
by 2025, sugarcane costs are be expected to decrease to approximately $0.51/gal from $0.64/gal 
since less feedstock is needed to produce the same volume of ethanol using the estimates from 
Table 4.1-14, above.  Table 4.1-15 shows the calculated decrease for the years 2005-2025.  We 
assumed a linear decrease between data points for 2005, 2015, and 2025.  Adding operating 
($0.26/gal) and capital costs ($0.49/gal) from Table 4.1-29, to a sugarcane cost of $0.51/gal, total 
production costs are $1.26/gal in 2022. 
 
Table 4.1-29. 
Estimated Decrease in Sugarcane Production Cost by 2022  
Due to Increases in Ethanol Productivity 
 
  
Sugarcane 
Production Cost 
$/gal liters/ton gal/ton 
2005 0.64 85 22.46 
2006 0.63 86.5 22.85 
2007 0.62 88 23.25 
2008 0.61 89.5 23.65 
2009 0.60 91 24.04 
2010 0.59 92.5 24.44 
2011 0.58 94 24.83 
2012 0.57 95.5 25.23 
2013 0.56 97 25.63 
2014 0.55 98.5 26.02 
2015 0.54 100 26.42 
2016 0.54 100.9 26.66 
2017 0.53 101.8 26.90 
2018 0.53 102.7 27.13 
2019 0.53 103.6 27.37 
2020 0.52 104.5 27.61 
2021 0.52 105.4 27.85 
2022 0.51 106.3 28.08 
2023 0.51 107.2 28.32 
2024 0.50 108.1 28.56 
2025 0.50 109 28.80 
 
515 
 Brazil sugarcane producers are also expected to move from burned cane manual 
harvesting to mechanical harvesting.  See Figure 4.1-3.886  As a result, large amounts of straw are 
expected to be available.  Costs of mechanical harvesting are lower compared to manually 
harvesting, therefore, we would expect costs for sugarcane to decline as greater sugarcane 
producers move to mechanical harvesting.  However, it is import to note that diesel use increases 
with mechanical harvesting, and with diesel fuel prices expected to increase in the future, costs 
may be higher than expected.  Therefore, we have not assumed any changes to harvesting costs 
due to the switchover from manual harvesting to mechanical harvesting.  
 
Figure 4.1-3. Phase-out Schedule for Trash Burning Practices 
 
 
 As more straw is expected to be collected at future sugarcane ethanol facilities, there is 
greater potential for production of excess electricity.  The production cost estimates in the OECD 
study assumes an excess of 40kWh per ton sugarcane, however, future sugarcane plants are 
expected to produce 135 kWh per ton sugarcane.886  Assuming excess electricity is sold for $57 
per MWh, the production of an additional 95 kWh per ton would be equivalent to a credit of 
$0.22 per gallon ethanol produced.  We did not include this potential additional credit from 
greater use of bagasse and straw in our estimates at this time.  Our cost estimates do include, 
however, the excess electricity produced from bagasse that is currently used today (40 kWh/ton).  
 
 It is also important to note that ethanol production costs can increase if the costs of 
compliance with various sustainability criteria are taken into account.  For instance, using 
organic or green cane production, adopting higher wages, etc. could increase production costs for 
sugarcane ethanol.887  Such sustainability criteria could also be applicable to other feedstocks, for 
516 
example, those used in corn- or soy-based biofuel production.  If these measures are adopted in 
the future, production costs will be higher than we have projected. 
 
 In addition to production costs, there are also logistical and port costs.  We used the 
report from AgraFNP to estimate such costs since it was the only resource that included both 
logistical and port costs.  The total average logistical and port cost for sugarcane ethanol is 
$0.19/gal and $0.09/gal, respectively, as shown in Table 4.1-30.  
 
Table 4.1-30. 
Imported Ethanol Cost at Port in Brazil (2006 $’s) 
 
 
Logistical Costs Port Cost 
Region US ($/gal) US ($/gal) 
NE Sao Paulo 0.146 0.094 
W Sao Paulo 0.204 0.094 
SE Sao Paulo 0.100 0.094 
S Sao Paulo 0.170 0.094 
N Parana 0.232 0.094 
S Goias 0.328 0.094 
E Mato Grosso do sul 0.322 0.094 
Triangulo mineiro 0.201 0.094 
NE Cost 0.026 0.058 
Sao Francisco Valley 0.188 0.058 
Average 0.192 0.087 
 
 Total fuel costs must also include the cost to ship ethanol from Brazil to the U.S.  In 
2006, this cost was estimated to be approximately $0.15 per gallon of ethanol.888 Costs were 
estimated as the difference between the unit value cost of insurance and freight (CIF) and the 
unit value customs price.  The average cost to ship ethanol from Caribbean countries (e.g. El 
Salvador, Jamaica, etc.) to the U.S. in 2006 was approximately $0.12 per gallon of ethanol.  
Although this may seem to be an advantage for Caribbean countries, it should be noted that there 
would be some additional cost for shipping ethanol from Brazil to the Caribbean country.  
Therefore, we assume all costs for shipping ethanol to be $0.15 per gallon regardless of the 
country importing ethanol to the U.S.  
 
 The total imported ethanol fuel costs (at U.S. ports) over the time period of 2010 to 2022 
are shown in Table 4.1-31.  In 2022, the total sugarcane ethanol cost estimate prior to tariffs and 
taxes is $1.69/gallon.  Direct Brazilian imports are also subject to an additional $0.54 per gallon 
tariff, whereas those imports arriving in the U.S. from Caribbean Basin Initiative (CBI) countries 
are exempt from the tariff.  In addition, all imports are given an ad valorem tax of 2.5% for 
undenatured ethanol and a 1.9% tax for denatured ethanol.  We assumed an ad valorem tax of 
2.5% for all ethanol.  Thus, including tariffs and ad valorem taxes, the average cost of imported 
ethanol is shown in Table 4.1-32 in the “Brazil Direct w/ Tax & Tariff” and “CBI w/ Tax” 
columns for the years 2010-2022. 
 
517 
Table 4.1-31.  Average Imported Ethanol Costs Prior to Tariff and Taxes 
 
  
Sugarcane 
Production 
Cost ($/gal) 
Operating 
Cost 
($/gal) 
Capital 
Cost 
($/gal) 
Logistical 
Cost 
($/gal) 
Port 
Cost 
($/gal) 
Transport Cost 
from Port to US 
($/gal) 
Total 
Cost 
($/gal) 
2010 0.59 0.26 0.49 0.19 0.09 0.15 1.77 
2011 0.58 0.26 0.49 0.19 0.09 0.15 1.76 
2012 0.57 0.26 0.49 0.19 0.09 0.15 1.75 
2013 0.56 0.26 0.49 0.19 0.09 0.15 1.74 
2014 0.55 0.26 0.49 0.19 0.09 0.15 1.73 
2015 0.54 0.26 0.49 0.19 0.09 0.15 1.72 
2016 0.54 0.26 0.49 0.19 0.09 0.15 1.72 
2017 0.53 0.26 0.49 0.19 0.09 0.15 1.71 
2018 0.53 0.26 0.49 0.19 0.09 0.15 1.71 
2019 0.53 0.26 0.49 0.19 0.09 0.15 1.71 
2020 0.52 0.26 0.49 0.19 0.09 0.15 1.70 
2021 0.52 0.26 0.49 0.19 0.09 0.15 1.70 
2022 0.51 0.26 0.49 0.19 0.09 0.15 1.69 
2023 0.51 0.26 0.49 0.19 0.09 0.15 1.69 
2024 0.50 0.26 0.49 0.19 0.09 0.15 1.68 
2025 0.50 0.26 0.49 0.19 0.09 0.15 1.68 
 
 
Table 4.1-32.  Average Imported Ethanol Costs 
 
  
Brazil 
Direct 
($/gal) 
Brazil Direct w/ 
Tax & Tariff ($/gal) 
CBI 
($/gal) 
CBI w/ Tax 
($/gal) 
2010 1.77 2.35 1.77 1.81 
2011 1.76 2.34 1.76 1.80 
2012 1.75 2.33 1.75 1.79 
2013 1.74 2.32 1.74 1.78 
2014 1.73 2.32 1.73 1.78 
2015 1.72 2.31 1.72 1.77 
2016 1.72 2.30 1.72 1.76 
2017 1.71 2.30 1.71 1.76 
2018 1.71 2.29 1.71 1.75 
2019 1.71 2.29 1.71 1.75 
2020 1.70 2.28 1.70 1.74 
2021 1.70 2.28 1.70 1.74 
2022 1.69 2.27 1.69 1.73 
2023 1.69 2.27 1.69 1.73 
2024 1.68 2.27 1.68 1.73 
2025 1.68 2.26 1.68 1.72 
 
 
 
 
518 
4.1.2 Biodiesel Production Costs 
 
 Biodiesel production costs for this rule were estimated using two variations of a model 
generated by USDA for a 10 million gallon per year transesterification biodiesel plant.  One 
version uses degummed soy oil as feedstock, and a second version includes acid pre-treatment 
steps required to utilize feedstocks such as rendered fat and yellow grease, which have 
considerable free fatty acid content.  USDA used the SuperPro Designer chemical process 
simulation software to build up a process flow with estimates of heat and material flowrates and 
equipment sizing.  Outputs from this software were then combined in a spreadsheet with capital, 
energy, labor, and feedstock costs to generate a final estimate of production cost.  Additional 
details on the model are given in a 2006 publication in Bioresource Technology, a peer-reviewed 
scientific journal.889  At 10 million gallons per year, the modeled plant size is between the mean 
and median plant sizes (13 million and 5 million gal/yr, respectively) given in our industry 
characterization.  Therefore, the model cost estimate is believed to be sufficiently accurate for 
our analyses and no further work was done to determine the effect of scale on production cost. 
 
 Soy oil feedstock price was taken from the FASOM agricultural commodity modeling 
done for this proposal, described in more detail in section 5.1 of this DRIA.  Distressed corn oil 
from ethanol plants was assumed to have a value 70% that of soy oil, consistent with historical 
yellow grease prices.  A co-product stream produced by the model is crude glycerin valued at 
$0.03/lb.  Table 4.1-33 shows the feedstock prices and resulting biodiesel price.  Energy inputs 
included natural gas for steam generation, and electricity.  The prices used for these were the 
same as those given in Table 4.1-4 in the corn ethanol production cost section. 
 
Table 4.1-33.  Biodiesel feedstock and production costs used in this analysis, 2006$ 
 Soy Oil Yellow Grease a 
Reference Case   
 Feedstock $/lb $0.28 $0.20 
 Biodiesel $/gal $2.43 $2.18 
Policy Case   
 Feedstock $/lb $0.39 $0.27 
 Biodiesel $/gal $3.27 $2.78 
a Includes corn oil extracted from thin stillage/DGS, rendered fats, recycled greases, etc. 
 
 Production cost for biodiesel is primarily a function of feedstock price, with other process 
inputs, facility, labor, and energy comprising much smaller fractions.  Table 4.1-34 shows the 
production cost allocation for the soy oil-to-biodiesel facility as modeled in the 2022 policy case.     
 
Table 4.1-34.  Production cost allocation for soy biodiesel derived from this analysis 
Cost Category Contribution to Cost 
Soy Oil 87% 
Other Materials a 5% 
Capital & Facility 4% 
Labor 3% 
Utilities 1% 
a Includes acids, bases, methanol, catalyst 
 
519 
 To arrive at a final weighted average for biodiesel production cost for the 2022 policy 
case, we weighted together the fraction of biodiesel produced from virgin oil (660 million 
gallons of soy and commodity-grade corn oil) and yellow grease (150 million gallons, primarily 
extracted corn oil) to arrive at $3.18/gal (2006$). 
 
4.1.3 Renewable Diesel Production Costs 
 
Renewable diesel can be produced using three processing options; 1.) a new standalone 
unit located in a refinery, 2.) co-processing in an existing refinery diesel hydrotreater and 3.) a 
standalone unit at a rendering plant (or another location outside of a refinery).    
 
 The renewable diesel production process converts vegetable oils and animal fats into a 
diesel type fuel using thermal depolymerization, which is similar to refinery hydro-treating to 
remove sulfur.  The process uses hydrogen and catalyst to remove oxygen from the triglyceride 
molecules in the feedstocks oils via a decarboxylation and hydro-oxygenation reaction, yielding 
some light petroleum products and water as byproducts.  The reactions also saturate the olefin 
bonds in the feedstock oils, converting them to paraffins.  All of these reactions consume 
significant amounts of hydrogen.  The extent of these reactions however, depends on the process 
conditions, as some of the carbon backbone of the oils can be cracked to naphtha and lighter 
products with higher severity.  For our analysis though, we assume no such cracking and predict 
yields resulting in ninety nine percent diesel fuel with the balance as propane and water.      
 
We derive our production cost estimates from those presented by UOP and Eni’s at a 
2007 industry conference to make renewable diesel in a grass roots standalone production 
process inside a refinery.190  The process has a pre-treating unit that removes alkali and acidic 
producing compounds from feed streams, which removes the catalyst poisons.  We also use the 
UOP engineering estimate to derive costs for co-processing renewable diesel in an existing 
refinery’s diesel hydrotreater.  For this, we assume that refiners will; 1) revamp their existing 
diesel hydrotreater to add capacity and 2) add a pre-treater to remove feedstock contaminants.  
Lastly, we derive costs for a standalone unit at a location outside a refinery at a rendering plant 
other facility, using a capital cost estimate from Syntroleum Corp.191  We assume that all of the 
renewable diesel production will take place in PADD 2, as feedstock shipping cost are reduced 
since most of the sources for feedstock supply are located primarily in the Midwest.  
 
At the moment, we do not have a exact way of predicting the how industry will develop 
to build processing capacity using the three processing methods, as only a few known projects  
have been announced.  We therefore base our estimate for future renewable processing capacity 
on current public project announcements and our production cost estimates, along with feedstock 
availability.  In early 2007, Tyson and ConocoPhillips entered into a strategic alliance to produce 
175 MM gallons per year of renewable diesel at Conoco’s refineries located in the Midwest, 
either through co-processing or as a standalone unit.  Tyson also announced this fall start of 
construction for a 75 MM gal/yr standalone plant at rendering plant in location in Geismar, 
Louisiana.  We assume that future capacity additions will mirror these announcements, and that a 
large fraction of the capacity for refinery installation will be produced using the co-processing 
                                                 
190
 A New Development in Renewable Fuels: Green Diesel, AM-07-10 Annual Meeting NPRA, March 18-20, 2007. 
191
 From Securities and Exchange Commission Form 8-K for Syntroleum Corp, June 25th 07. 
520 
method, as the production costs are lower than those for a new standalone unit in a refinery.  
Using this, we speculate that about 50% of renewable diesel being produced by the refinery co-
processing route, 17% from a new stand alone unit at a refinery and 33% at rendering plants or 
as a new site installation.   
 
We derive an average production cost to make renewable diesel as 39.6 cents per gallon 
using yellow grease/animal fats, while production cost from soy oil feedstock are 37.1 cents per 
gallon.  Both of these costs are the resulting average from using the processing industry 
capacities listed above, along with our production cost estimates.  It is advantageous, however to 
convert yellow grease and animal fats into renewable diesel, as the resulting diesel fuel has 
improved blending, cold flow, storage and shipping capabilities over yellow grease converted via 
the biodiesel process.  Additionally, since the process-related costs for producing renewable 
diesel from yellow grease are considerably lower than for converting yellow grease to biodiesel, 
we assume that all of our projected feedstock supplies of yellow grease and animal fats will be 
converted using the renewable diesel process, yielding 375 million gallons per year in 2022.  As 
such, we assume that future renewable processing capacity will mirror the volume produced 
from yellow grease.  Considering the uncertainties with subsidies and that there is considerable 
capacity for processing soy oil in biodiesel plants, we assume that all soy oil will be processed in 
existing and announced biodiesel plants.  
  
The specifics of our cost estimation are outlined in the sections that follow. 
 
 i. New Standalone Unit in Refinery 
 
Capital costs: 
 
We derived new standalone renewable diesel production costs based on the UOP estimate 
for a new unit built inside an existing petroleum refinery.  The total capital cost from the UOP 
estimate included ISBL and OSBL equipment outlays, which were $33.9 and $6.8 MM in 2005 
dollars, respectively for an 8,000 BPSD unit.  We adjusted the original UOP capital estimates, 
which were assumed to be in 2006 dollars to 2005 dollars using CPI.  Additionally, for our 
analysis, we assumed that the process was designed to accommodate a throughput flow rate to 
maintain an average of 8000 BPSD per day on an annual basis.  To get installed costs, we 
escalated the above total capital costs by 20 percent, so as to account for unknown contingencies 
for installation and adjusted the resulting costs for locating the process in PADD 2, multiplying 
by a 1.3 factor.  We amortized the resulting cost, assuming 7% return on capital after taxes, 
depreciation, and amortization to derive a cost for capital of 5.9 c/gal.  All of the economic 
factors used for amortizing the capital costs are summarized in Table 4.1-35. 
 
Table 4.1-35.  Economic Factors Used in Deriving the Capital Cost Amortization Factor 
Amortization 
Scheme 
Depreciation 
Life 
Economic and 
Project Life 
Federal and 
State Tax Rate 
Return on 
Investment 
(ROI) 
Resulting 
Capital 
Amortization 
Factor 
Societal Cost 10 Years 15 Years         0%         7%        0.11 
 
 
521 
Operating Costs: 
 
For fixed costs, we assumed this is 7% of the total installed capital, resulting in a cost of 
4.3 cents per gallon of renewable diesel fuel.  For hydrogen operating costs, we used the UOP 
analysis and guidance from Conoco Philips192, to derive our estimate to make renewable diesel, 
assuming that the feedstock oils were not cracked to other products.  The UOP paper presents a 
range of 1000 to 2000 SCF per barrel for converting the various feedstock to renewable diesel.  
We derived feedstock specific hydrogen requirements, weighting hydrogen needs for feedstock 
oxygen saturation, along with cost for hydrogen and UOP’s total variable operating cost.  The 
resulting renewable hydrogen needs are presented in the Table 4.1-36 below. 
 
Table 4.1-36.  Feedstock Hydrogen Demands for Renewable Diesel (std. ft3/gallon) 
Feedstock Oil Hydrogen (std ft3) 
Soy Oil 1410 
Animal Grease and Yellow Grease 1590 
 
  Hydrogen costs were generated using annual projected hydrogen prices from Jacob’s 
along with the quantities listed above, resulting in a cost of 18.0 and 21.0 c/gal for soy oil and 
yellow grease, respectively.  All other remaining operating variable costs are estimated as 6.5 
c/gal, based on the UOP paper.  This figure represents cost for manpower, electricity, catalyst, 
utility requirements, etc. 
 
The resulting total production costs are 34.5 and 37.4 cents per gallon for soy oil and 
yellow grease, respectively for new unit co-located in a refinery. 
 
 ii. Co-Processing in Existing Refinery Diesel Hydrotreater 
 
Co-processing in a refinery appears to be the most cost effective, though feedstock pre-
treating equipment may be needed to remove impurities, so as to prevent degradation of refinery 
diesel hydrotreater catalyst.  The advantage of co-processing in a hydrotreater, are that the capital 
cost are reduced as the existing diesel hydrotreater reactor, heat exchangers, pumps, process lines 
etc., can be used for the depolymerization reaction.  Since the depolymerization reaction is 
highly exothermic, though there is a limit on the amount of oil feedstock that can be routed 
through an existing diesel hydrotreater.  We derived our estimate for co-processing using the cost 
information form UOP’s standalone processing in the preceding section. 
 
Capital costs: 
 
We estimate that pre-treater capital costs will be 40% of the total capital cost of a 
standalone unit, per guidance from UOP.  We assume that this estimate includes capital costs to 
account for any needed refinery diesel hydrotreater modifications.  The capital costs are 
amortized assuming 7% return on capital after taxes, depreciation, and amortization to derive a 
cost 2.7 cents.  
 
Operating Costs: 
                                                 
192
 Per EPA phone discussion July 23, 07. 
522 
 
For the fixed cost, we assume this is 8% of the total capital listed above, which equates to 
1.9 c/gal.  All other remaining operating costs were assumed to be the same as those listed for the 
UOP standalone unit in the preceding section.  The resulting total operating costs are 26.1 and 
29.2 c/gal for soy oil and yellow grease, respectively. 
 
For co-processing in a refinery, the resulting total production costs are 28.5 and 30.6 
c/gal for soy oil and yellow grease, respectively. 
 
 iii. Standalone Unit at Rendering Plant 
 
For a standalone unit, not installed in a refinery, the capital cost are higher than a refinery 
new unit, as offsite and utility investments are needed to support the renewable processing 
equipment.  These units, therefore require capital for these additional items, since there are little 
existing infrastructure at the site such as buildings, roads, tanks, pipelines, etc. and utility 
processes for steam generation, cooling water, etc.  For our estimation of these extra costs, we 
used the total installed capital cost from Syntroleum, which is for a grass roost unit and accounts 
for offsite items.  For operating costs, we assume this will be the same as those in a UOP unit.   
 
Capital costs: 
 
Syntroleum estimated that the total installed capital cost for new process is $135 MM for 
a 4800 BPSD unit, located in the South.  This figure includes capital costs for offsite and utility 
investments.  We estimated capital cost assuming 7% rate of return, after taxes and depreciation, 
resulting in 20.0 cents per gallon. 
 
Operating Costs: 
 
We estimated fixed costs as 6% of the total installed capital outlay listed above, which 
equates to 10.9 c/gal.  All other remaining operating costs were assumed to be the same as those 
listed for the UOP standalone unit.  
 
The resulting overall production costs are 55.2 and 58.3 c/gal for soy oil and yellow 
grease for a standalone unit, respectively. 
 
 
 4.1.4 BTL Diesel Production Costs  
 
 Biofuels-to-Liquids (BTL) processes, which are also thermochemical processes, convert 
biomass to liquid fuels via a syngas route.  The primary product produced by this process is 
diesel fuel.   
 
 There are many steps involved in a BTL process which makes this a capital-intensive 
process.  The first step, like all the cellulosic processes, requires that the feedstocks be processed 
to be dried and ground to a fine size.  The second step is the syngas step, which 
thermochemically reacts the biomass to carbon monoxide and hydrogen.  Since carbon monoxide 
523 
production exceeds the stoichiometric ideal fraction of the mixture, a water shift reaction must be 
carried out to increase the relative balance of hydrogen.  The syngas products must then be 
cleaned to facilitate the following Fischer-Tropsch reaction.  The Fischer-Tropsch reaction reacts 
the syngas to a range of hydrocarbon compounds – a type of synthetic crude oil.  This 
hydrocarbon mixture is then hydrocracked to maximize the production of high cetane diesel fuel, 
although some low octane naphtha is also produced.  The many steps of the BTL process 
contribute to its high capital cost.  One report by Iowa State University estimated that diesel fuel 
produced by a 35 million gallon per year cellulosic Fischer Tropsch plant would cost $2.37 per 
gallon.890  This cost seems to be based on amortizing the capital costs using a 7 percent before 
tax rate of return which is the basis for our cost analyses.  The report’s estimate for capital cost 
was $341 million.  This cost was estimated in the year 2002, and adjusting this cost to a 2006 
investment environment increases the cost to $484 million.  When we amortize this capital cost 
assuming a 7 percent rate of return before taxes, the yearly cost is $53 million, or about $1.51 per 
gallon of diesel fuel produced.  The report estimates the operating costs to be $1.48 per gallon, 
and adjusting the operating costs to reflect 2006 dollars increases the operating cost to $1.48.  
Adding the adjusted operating cost to the adjusted capital cost results in a total cost of $2.99 per 
gallon.  Almost $1.00 of the total operating cost is due to the feedstock costs, which seems to be 
assuming about $75 per dry ton of feedstock.  After we adjusted to 2006 dollars, the report 
would estimate the feedstock to cost $84 per dry ton, which is higher than our average feedstock 
cost estimate of $71 per dry ton.  Adjusting to an average estimated feedstock cost of $71 per dry 
ton reduces the total cost to $2.85 per gallon of diesel fuel.  
 
 Initially, the estimated cost of $2.85 per gallon seems high relative to the projected cost 
for a year 2015 biochemical cellulosic plant, which is $1.39 per gallon of ethanol in 2006 dollars.  
However, ethanol provides about half the energy content as Fischer Tropsch diesel fuel.  So if we 
double the biochemical cellulosic ethanol costs to $2.78 per diesel fuel-equivalent gallon, the 
estimated costs are very consistent between the two.  The cellulosic biofuel tax subsidy favors 
the biochemical ethanol plant, though, because it is a per-gallon subsidy regardless of the energy 
content, and it therefore offsets twice as much cost as the BTL plant producing diesel fuel.  
There is one more issue worth considering and that is the relative price of diesel fuel to that of 
E10 or E85.  Recently diesel fuel has been priced much higher than gasoline, and if this trend 
continues to hold, it would provide a better market for selling the BTL diesel fuel than for selling 
biochemical ethanol into the E85 market, which we believe will be a challenging pricing market 
for refiners. 
 
 
 
524 
4.2  Renewable Fuel Distribution Costs 
 
 Our analysis of the costs associated with distributing the volumes of renewable fuels that 
we project would be used under RFS2 focuses on:  1) the capital cost of making the necessary 
upgrades to the fuel distribution infrastructure system directly related to handling these fuels, and 
2) the ongoing additional freight costs associated with shipping renewable fuels to the point 
where they are blended with petroleum-based fuels.  Our analysis considers distribution costs 
within the U.S. only.  The costs associated with bringing ethanol imports to the U.S. are 
considered in the context of the cost of the imports themselves.KKKKKKKK   The following 
sections outline our estimates of the distribution costs for the additional volumes of ethanol, 
biodiesel, and renewable diesel fuel that we project would be used in response to the RFS2 
standards.  There will be ancillary costs associated with upgrading the basic rail, marine, and 
road transportation nets to handle the increase in freight volume due to the RFS2.  We have not 
sought to quantify these ancillary costs because 1) the growth in freight traffic that is attributable 
to RFS2 represents a minimal fraction of the total anticipated increase in freight tonnage 
(approximately 2% by 2022, see Section 1.6.5 of this DRIA), and 2) we do not believe there is an 
adequate way to estimate such non-direct costs. 
 
 The biofuels used in response to the RFS2 standards would displace petroleum-based 
fuels that would otherwise be used.  Thus, it would be appropriate to subtract the distribution 
costs for the displaced petroleum-based fuels from the distribution costs attributed to the biofuels 
that replace these petroleum-based fuels.  However, we choose not to do so to for our primary 
analysis in order to help ensure a conservatively high estimate of biofuel distribution costs given 
the uncertainties in our analysis.LLLLLLLL 
 
A discussion of the changes that would be needed in the biofuels distribution system to 
accommodate the increased volumes of biofuels that we project would be used in response to the 
proposed RFS2 standards is contained in Section 1.6 of this DRIA.   In this chapter, we further 
detail the nature of these projected changes and estimate the associated costs.  Distribution 
capital costs associated with the additional volume of ethanol, biodiesel, and renewable diesel 
that we project would be used by 2022 in response to the RFS2 standards relative to a 13 BGY 
2022 reference case total 12.448 billion dollars in the U.S., 97% of which is attributed to ethanol.  
 
4.2.1 Ethanol Distribution Costs 
 
As discussed in the following sections, we estimate that the total capital costs in the U.S 
to support distribution of the additional volume of ethanol that would be used in response to the 
RFS2 standards would be 12.1 billion dollars by 2022.  When amortized, this translates to 6.9 
cents per gallon of additional ethanol attributed to the RFS2 standards.  Amortization of capital 
costs was done over 15 years at a 7% annual cost of capital except in the case of the cost of tank 
trucks where a 10 year amortization schedule was used.  These costs were calculated relative to 
the AEO 2007 baseline which projects that 13.2 BGY of ethanol would be used in 2022 absent 
the RFS2 standards.  Under the RFS2 standards, we project that 34.1 BGY of ethanol would be 
used by 2022.  Ethanol freight costs are estimated to be 11.3 cents per gallon on a national 
                                                 
KKKKKKKK
 The cost of imported ethanol is discussed in Section 4.1.1.3 of this DRIA. 
LLLLLLLL
 This was the approach taken in the RFS1 final rule. 
525 
average basis.  Thus, we estimate that total ethanol distribution costs would be 18.2 cents per 
gallon of ethanol attributed the RFS2 standards.  The way in which we estimated these costs is 
detailed in the following sections. 
 
As noted previously, we choose not to subtract the distribution costs for the petroleum-
based fuels that would be displaced by the use of biofuels from our estimated biofuel distribution 
costs to help ensure a conservatively high estimate of biofuel distribution costs given the 
uncertainties in our analysis.   We believe that the freight costs to ship petroleum-based fuels to 
the terminal are approximately 4 cents per gallon.  If we were to subtract these costs from the 
estimated ethanol distribution costs, the result would be 14.2 cents per gallon. 
 
We currently have a study underway through Oakridge National Laboratories (ORNL) to 
model the transportation of ethanol from production/import facilities to petroleum terminals.  
The ORNL model optimizes freight flows over the rail, marine, and road distribution net while 
addressing the use of multiple shipping modes.  We plan to use the results of the ORNL study to 
adjust our ethanol freight and capital cost estimates for the final rule. 
 
4.2.1.1 Capital Costs to Upgrade the Ethanol Distribution System 
 
4.2.1.1.1 Summary of Ethanol Distribution Capital Costs 
 
 A summary of ethanol distribution capital costs is contained in Table 4.2-1.  Our 
estimation of these costs is detailed in the following sections. 
 
Table 4.2-1.  
Summary of Estimated Ethanol Distribution Infrastructure Capital Costs* 
 
 Million $ 
Fixed Facilities  
   Marine Import Facilities     49 
   Ethanol Receipt Facilities at Rail Terminals   
        Rail Car Handling and Miscellaneous Equipment 1,264 
        Ethanol Storage Tanks    354 
   Petroleum Terminals  
        Rail Receipt Facilities 2,482 
        Ethanol Storage Tanks 1,611 
        Ethanol Blending and Miscellaneous Equipment    545 
   E85 Retail Facilities 2,957 
Mobile Facilities   
   Rail Cars 2,938 
   Barges    183 
   Tank Trucks    223 
Total Ethanol Distribution Capital Costs 12,066 
* Relative to the AEO 2007 13.2 BGY 2022 reference case 
526 
 
4.2.1.1.2 Petroleum Terminal Ethanol Distribution Capital Costs 
 
 The facility upgrades that we project would be needed at petroleum terminals to facilitate 
the distribution of the volume of ethanol that we project would be used in response to the RFS2 
standards are discussed in Section 1.6.9 of this DRIA.  Total capital costs at terminals by 2022 
relative to the 13 BGY 2022 reference case are estimated at 4.637 billion dollars.  These capital 
costs are detailed in the following sections. 
 
4.2.1.1.2.1 Capital Cost of Additional Ethanol Rail Receipt Capability  
at Petroleum Terminals  
 
 A discussed in Section 1.6.9 of this DRIA, we estimate that an additional 21 unit train 
and 148 manifest rail car receipt facilities would be built at petroleum terminals by 2022 to 
handle the additional volumes of ethanol that project would be transported to petroleum 
terminals via these modes (relative to the 13 BGY reference case).  Based on input from 
industry, we estimate the cost of installing ethanol rail receipt capability at 600 thousand dollars 
per rail car slot.  This figure is meant to include various ancillary costs associated with the 
necessary track and rail car handling facilities within the terminal gates.  We believe that this is 
an upper bound regarding the potential costs of installing rail receipt capability at terminals, 
particularly with respect to unit train installations.  We hope to receive additional input from 
industry with which to refine this estimate for the final rule. We assumed that ethanol unit train 
receipt facilities would need room for 100 rail cars, and that ethanol manifest rail car receipt 
facilities would accommodate 8 rail cars.  Ethanol unit trains are typically composed of 70 to 100 
rail cars.   Our assumption of an 8 ethanol manifest rail car receipt facility is based on an 
evaluation of how much ethanol could be handled by such a facility on an annual basis.  
Assuming 60 deliveries per year (5 per month), translates to an annual throughput at a manifest 
rail car receipt facility of approximately 14.2 million gallons per year, which we believe to be a 
reasonable volume for the terminals that would be served primarily by manifest rail.  To 
accommodate contingencies associated with adding ethanol receipt capability, we added 1 
million dollars per unit train facility and 500 thousand dollars per manifest rail car facility.  Thus, 
within the gates of the terminal, the cost of a unit train receipt facility is estimated at 61 million 
dollars and the cost of a manifest rail car receipt facility is estimated at 5.3 million dollars.  This 
does not include the cost of linking the petroleum terminal to a rail line to the extent that such 
linkage does not already exist.   
 
There is no comprehensive data on the number of terminals that have rail access and the 
logistical considerations in adding rail access to terminals where proximity to a rail line makes 
this an option.  Lacking such information, we assumed that 50% of terminals that add ethanol rail 
receipt capability would already have rail access and 50% would need to install a rail spur to 
bring rail access to their facility.  Based on input from industry, we estimate the cost of installing 
track for a rail spur at 2 million dollars per mile.  We assumed that a 4 mile spur would be 
needed to connect the rail line to the petroleum terminal for unit train receipt and that a 2 mile 
long spur would be needed to connect the terminal for manifest rail car receipt.  This is based on 
the premise that the length of unit trains may require more gentle curves and/or limit placement 
of the link to the rail line, whereas accommodating connections for the short manifest rail car 
527 
shipments would be less demanding.  Ancillary costs associated with establishing a linkage to a 
rail line to allow rail receipt capability are estimated at 4 million dollars per unit train facility.  
This is meant as a contingency to cover costs that we could not foresee such as the potential need 
to acquire additional land in certain cases.  Again, this is based on the premise that 
accommodating a long unit train would present additional logistical challenges.  The actual cost 
could be less.  Based on the above, we estimate that the cost of providing linkage to a rail line 
would be 12 million dollars to allow unit train receipt capability and 4 million dollars to support 
manifest rail car receipt capability at a petroleum terminal. 
 
 Summing the above, we arrived at the estimates contained in Table 4.2-2 for the total cost 
of providing rail receipt capability at terminals including the cost of providing rail access where 
needed. 
 
Table 4.2-2. 
Estimated Cost of Installing Ethanol Rail Receipt Capability  
at Petroleum Terminals 
 
 Cost Per Facility 
(million $) 
Unit Train Receipt Capability  
at a Terminal that Already had Rail Access 
61 
Unit Train Receipt Capability  
at a Terminal that Needed to Install New Rail Access 
73 
Manifest Rail Car Receipt Capability  
at a Terminal that Already had Rail Access 
5.3 
Manifest Rail Car Receipt Capability  
at a Terminal that Needed to Install New Rail Access 
9.3 
 
 The total cost of the additional unit train receipt facilities (21) that we project would be 
installed at petroleum terminals by 2022 to support the distribution of the additional volume of 
ethanol that would be used in response to the RFS2 standards (relative to the 13 BGY reference 
case) is estimated at 1.4 billion dollars.  The total cost of the additional manifest rail car receipt 
facilities (148) that we project would be needed by 2022 to support the distribution of the 
additional volume of ethanol that would be used in response to the RFS2 standards (relative to 
the 13 BGY reference case) is estimated at 1.08 billion dollars.  These costs were amortized over 
15 years at a 7% annual cost of capital to derive the cents-per-gallon distribution capital cost 
estimate in Section 4.2.1 of this DRIA. 
 
As discussed in Section 1.6.9 of this DRIA, there is considerable uncertainty regarding 
the extent to which additional rail receipt facilities would be placed at petroleum terminals versus 
at rail terminals.  This has implications not only with respect to whether the costs would be 
incurred by petroleum terminals or rail terminals but also the extent to which secondary 
transportation of ethanol is needed to reach petroleum terminals and the extent to which ethanol 
storage and handling capability would be needed at rail terminals.  The projected modes of 
transporting ethanol to petroleum terminals are discussed in Section 1.6.2 of this DRIA.  The 
528 
projected capital costs at rail terminals to facilitate the distribution of ethanol are discussed in 
Section 4.2.1.1.3 of this DRIA. 
 
4.2.1.1.2.2 Capital Cost of Additional Ethanol Storage Tanks at Petroleum Terminals 
 
 A discussion of how we estimated the volume of new ethanol storage that would be 
needed by 2022 as a result of the RFS2 standards (relative to the 13 BGY 2022 reference case) is 
contained in Section 1.6.9 of this DRIA.  The breakdown of the amount of new ethanol storage 
that we believe could be accommodated through the retrofitting of existing tanks currently in 
gasoline service versus the amount that would require the construction of new storage tanks is 
also discussed in Section 1.6.9.  We estimate that a total of 97.3 million barrels of new ethanol 
storage would be needed at petroleum terminals due to the RFS2 standards, 65.2 million barrels 
of which would be existing gasoline storage tanks retrofitted to ethanol service and 32.1 million 
barrels of which would be new construction.  As discussed in Section 4.2.1.1.3.2, we estimate 
that an additional 8.85 million barrels of new ethanol storage would also be needed at rail 
terminals, all of which would be satisfied with new construction.  Based on information from 
industry with respect to the effect of increased steel prices on storage tanks costs, we estimate 
that the cost of constructing new ethanol storage tanks would be 40 dollars per barrel.  The cost 
of installing an ethanol compatible liner and making other modifications to existing gasoline 
storage tanks to make them compatible for storing ethanol is estimated to be 5 dollars per barrel 
on average.  Thus, we estimate that the total cost at petroleum terminals of new ethanol storage 
would be 1.61 billion dollars, 1.28 billion dollars of which is attributed to the construction of 
new tanks, and 326 million dollars of which is attributed to the conversion of existing gasoline 
tanks to ethanol service.  These costs were amortized over 15 years at a 7% annual cost of capital 
to derive the cents-per-gallon distribution capital cost estimate in Section 4.2.1 of this DRIA. 
 
4.2.1.1.2.3 Capital Cost of Ethanol Blending and Other Miscellaneous Equipment at  
Petroleum Terminals 
 
 As discussed in Section 1.6.9 of this DRIA, petroleum terminals would need to install 
additional equipment to blend ethanol with gasoline as well as making other miscellaneous 
upgrades to, piping, pumps, seals, and vapor recovery systems to ensure ethanol compatibility.  
As detailed in Section 1.6.9 of this DRIA, we projected that 164 terminals would need to install 
ethanol blending equipment by 2022 as a result of the RFS2 standards (relative to the 13 BGY 
2022 reference case).  We further project that 90% of all terminals (931) would need to install 
E85 blending capability by 2022 as a result of the RFS2 standards.  The remaining terminals 
(132 out of a total of 1,063) were projected to have only E10 blending capability by 2022.  We 
estimated that the terminals which would have installed E10 blending capability absent the RFS2 
standards would be the ones that upgrade their ethanol blending capability to accommodate 
blending E85 as well as E10.  We also estimated that the 164 terminals that would not have 
received ethanol absent the RFS2 standards would need to upgrade their vapor recovery systems 
and make other miscellaneous changes to handle ethanol blended fuel for the first time. 
 
 We estimated the costs of the changes needed at petroleum by 2022 relative to the 13 
BGY 2022 reference case based on input from terminal operators and various other industry 
sources.  The cost of upgrading the vapor recovery systems at petroleum terminals that would not 
529 
have handled ethanol absent the RFS2 standards is estimated at 1 million dollars per terminal, 
and the miscellaneous costs associated with handling ethanol for the first time are estimated at 
20,000 per terminal.  This equates to a total of 176.3 million dollars for the 164 terminals that we 
project would not have handled ethanol absent the RFS2 standards.  We estimate that all 1,063 
petroleum terminals would incur 300 thousand dollars per facility on average to upgrade their 
piping, electrical, and other miscellaneous equipment in order to handle the increased ethanol 
throughput that they would experience due to the RFS2 standards.  This is based on our 
engineering judgment and contains substantial contingency costs.  Actual costs could be less.  
This would total 318.9 million dollars by 2022. 
 
 In addition, the cost of installing E10 blending equipment is estimated to average 300 
thousand dollars for the 164 terminals that we estimate would not have installed ethanol blending 
capability in the absence of the RFS2 standards.  The does not include the needed ethanol storage 
capability discussed in Section 4.2.1.1.2.2 of this DRIA and the miscellaneous piping and other 
work needed that is discussed above.   Input from terminal operators indicates that retrofitting 
E10 blending equipment to dispense E85 as well as E10 (apart from ethanol storage and delivery 
concerns) primarily involves changes to computer software.  Based on this input, we estimate 
that E85 blending equipment would cost 10 thousand dollars more than E10 blending equipment.  
We applied this 10 thousand dollar differential to new installations of E85 blending equipment as 
well as retrofits of existing E10 blending equipment.  Based on this, we estimate the total cost of 
the ethanol blending equipment that would be needed at petroleum terminals as a result of the 
RFS2 standards to be 58.5 million dollars.            
 
 Summing all of these estimated costs, we arrived at an estimate of the total cost by 2022 
for the ethanol blending and other miscellaneous equipment that would be needed at petroleum 
terminals as a result of the RFS2 standards of 544.7 million dollars.  These costs were amortized 
over 15 years at a 7% annual cost of capital to derive the cents-per-gallon distribution capital 
cost estimate in Section 4.2.1 of this DRIA. 
 
4.2.1.1.3 Rail Terminal Ethanol Distribution Capital Costs 
 
 The facility upgrades that we project would be needed at rail terminals to facilitate the 
distribution of the volume of ethanol that we project would be used in response to the RFS2 
standards are discussed in Section 1.6.3 of this DRIA.  Total capital costs at terminals by 2022 
relative to the 13 BGY 2022 reference case are estimated at 1.618 billion dollars.  These capital 
costs are detailed in the following sections. 
 
4.2.1.1.3.1 Capital Cost of Ethanol Unit Train Receipt Capability at Rail Terminals 
 
 As discussed in Section 1.6.3 of this DRIA, we project that 21 ethanol unit train receipt 
facilities would be located at rail terminals to facilitate the delivery of ethanol to petroleum 
terminals.  Consistent with the approach taken in the estimation of the cost of installing a unit 
train facility at a petroleum terminals (as discussed in Section 4.2.1.1.2.1 of this DRIA), we 
estimated the cost of installing ethanol rail receipt capability at a rail terminal to be 600 thousand 
dollars per rail car slot.  This translates to 60 million dollars for a facility capable of receiving a 
100 rail car unit train.  In the case of rail terminals, we believe this figure is sufficient to cover 
530 
various ancillary costs associated with the necessary track and rail car handling facilities within 
the rail terminal gates.  Given that rail terminals are already in the business of handling large 
numbers of rail cars, we believe that there would be significantly less ancillary costs associated 
with handling ethanol rail cars themselves compared to a petroleum terminal.   Thus, we believe 
that the 600 thousand per rail slot is also sufficient to cover whatever truck loading, piping, and 
other miscellaneous costs that would be incurred at rail terminals (with the exception of the need 
for ethanol storage tanks that is discussed in the following section).   Nevertheless, we added a 1 
million dollar per rail terminal contingency cost to help ensure that these ancillary costs are 
accounted for.  Consistent with our estimate of the cost of unit train facilities at petroleum 
terminals, we assumed the need to accommodate a 100 car ethanol unit train. 
 
Based on the above, we project that the total cost of installing ethanol unit train receipt 
capability at a rail terminal to be 61 million dollars per facility.   This totals 1.264 billion dollars 
for the 21 ethanol unit train rail receipt facilities that we project would be installed as a result of 
the RFS2 standards by 2022 (relative to the 13 BGY 2022 reference case).  These costs were 
amortized over 15 years at a 7% annual cost of capital to derive the cents-per-gallon distribution 
capital cost estimate in Section 4.2.1 of this DRIA. 
 
A discussed in Section 1.6.9 of this DRIA (and noted in Section 4.2.1.1.2.1), there is 
considerable uncertainty regarding the extent to which additional rail receipt facilities would be 
placed at petroleum terminals versus at rail terminals.  To the extent that logistical constraints 
prevent the placement of some of the 21 additional ethanol unit train receipt facilities and/or 148 
manifest rail car facilities that we project would be installed at petroleum terminals (see Section 
4.2.1.1.2.1), we expect that additional unit train receipt facilities would be placed at rail terminals 
to compensate.   
 
4.2.1.1.3.2 Capital Cost of Ethanol Storage Tanks at Rail Terminals 
 
 As discussed in Section 1.6.3 of this DRIA, we project that 17.7 million gallons of new 
ethanol storage would be needed at rail terminals to support unit train deliveries.  This equates to 
a total of 371.7 million gallons or 8.85 million barrels of new ethanol storage tanks for the 21 
ethanol unit train receipt facilites that we project would be installed to support use of the volume 
of ethanol that we estimate would be use in response to the RFS2 standards (relative to the 13 
BGY 2022 reference case).  We used the same estimate of 40 dollars per barrel to construct new 
ethanol storage tanks that we used to estimate the cost of new ethanol storage tanks at petroleum 
terminals (in Section 4.2.1.1.2 of this DRIA).  Thus, we estimate that the total cost of the 
additional ethanol storage tankage that would be needed due to the RFS2 standards at 354 
million dollars.  These costs were amortized over 15 years at a 7% annual cost of capital to 
derive the cents per gallon distribution capital cost estimate in Section 4.2.1 of this DRIA.  
Should some of the ethanol rail receipt facilities that we project would be installed at petroleum 
terminals instead be installed at rail terminals, ethanol storage at additional rail terminals would 
be needed instead. 
 
4.2.1.1.4 Import Facility Ethanol Distribution Capital Costs 
 
531 
 As discussed in Section 1.6.4 of this DRIA, we estimate that a total of 28 port facilities 
would receive imported ethanol by 2022, 12 of which had not received ethanol before.  We 
believe that all such port facilities also serve as petroleum terminals.  Thus, the cost of additional 
ethanol storage, ethanol blending equipment, and other miscellaneous equipment related to 
handling ethanol from the standpoint of terminal operations at such facilities is accounted for in 
the context of the costs at petroleum terminals (see Section 4.2.1.1.2 of this DRIA).  However, 
there would be additional costs at the port facilities which had not received ethanol in the past.  
Input from industry indicates that offloading large marine transport containers of ethanol requires 
significantly upgraded vapory recovery equipment.  Based on this input, we estimated the cost of 
making the needed upgrades to vapor recovery equipment at 2.5 million dollars per facility.  We 
further estimated miscellaneous costs associated with delivery of ethanol into storage tanks from 
marine vessels at 1 million dollars per facility.  This is meant to include new piping, pumps, 
various other fittings, and a contingency cost.  The actual cost could be significantly lower.  
Thus, we estimate that the total cost to prepare for delivery of ethanol at a port that had not 
received ethanol before at 3.5 million dollars per facility.  The total for the 12 ports that we 
project had received imported ethanol before is 42 million dollars.  As discussed in Section 1.6.4, 
we are considering whether 2 additional ports that have not received ethanol before should be 
added to the list of ports that we expect would receive ethanol imports by 2022.  Including these 
2 additional ports would increase the total cost for ports that had not received ethanol before to 
49 million dollars.  These costs were amortized over 15 years at a 7% annual cost of capital to 
derive the cents-per-gallon distribution capital cost estimate in Section 4.2.1 of this DRIA. 
 
4.2.1.1.4 Ethanol Rail Car Capital Costs  
 
 As discussed in Section 1.6.3 of this DRIA, we estimate that an additional 26,644 ethanol 
tank cars would be needed by 2022 to transport the additional volume of ethanol that we project 
would be used to meet the RFS2 standards (relative to the 13 BGY 2022 reference case).  Based 
on input from industry, we estimate that the cost of a new ethanol tank car of 30 thousand gallon 
nominal capacity at 90 thousand dollars.  Thus, we estimate that the total cost of the ethanol rail 
tanks cars needed due to the RFS2 standards by 2022 would be 2.398 billion dollars.  These costs 
were amortized over 15 years at a 7% annual cost of capital to derive the cents-per-gallon 
distribution capital cost estimate in Section 4.2.1 of this DRIA.  
 
4.2.1.1.5 Ethanol Barge Capital Costs  
 
As discussed in Section 1.6.4, we estimate that an additional 131 10,000 barrel capacity 
barges would be needed by 2022 to transport the additional volume of ethanol that we project 
would be used to meet the RFS2 standards (relative to the 13 BGY 2022 reference case).  Based 
on input from industry, we estimate the cost of a new 10,000 barrel barge capable of transporting 
ethanol at 1.4 million dollars.  Thus, we estimate that the total cost of barges needed to transport 
ethanol due to the RFS2 standards by 2022 would be 183 million dollars.  These costs were 
amortized over 15 years at a 7% annual cost of capital to derive the cents-per-gallon distribution 
capital cost estimate in Section 4.2.1 of this DRIA. 
 
 We understand that the tank barge industry is trending towards the use of tank barges 
with a carrying capacity of 30,000 barrels which tend to less expensive on a per-barrel basis than 
532 
10,000 barrel capacity barges.  Thus, our assumed use of a 10,000 barrel capacity barges likely 
results in a conservatively high estimate of ethanol barge costs. 
 
4.2.1.1.6 Ethanol Tank Truck Capital Costs 
 
 As discussed in Section 1.6.5 of this DRIA, we estimate that an additional 1,241 8,000 
gallon capacity tank trucks would be needed by 2022 to transport the additional volume of 
ethanol that we project would be used to meet the RFS2 standards (relative to the 13 BGY 2022 
reference case).  Based on input from industry, we estimate that the cost of a new 8,000 gallon 
tank truck capable of transporting ethanol at 180 thousand dollars.  This is based on a 110 
thousand dollar cost for the tractor and a 70 thousand dollar cost for the tank trailer.  Thus, we 
estimate that the total cost of tank trucks needed to transport ethanol due to the RFS2 standards 
by 2022 would be 223 million dollars.  These costs were amortized over 10 years at a 7% annual 
cost of capital to derive the cents-per-gallon distribution capital cost estimate in Section 4.2.1 of 
this DRIA.  We used a 10 year amortization schedule for tank trucks as opposed to the 15 year 
schedule used for other capital equipment to reflect their likely shorter service life. 
 
4.2.1.1.6 E85 Retail Facility Costs 
 
 As discussed in Section 1.6.10 of this DRIA, we estimate that an additional 24,250 E85 
retail facilities would be needed by 2022 as a result of the RFS2 standards (relative to the 13 
BGY 2022 reference case).  We estimated that 40% of these new facilities would install 2 new 
E85 pumps with four nozzles.  We assumed that no existing equipment would be retrofitted to 
meet this demand.   On average, we estimate the cost per E85 facility would be 122,000 dollars 
as detailed below.  This cost estimate includes the use of E85 compatible hardware and 
compliance with applicable regulations regarding the storing/dispensing fuels. 
 
 The following cost estimates are based on input from gasoline retailers and other parties 
with experience in the requirements and costs associated with installing E85 retail equipment.  
The total cost of installing a two nozzle E85 dispenser is estimated at 23,000 dollars.  This is 
composed of 17,000 dollars for the dispenser itself, 750 dollars for hanging hardware, 950 for 
refueling island hardware, 3,000 for installation, and a 1,300 dollar contingency cost.  Hanging 
hardware costs are composed of 310 dollars for 2 nozzles, 135 dollars for 2 breakaway 
connections, 135 dollars for 2 swivel connections, and 170 dollars for 2 hoses.  Refueling 
hardware costs are composed of 450 dollars for the dispenser island, 250 for an island sump 
pump, and 250 dollars for bumper posts.  Installation costs are composed of 1,500 dollars for 
concrete removal and replacement, and 1,500 dollars for wiring and piping.    
 
The cost of automatic tank level gauging equipment is estimated at 6,500 dollars.  It is 
estimated that 65% of retailers would install automatic tank gauging (ATG) equipment and the 
remainder would rely on manual means of determining the amount of fuel remaining in their 
underground storage tank.  Thus, the average cost per facility would be 4,225 for ATG 
equipment.  We estimate the cost of installing a canopy addition to provide cover for an 
additional dispenser at 15,000.  We estimated that only 10% of facilities would need to install 
additional canopy coverage in order to accommodate the new E85 retail dispenser.  Thus, the 
average canopy cost per facility is estimated at 1,500 dollars.  The cost of installing a new 8,000 
533 
underground E85 storage tank is estimated at 84,000 dollars.  The cost of connecting the tank to 
the dispenser(s) is included in this cost along with other miscellaneous storage tank related costs.   
 
We proposed that a level be placed near each E85 nozzle which states the E85 is for use 
only flex-fuel vehicles.MMMMMMMM  Based on input from industry, the cost of compliance with 
this proposal would be approximately 5 dollars per label.  New labels would be needed on all 
E85 dispensers, which totals approximately 385,000 dollars for the 76,900 E85 nozzles that we 
project would be in operation by 2022 under the RFS2 standards.. 
 
Based on the above, we estimate the cost of installing a new single dispenser E85 facility 
would be 113,000 dollars and the cost for a 2 dispenser facility would be 136,000 dollars.  Based 
on our projection that 40% of facilities would install 2 dispensers, we estimate an average cost of 
122,000 per new E85 facility.  Thus, the total cost of the 24,250 new E85 facilities that we 
project would be needed by 2022 due to the RFS2 program would be 2.96 billion dollars.  These 
costs were amortized over 15 years at a 7% annual cost of capital to derive the cents-per-gallon 
distribution capital cost estimate in Section 4.2.1 of this DRIA.  As discussed in Section 1.6.10 
of this DRIA, this cost estimate is based on our assessment that it would be sufficient for one in 
four retail facilities to offer E85 in 70% of the country. 
 
 As discussed in Section 1.6.10, we performed several sensitivity analyses to evaluate the 
potential that additional dispensers or retail facilities might be needed to facilitate the use of the 
volume of E85 that we project would be needed by 2022 to support compliance with the RFS2 
standards.   Under one scenario, we assumed that 3 E85 dispensers would be needed at each 
facility that sells E85 in order to provide a less aggressive throughput per nozzle level.  Under 
this scenario, the 4,500 E85 retail facilities that we estimate would be in place by 2022 absent the 
RFS2 requirements would need to install an additional 2 dispensers.NNNNNNNN  Based on the 
above, the cost to these facilities would be 46,000 dollars.  We also assumed that 50% of new 
E85 facilities would convert one of its gasoline storage tanks to E85 service in addition to 
installing a new E85 storage tank.OOOOOOOO  Based on these assumptions and the cost 
information discussed above, the cost per new E85 facility would be 166,000 dollars.  The total 
cost under this scenario would rise to 4.24 billion dollars. 
 
 We evaluated 3 additional sensitivity cases under which the total number of E85 facilities 
needed was increased by varying our estimates regarding what fraction of retailers would need to 
offer E85 in a given area to provide reasonable access and the fraction of the country that would 
need to have reasonable access to E85.  In all cases, we maintained the assumption that 40% of 
new E85 retail facilities would install two dispensers while the remainder would install only one 
dispenser.  Under the first such scenario, we assumed that one-in-three retail facilities in a given 
area would need to offer E85 to provide reasonable access, while maintaining our estimate that 
reasonable access would be needed in 70% of the county.  Under this scenario, an additional 
33,835 E85 retail facilities would be needed by 2022 relative to the 13 BGY 2022 reference case 
at a total cost of 4.13 billion dollars.  Under the second such scenario, we assumed that one-in-
                                                 
MMMMMMMM
 See proposed regulatory Section 80.1469. 
NNNNNNNN
 As discussed in Section 1.6.10 of this DRIA we assumed that these facilities would install only a single 
E85 dispenser (with 2 nozzles) absent the RFS2 program. 
OOOOOOOO
 This cost includes all the necessary changes to make the tank and associated equipment E85 compatible. 
534 
four retail facilities in a given area would need to offer E85 to provide reasonable access 
consistent with our primary case, but that reasonable access would be needed in 100% of the 
county.  Under this scenario, an additional 36,573 E85 retail facilities would be needed by 2022 
relative to the 13 BGY 2022 at a total cost of 4.46 billion dollars.  Under the third such scenario 
we assumed that one-in-three retail facilities in a given area would need to offer E85 to provide 
reasonable access and that reasonable access would be needed in 100% of the county.  Under this 
scenario, an additional 50,264 E85 retail facilities would be needed by 2022 relative to the 13 
BGY 2022 at a total cost of 6.13 billion dollars. 
 
4.2.1.2 Ethanol Freight Costs 
 
Our estimation of the cost of transporting ethanol from production/import facilities to the 
various locations where it would be used is based on the freight cost estimates developed for the 
RFS1 final rule891  A comprehensive study of the infrastructure requirements for an expanded 
fuel ethanol industry conducted for the Department of Energy (DOE) in 2002  provided the 
foundation for our estimate of the freight costs to handle the increased volume of ethanol needed 
under the RFS1 program.892  As noted earlier, we currently have a study underway through 
Oakridge National Laboratories (ORNL) to model the transportation of ethanol from 
production/import facilities to petroleum terminals.  The ORNL model optimizes freight flows 
over the rail, marine, and road distribution net while addressing the use of multiple shipping 
modes.  We plan to use the results of the ORNL study to adjust our ethanol freight cost estimates 
for the final rule. 
 
 Our estimation of ethanol freight costs is based on our evaluation of where ethanol would 
be produced/imported and where it would be used under the RFS2 standards.  Section 1.5 of this 
DRIA contains a discussion of our projections regarding where ethanol would be produced and 
the points of entry for ethanol imports to satisfy the RFS2 requirements.  Section 1.7 of this 
DRIA contains a discussion of where we project ethanol would be used under the proposed 
RFS2 program.  Overall ethanol freight costs were minimized by first filling demand within a 
state with ethanol produced within or imported into that state and then reaching out to areas that 
had an excess production capacity compared to in-state demand.  We developed ethanol freight 
costs on a state-by-state basis for ethanol that is produced within and imported into the state, and 
ethanol that is shipped in from PADD2.  A higher freight cost was assessed to rural versus urban 
areas for ethanol brought in from out-of-state.  This is based on the premise that ethanol shipped 
to rural areas from out-of-state would typically either first be delivered to a hub terminal in an 
urban area (typically by unit train) for further shipment to terminals in rural areas or would be 
shipped directly to terminals in rural areas via manifest rail car.PPPPPPPP   
 
In-state shipment of ethanol was assumed to be done by tank truck.  Such in-state ethanol 
freight costs were developed based on a review of shipping distances and topography with the 
state and the trucking costs developed for the RFS1 final rule.  Ethanol freight costs from PADD 
2 production facilities to meet out-of-state demand were also based on the estimates developed 
for the RFS1 final rule for such shipments.893  We made several changes to the RFS1 freight cost 
estimates for the purpose of our RFS2 analysis.  The freight cost estimates for shipment to rural 
                                                 
PPPPPPPP
 A discussion of our assessment of which areas are rural versus urban is contained in Section 1.7 of this 
DRIA.   
535 
areas in several states (California, Hawaii, and Michigan) were increased relative to those in the 
RFS1 rule based on our reanalysis of the difficulties in meeting all of the rural demand in these 
states.  In part, this is based on the premise that ethanol would need to travel farther and more 
widely to satisfy the volume requirements under the RFS2 standards in comparison to the RFS1 
standards.  We also considered freight costs for the upper and lower peninsulas of the State of 
Michigan separately for the purposes of our RFS2 analysis, whereas the State of Michigan was 
treated as a whole under the RFS1 analysis. 
 
Following is a discussion of our derivation of the freight costs for ethanol shipped from 
PADD2 production centers to meet out-of-state demand.  The 2002 DOE study contains 
estimated ethanol freight costs for each of the 5 PADDs.   These estimated costs are summarized 
in the following Table 4.2-3.894  A map of the PADDs is contained in Figure 4.2-1. 
 
Table 4.2-3. 
Estimated Ethanol Freight Costs from the 2002 DOE Study 
 
 
PADD 
5.1 billion gallons per year 
(cents per gallon) 
10.0 billion gallons per year 
(cents per gallon) 
1 11.1 7.2 
2 4.3 2.4 
3 6.6 5.8 
4 4.7 7.4 
5 12.7 10.7 
National Average 7.7 5.7 
 
536 
Figure 4.2-1. 
PAD District Definitions. 
 
 
 
The Energy Information Administration (EIA) translated the cost estimates from the 2002 
DOE study to a census division basis.895  A summary of the resulting (EIA) ethanol distribution 
cost estimates are contained in the following Table 4.2-4.  A map of the census divisions is 
contained in Figure 4.2-2. 
 
537 
Table 4.2-4. 
EIA Estimated Ethanol Freight Costs 
(Derived from the 2002 DOE Study) 
 
Census Division 
From  To 
Freight Cost 
(cents per gallon) 
East North Central  New England 9.8 
East North Central Middle Atlantic 9.8 
East North Central East North Central 4 
East North Central South Atlantic 9.8 
East North Central East South Central 4.7 
East North Central Pacific 14.0 
West North Central New England 11.4 
West North Central Middle Atlantic 11.4 
West North Central East North Central 4 
West North Central West North Central 4 
West North Central South Atlantic 11.4 
West North Central East South Central 4.7 
West North Central West South Central 4.7 
West North Central Mountain 4.5 
West North Central Pacific 13.0 
 
 
538 
Figure 4.2-2. 
Census Divisions 
 
 
 
 
We took the EIA projections and translated them into state-by-state freight costs for 
shipment of the ethanol produced in the East and West North Central Census Divisions 
(corresponding closely to PADD 2).  Distribution outside of PADD2 was assumed to be by rail, 
or marine vessel.  In the case of Alaska and Hawaii, differences in ethanol delivery prices from 
the mainland were inferred from gasoline prices.  A single average freight cost for each 
destination census division was generated by weighting together the freight costs given for each 
mode in both source census divisions according to their volume share.  These cents per gallon 
figures were first adjusted upward by 10% to reflect the increased cost of transportation fuels 
used to ship ethanol between the 2002 DOE study and the publication of the RFS1 FRM, and 
then additional adjustments were applied to some individual states based on their position within 
the census division.  We believe that these estimates reasonably correspond to the 53 dollar per 
barrel of crude case that we used in other areas of our analysis.  We were unable to develop an 
estimate of how an increase in crude cost would affect ethanol freight costs for this proposal.  
539 
Freight costs are correlated to the cost of the transportation fuel used by the transportation modes 
employed.  Transportation fuel costs represent a different fraction of overall freight costs for 
each of the different modes (rail, barge, tank truck).   We were unable to obtain sufficient data 
with which to assess the effects on ethanol freight costs of increased crude costs for all of the 
modes employed.  There are significant competitive issues with respect to how these costs are 
passed along to customers, and the extent to which increases in transportation fuel costs must be 
absorbed by the shipper as opposed to being passed along to the customer due to market 
conditions.  We intend to pursue this issue further so that we can develop an estimate of ethanol 
freight costs under the 92 per barrel of crude case that was used in other areas of our analysis. 
 
For some states, different freight costs for ethanol supplied to large hub terminals versus 
small satellite terminals were estimated.  The reasoning behind this is that large shipments of 
ethanol shipped from the Midwest by barge, ship, and/or unit train will often be initially 
unloaded at hub terminals for further distribution to satellite terminals.  In cases where 
redistribution from a hub to a satellite terminal doesn’t take place, the volume of ethanol shipped 
directly from the producer to a lesser volume (“satellite”) terminal would also incur a higher 
freight rate than ethanol shipped to a larger-volume “hub” terminal.  The largest adjustment was 
applied to the Rocky Mountain States since they are generally large in area and additional 
expense is required to transport freight through higher elevations and rugged terrain.  Smaller 
adjustments were applied to states that are smaller, flatter, or have access by navigable 
waterways.  The states to which an adjustment was not applied were generally in the Midwest or 
were so small as to not warrant different distribution costs.  The estimated additional freight cost 
of shipping ethanol to satellite terminals versus hub terminals is contained in the following Table 
4.2-5.  All areas were not assigned both hub and satellite terminal ethanol distribution costs.  For 
example, all shipment to of ethanol to the upper peninsula of the State of Michigan was assumed 
to be to smaller volume terminals, since there is insufficient population density in the area to 
support a hub terminal.  
 
Table 4.2-5. 
Additional Freight Cost to Deliver Ethanol to a Satellite Terminal  
Compared to a Hub Terminal 
 
States* cents per gallon 
OH, MI (lower peninsula) 2 
AL, AR, CA, FL, GA, KY, LA, MD, ME, MS, 
NC, NH, NY, OK, OR, PA, SC, TN, VA, VT, 
WA, WV 
4 
AK, AZ, CO, ID, NM, NV, TX, UT, WY 5 
  * States not listed were not assigned separate hub and satellite freight costs.  
 
We also made adjustments to the DOE study derived freight cost estimates to better 
account for the cost of shipping ethanol from the production plant to the rail head / marine 
terminal either for large volume shipment by unit train or marine shipment to hub terminals, or 
for shipment at single car rates via multiple-product trains directly to satellite terminals.  Chicago 
is a primary ethanol gathering point from producers for further distribution.   A 4 cent per gallon 
conveyance fee is charged to account for delivery of ethanol from the production plant gate to 
540 
the Chicago Board of Trade delivery point for taking ethanol.  This includes train shipments, 
loading costs, and other miscellaneous fees.  Based on this information, we added 4 cents per 
gallon to our ethanol freight estimates.  
 
We assumed that these freight costs do not include the costs associated with the recovery 
of capital for the distribution facility changes that are necessary to accommodate the increased 
volume of ethanol.  This may tend to overstate distribution costs to some extent because some 
capital recovery may already be incorporated into the 4 cent per gallon conveyance fee.  The 
inclusion of rail tank car lease fees also suggests that these estimated freight costs may be 
conservatively high given that rail car lease fees incorporate a capital recovery and a profit 
margin.   
 
Our resulting estimates of the state-by-state ethanol freight costs in 2022 are contained in 
Table 4.2-6.  Based on these estimates and our projections regarding where ethanol would be 
produced/imported and used, we estimate that the national average ethanol freight cost would be 
11.3 cents per gallon. 
 
Ethanol freight costs will vary from year-to-year based on where ethanol would be 
shipped versus where it would be produced.  As the volumes of ethanol used increase over time, 
more ethanol would be used in rural areas that have higher distribution costs.  Therefore, we 
believe that average ethanol freight costs would increase over time.  Thus, basing our evaluation 
of ethanol freight costs on the 2022 case should provide a conservatively high estimate of freight 
costs for earlier years.  A discussion of how we estimated the volumes of ethanol used in each 
state from in-state versus out-of-state production/imports and the estimation of volume that 
would be shipped to urban versus rural areas is contained in Section 1.7.1 of this DRIA. 
 
541 
Table 4.2-6. 
2022 Estimated Ethanol Freight Costs 
 
Destination % of Use From 
In-State Supply 
(vs. Out-of-
State Supply) 
Freight 
Cost 
for In-
State 
Supply 
(cpg) 
% of Out-of-
State Supply 
Shipped to 
Urban Areas 
(vs. Rural 
Areas) 
Freight Cost 
for Out-of-
State Supply 
Shipped to 
Urban Areas 
(cpg) 
Freight Cost 
for Out-of-
State Supply 
Shipped to 
Rural Areas 
(cpg) 
Alabama 68  4.4 46 11.2 15.2 
Alaska 0  NA 53 45.4 50.5 
Arizona 5 5.4 76 19.4 24.4 
Arkansas 76 5.4 37 11.3 16.3 
California 26 4.4 94 20.5 24.5 
Colorado 22 5.4 64 14.4 19.4 
Connecticut 18 4.4 100 15.4 NA 
Delaware 0 NA 100 15.4 NA 
District of 
Columbia 
0 NA 100 15.4 NA 
Florida 29 4.4 84 12.4 16.4 
Georgia 44 5.4 68 15.4 19.4 
Hawaii 15 5.4 60 40.5 44.5 
Idaho 34 5.4 29 19.4 24.4 
Illinois 100 4.4 NA NA NA 
Indiana 100 4.4 NA NA NA 
Iowa 100 3.4 NA NA NA 
Kansas 100 4.4 NA NA NA 
Kentucky 16 5.4 47 6.2 10.2 
Louisiana 100 4.4 NA NA NA 
Maine 96 5.4 61 17.4 21.4 
Maryland 0 NA 89 15.4 15.4 
Massachusetts 18 4.4 100 15.4 NA 
Michigan –LP 69 5.4 68 6.2 10.2 
Michigan –UP 0 NA 0 NA 10.2 
Minnesota 100 4.4 NA NA NA 
Mississippi 38 4.4 27 10.2 14.2 
Missouri 98 4.4 58 6 8 
Montana 64 5.4 9 17.4 22.4 
Nebraska 100 4.4 NA NA NA 
Nevada 6 5.4 77 20.4 25.4 
 
542 
 
 
Table 4.2-6. (continued) 
2022 Estimated Ethanol Freight Costs 
 
Destination % of use from 
in-State Supply 
(vs. Out-of-
State Supply) 
Freight 
Cost for 
in-State 
Supply 
(cpg) 
% of Out-of-
State Supply 
Shipped to 
Urban Areas 
(vs. Rural 
Areas) 
Freight Cost 
for out-of-
state supply 
to urban areas 
(cpg) 
Freight Cost 
for out-of-
state supply 
to rural areas 
(cpg) 
New Hampshire 91 4.4 67 16.4 16.4 
New Jersey 18 4.4 100 15.4 NA 
New Mexico 8 4.4 33 16.4 21.4 
New York 28 5.4 85 15.4 19.4 
North Carolina 40 4.4 61 15.4 19.4 
North Dakota 100 5.4 NA NA NA 
Ohio 77 5.4 74 6.2 10.2 
Oklahoma 100 4.4 NA NA NA 
Oregon 84 5.4 57 20.5 24.5 
Pennsylvania 20 5.4 72 12.4 16.4 
Rhode Island 18 4.4 100 15.4 NA 
South Carolina 45 4.4 49 15.4 19.4 
South Dakota 100 5.4 NA NA NA 
Tennessee 34 5.4 58 6.2 10.2 
Texas 39 5.4 88 14.3 19.3 
Utah 0 NA 72 17.4 22.4 
Vermont 0 NA 0 NA 16.4 
Virginia 17 5.4 68 15.4 19.4 
Washington 38 5.4 60 20.5 24.5 
West Virginia 67 5.4 28 15.4 19.4 
Wisconsin 100 4.4 NA NA NA 
Wyoming 8 5.4 0 NA 21.4 
 
 
4.2.2 Biodiesel Distribution Costs 
 
As discussed in the following sections, we estimate that the total capital costs to support 
distribution of the additional volume of biodiesel that would be used in response to the RFS2 
standards would be 381 million dollars by 2022.  When amortized, this translates to 9.8 cents per 
gallon of additional biodiesel attributed to the RFS2 standards.  Amortization of capital costs was 
done over 15 years at a 7% annual cost of capital except in the case of the cost of tank trucks 
were a 10 year amortization schedule was used.  These costs were calculated relative to the AEO 
2007 baseline which projects that 380 MGY of biodiesel would be used in 2022 absent the RFS2 
standards.  Under the RFS2 standards, we project that an additional 430 MGY of biodiesel would 
543 
be used by 2022 for a total of 810 MGY.  Biodiesel freight costs are estimated to be 9.3 cents per 
gallon on a national average basis.QQQQQQQQ  Thus, we estimate that total biodiesel distribution 
costs would be 19.1 cents per gallon of biodiesel attributed the RFS2 standards.  The way in 
which we estimated these costs is detailed in the following sections. 
 
As noted previously, we choose not to subtract the distribution costs for the petroleum-
based fuels that would be displaced by the use of biofuels from our estimated biofuel distribution 
costs to help ensure a conservatively high estimate of biofuel distribution costs given the 
uncertainties in our analysis.   We believe that the freight costs to ship petroleum-based fuels to 
the terminal are approximately 4 cents per gallon.  If we were to subtract these costs from the 
estimated biodiesel distribution costs, the result would be 15.1 cents per gallon. 
 
4.2.2.1 Capital Costs to Upgrade the Biodiesel Distribution System 
 
4.2.1.1.1 Summary of Biodiesel Distribution Capital Costs 
 
 A summary of biodiesel distribution capital costs is contained in Table 4.2-7.  Our 
estimation of these costs is detailed in the following sections. 
 
Table 4.2-7.  
Summary of Estimated Biodiesel Distribution Infrastructure Capital Costs* 
 
 Million $ 
Fixed Facilities  
   Petroleum Terminals  
        Biodiesel Storage Tanks 129 
        Biodiesel Blending and Miscellaneous Equipment 192 
Mobile Facilities   
   Rail Cars  35 
   Barges   17  
   Tank Trucks    8 
Total Biodiesel Distribution Capital Costs 381 
* Relative to the AEO 2007 380 MGY 2002 reference case. 
 
4.2.1.1.2 Petroleum Terminal Biodiesel Distribution Capital Costs 
 
 The facility upgrades that we project would be needed at petroleum terminals to facilitate 
the distribution of the increased volume of biodiesel in response to the RFS2 standards are 
discussed in Section 1.6.9 of this DRIA.  Total capital costs at terminals by 2022 relative to the 
BGY 2022 reference case are estimated at 321 million dollars.   
 
                                                 
QQQQQQQQ
 The projected shorter transportation distances on average for biodiesel compared to ethanol resulted in a 
lower per gallon freight cost for biodiesel compared to ethanol (11.3 cpg). 
544 
As discussed in Section 1.6.9 of this DRIA, we estimate that a total of 1.84 million 
barrels of new biodiesel storage would be needed at petroleum terminals due to the RFS2 
standards, all of which would need to be satisfied by new construction.  Based on information 
from industry with respect to the effect of increased steel prices on storage tanks costs, we 
estimate that the cost of constructing new biodiesel storage tanks would be 70 dollars per barrel.  
This is considerably higher than the 40 per barrel cost we estimated for construction of new 
ethanol tanks for two reasons.  Biodiesel tanks need to be heated/insulated in colder climes.  
Biodiesel tanks tend to be of considerably smaller size compared to ethanol tanks.  Both of these 
factors contribute significantly to the cost per barrel of constructing a new storage tank.   We 
estimate that the total cost at petroleum terminals of new biodiesel storage tanks would be 129 
million dollars.   
 
 As discussed in Section 1.6.9 of this DRIA, we projected that 200 terminals would need 
to install biodiesel blending equipment by 2022 as a result of the RFS2 standards (relative to the 
380 MGY 2022 reference case).  Based on input from industry, we estimated that the cost of 
biodiesel blending equipment would be 400 thousand dollars per terminal. The cost of additional 
piping is estimated at 60,000 per terminal.  Miscellaneous costs associated with 
receiving/blending/storing biodiesel for the first time are estimated at 500 thousand dollars per 
terminal.  Estimated equipment costs for handling biodiesel are higher than those for similar 
equipment designed to handle ethanol due to the need for insulated/heated equipment in colder 
climes.    
 
 Summing all of these estimated costs, we arrived at an estimate of the total cost for the 
biodiesel blending, storage, and other miscellaneous equipment that would be needed at 
petroleum terminals as a result of the RFS2 standards by 2022 of 321.1 million dollars.  These 
costs were amortized over 15 years at a 7% annual cost of capital to derive the cents-per-gallon 
distribution capital cost estimate in Section 4.2.2 of this DRIA. 
 
4.2.1.1.3 Biodiesel Rail Car Capital Costs 
 
 As discussed in Section 1.6.3 of this DRIA, we estimate that an additional 353 biodiesel 
tank cars would be needed by 2022 to transport the additional volume of ethanol that we project 
would be used to meet the RFS2 standards (relative to the 380 MGY 2022 reference case).  
Based on input from industry, we estimate that the cost of a new biodiesel tank car of 25,600 
gallon capacity at 99,000 dollars.  The estimated cost for a biodiesel rail car is 10% higher than 
that of an ethanol rail car to accommodate the need for insulated/heated tanks in colder climes.  
Thus, we estimate that the total cost of the biodiesel rail tanks cars needed due to the RFS2 
standards by 2022 would be 35 million dollars.  These costs were amortized over 15 years at a 
7% annual cost of capital to derive the cents-per-gallon distribution capital cost estimate in 
Section 4.2.2 of this DRIA.  
 
4.2.1.1.4 Biodiesel Barge Capital Costs 
 
As discussed in Section 1.6.4, we estimate that an additional 11 10,000 barrel capacity 
barges would be needed by 2022 to transport the additional volume of biodiesel that we project 
would be used to meet the RFS2 standards (relative to the 380 MGY 2022 reference case).  
545 
Based on input from industry, we estimate that the cost of a new 10,000 barrel barge capable of 
transporting biodiesel at 1.54 million dollars.  This estimated cost is 10% higher than the cost of 
a barge designed to transport ethanol due to the need for an insulated/heated tank in colder 
climes. Thus, we estimate that the total cost of barges needed to transport biodiesel due to the 
RFS2 standards by 2022 would be 16.6 million dollars.  These costs were amortized over 15 
years at a 7% annual cost of capital to derive the cents-per-gallon distribution capital cost 
estimate in Section 4.2.2 of this DRIA. 
 
 While the tank barge industry is trending towards the use of tank barges with a carrying 
capacity of 30,000 barrels (which tend to be less expensive on a per-barrel basis than 10,000 
barrel capacity barges), we believe the assumed use of 10,000 barrel barges is appropriate for 
biodiesel transport due to the relatively smaller volumes of biodiesel that we project would be 
used. 
 
4.2.1.1.5 Biodiesel Tank Truck Capital Costs 
 
 As discussed in Section 1.6.5 of this DRIA, we estimate that an additional 1,241 8,000 
gallon capacity tank trucks would be needed by 2022 to transport the additional volume of 
biodiesel that we project would be used to meet the RFS2 standards (relative to the 380 MGY 
2022 reference case).  Based on input from industry, we estimate that the cost of a new 8,000 
gallon tank truck capable of transporting biodiesel at 198 thousand dollars.  This is based on an 
110,000 dollar cost for the tractor and an 88,000 thousand dollar cost for the tank trailer.  This 
estimate is 25% higher than the cost of a tank trailer designed to transport ethanol due to the need 
for an insulated/heated tank in colder climes.  Thus, we estimate that the total cost of tank trucks 
needed to transport biodiesel due to the RFS2 standards by 2022 would be 7.8 million dollars.  
These costs were amortized over 10 years at a 7% annual cost of capital to derive the cents-per-
gallon distribution capital cost estimate in Section 4.2.2 of this DRIA.  We used a 10 year 
amortization schedule for tank trucks as opposed to the 15 year schedule used for other capital 
equipment to reflect their likely shorter service life. 
 
4.2.2.2 Biodiesel Freight Costs 
 
The distribution of biodiesel from production plants to petroleum terminals where it 
would be blended with diesel fuel is discussed in Section 1.6.3 of the DRIA.  Tank truck was the 
assumed method of shipment for distances of less than 300 miles.  Where distances are beyond 
300 miles, shipment by manifest rail was assumed to be the preferred option other than in cases 
on the East coast where there were apparent barge routes from production to demand centers.  In 
no case was it assumed that biodiesel would need to be shipped by multiple modes prior to 
delivery at the petroleum terminal.  
 
Our estimation of biodiesel freight costs is based on our evaluation of where biodiesel 
would be produced and where it would be used under the RFS2 standards. Section 1.5 of this 
DRIA contains a discussion of our projections regarding where biodiesel would be produced to 
satisfy the RFS2 requirements.  Section 1.7 of this DRIA contains a discussion of where we 
project biodiesel would be used under the proposed RFS2 program.  Demand for biodiesel in 
each state was established based on current and anticipated future state biodiesel mandates and 
546 
the anticipated demand for 2% biodiesel in most heating oil used in the Northeast by 
2022.RRRRRRRR  Production volumes from each plant were assigned to meet these demands based 
on minimizing overall distribution distances (and cost).  The production volume that was not 
consumed in meeting the anticipated demand from state mandates and to meet heating oil 
demand was assumed to be used within trucking distance of the production plant to the extent 
possible while maintaining biodiesel blend concentrations below 5%.  This may tend to result in 
a conservatively high estimate of biodiesel freight costs since biodiesel blend levels could exceed 
5% in some areas.  The remaining volume needed to match our estimated production volume was 
assumed to be shipped via manifest rail car or barge to the nearest areas where diesel fuel use 
was not already saturated with biodiesel to the 5% level.  A 1,000 mile shipping distance was 
selected to ensure that all biodiesel not used to satisfy a state mandate, otherwise used in state, or 
used for bio-heat could find a market.  It is likely that some fraction would not need to travel 
quite at far.  Therefore, this assumption is also likely to result in a conservatively high estimate 
of biodiesel freight costs. 
 
Our estimates of the freight costs for shipping biodiesel by tank truck are based on the 
ethanol tank truck freight costs that we developed for the RFS1 final rule.SSSSSSSS  These ethanol 
transport costs were increased by 10% to account for the increased cost associated with 
preventing fuel gelling during cold conditions.  The cost of shipping biodiesel by truck when the 
trip (or multiple trips) could be completed in a day was estimated to range from 7 to 8 cents per 
gallon.  Some long truck transports were assumed to be necessary (up to 300 miles), where a 
round trip could not be completed in a single day.  In such cases, the need for an overnight 
layover was assumed to add 120 dollars to shipping costs, resulting in an estimated 9.5 cents per 
gallon freight cost.    
 
Our estimate of the cost of shipping biodiesel by manifest rail cars is based on publicly 
available biodiesel freight tariff information from BNSF railway from February 2008.896  We 
used the BNSF fuel surcharge schedule to adjust our freight cost estimates to match our 53 per 
barrel of crude scenario.  Specific tariff information was not available for source/destinations 
needed for our analysis.  A minimum cost of 9 cents per gallon was assumed to accommodate 
loading, unloading, and rail car lease costs.  Based on the BNSF tariff information, we estimated 
that every 100 miles of additional shipment by manifest rail car beyond 600 miles adds 1.4 cents 
per gallon to shipping cost.  Thus, for the assumed 1,000 mile shipping distance for biodiesel 
used to meet miscellaneous demand (i.e. not used to meet state mandates or for bioheat) the cost 
to ship by manifest rail car was estimated at 15 cents per gallon.  Barge shipping costs were 
assumed to be comparable to the cost of shipping by manifest rail.  This will tend to overstate 
barge shipping costs, since we understand that barge freight costs tend to be significantly less 
than rail freight costs.  However, given that only 1% of biodiesel is projected to me moved by 
barge, this will have only a minimal effect on our overall estimation of biodiesel freight costs.  
We intend to seek out additional information regarding the cost of shipping biodiesel by barge 
over the routes we have identified so that we can update our biodiesel freight cost estimate for 
the final rule.  Shipping distances were estimated based on a review of biodiesel production plant 
locations, demand centers, and the rail/barge transportation net. 
   
                                                 
RRRRRRRR
 When biodiesel is blending into heating oil, the product is commonly referred to as bioheat. 
SSSSSSSS
 See Section 4.2.1.2 of this DRIA. 
547 
Similar to the situation regarding our estimation of ethanol freight costs, we were not able 
to satisfactorily adjust our freight cost estimates across all modes in order to estimate biodiesel 
freight costs under the 92 per barrel crude cost scenario used in other parts of our analysis.  We 
intend to pursue this analysis further so that we can provide an estimate of the impact on 
biodiesel freight costs of changes in transportation fuel costs in the final rule. 
 
Due to the favorable match up in the location of biodiesel plants and biodiesel demand 
centers, 86% of biodiesel was projected to be shipped by truck, 13% was estimated to be shipped 
by manifest rail car, and 1% was estimated to be shipped by barge.  We project that 
approximately 44% of the biodiesel production volume in 2022 would be used in the state where 
it was produced to meet state mandates, satisfy the demand for bioheat, or to meet other in-state 
miscellaneous demand.  The average cost of shipping this volume by tank truck is estimated to 
average 8 cents per gallon.  Approximately 3% of biodiesel production volume is estimated to be 
shipped out-of-state by manifest rail car to meet miscellaneous biodiesel demand at an average 
freight cost of 15 cents per gallon.   
 
Approximately 54% of biodiesel production is projected to be shipped out of state to 
satisfy state mandates or bioheat demand which could not be satisfied with in-state production.  
We assigned portions of the production volumes from states that had already satisfied this 
demand to meet this demand in other states based on minimizing overall shipping distances (and 
costs).  A freight cost estimate was derived for each source and destination pair based on the 
fraction of the volumes that would be shipped by each mode and the freight cost for each mode 
used given the shipping distance.  On average the cost of shipping biodiesel from out-of-state to 
satisfy state biodiesel mandates or the demand for bioheat is estimated at 10 cents per gallon.  By 
weighting the biodiesel volumes used to satisfy the three demand categories by the respective 
freight cost to ship that volume we arrived at a national average biodiesel freight cost estimate of 
9.3 cents per gallon.  Biodiesel freight costs are summarized in Table 4.2-8.  
 
Table 4.2-8.  
Estimated Biodiesel Freight Costs  
Biodiesel Demand Category Fraction of  
Biodiesel Production 
Freight Cost 
(cpg) 
Shipped In-State to Satisfy In-State Demand 43% 8 
Shipped Out-of-State to Satisfy State Mandates 
and Demand for Bioheat 
54% 10 
Shipped Out-of-State to Satisfy  
Miscellaneous Demand 
3% 15 
Total (National Average) 100% 9.3 
 
4.2.3 Renewable Diesel Distribution Costs  
 
 As discussed in Section 1.6.1.3, there are comparatively few additional costs associated 
with distributing renewable diesel fuel because the majority is projected to be produced at 
petroleum refineries and it can be shipped fungibly with petroleum-based diesel fuel.  As 
discussed in Section 1.6.5 of this DRIA, we estimate that 8 additional 8,000 gallon capacity tank 
trucks would be needed by 2022 to transport the additional volume of renewable diesel fuel that 
548 
we project would be used to meet the RFS2 standards from stand-alone production facilities to 
petroleum terminals (relative to the 0 MGY 2022 reference case).  Based on input from industry, 
we estimate that the cost of a new 8,000 gallon tank truck capable of transporting renewable 
diesel fuel at 180 thousand dollars.  This is based on a 110 thousand dollar cost for the tractor 
and 70 thousand dollar cost for the tank trailer.  Thus, we estimate that the total cost of tank 
trucks needed to transport renewable diesel fuel due to the RFS2 standards by 2022 would be 1.3 
million dollars.  These costs were amortized over 10 years at a 7% annual cost of capital.  This 
translates to 0.2 cents per gallon of the renewable diesel that would be produced at stand-alone 
facilities and hence need to be transported separately (125 million gallons by 2022).  We used a 
10 year amortization schedule for tank trucks as opposed to the 15 year schedule used for other 
capital equipment to reflect their likely shorter service life. 
 
 As discussed in Section 1.6.4 of this DRIA, we estimate that renewable diesel fuel which 
does need to be transported separately from petroleum-based diesel fuel (because it is produced 
at stand-alone facilities not located at a refinery) would be shipped by tank truck to a terminal 
facility where it would be blended directly with diesel fuel.  The freight cost for this truck 
transport is estimated at 5 cents per gallon.  Thus, the total cost of distributing renewable diesel 
fuel is estimated at 5.2 cents per gallon, and this only applies to the renewable diesel that would 
be produced at stand-alone facilities.  
 
As noted previously, we choose not to subtract the distribution costs for the petroleum-
based fuels that would be displaced by the use of biofuels from our estimated biofuel distribution 
costs to help ensure a conservatively high estimate of biofuel distribution costs given the 
uncertainties in our analysis.   We believe that the freight costs to ship petroleum-based fuels to 
the terminal are approximately 4 cents per gallon.  If we were to subtract these costs from the 
estimated renewable diesel distribution costs, the result would be 1.2 cents per gallon. 
 
4.2.4 Potential Impact on Ethanol Distribution Costs of the Use of  
Mid-Level Ethanol Blends 
 
As discussed in Section 1.6.11 of this DRIA, the only impact on ethanol distribution costs 
if a waiver for the use of a mid-level ethanol blend was granted would be the additional costs 
associated with retrofitting equipment at all gasoline retail facilities to dispense a mid-level 
ethanol blend.  Currently, retail equipment that dispenses an ethanol blend greater than E10 must 
be certified by Underwriters Laboratories to be capable of dispensing of E85.  There is some 
interest on the part of gasoline retailers in investigating whether a different certification might be 
granted for retail equipment capable of dispensing a mid-level ethanol blend.  It has been 
postulated that current equipment certified for E10 use might even be recertified to cover the 
dispensing of a mid level ethanol blend.  However, the potential outcome of such efforts is 
highly uncertain, and at present and it seems likely that at least some fairly substantial changes 
would be needed E10 certified equipment to allow its use in dispensing a mid-level ethanol 
blend.  Thus, we assumed that the same costs would be present in retrofitting a facility to 
dispense a mid-level ethanol blend as there would be to dispense E85. 
 
We used cost estimates to retrofit retail facilities for E85 service compiled by National 
Renewable Energy Laboratory as the basis for estimating the cost of retrofitting a retail facility 
549 
to dispense a mid-level ethanol blend.897   Based on a review of these data, we estimate the cost 
of retrofitting a retail dispenser with two nozzles, cleaning the existing storage tank dedicated to 
regular gasoline service and preparing it for mid-level ethanol service at 20,000 dollars.  
Assuming that each of the 164,292 gasoline retail facilities would complete such a retrofit, 
results in an additional cost of 3.3 billion dollars associated with a distributing an ethanol blend 
of greater than 10% ethanol.898  Based on gasoline retailer survey data, we estimate that there is 
average of 3.9 gasoline dispensers at gasoline retail facilities. 899  If we were to assume that all 
gasoline dispensers would be retrofitted to dispense E85, the cost associated with a distributing 
an ethanol blend of greater than 10 % ethanol would be 12.7 billion dollars.  These estimates 
assume that existing underground storage tanks are compatible for ethanol blends greater than 
10% and that most of necessary changes would be to the dispenser and associated above-ground 
hardware.  However, we understand that it may be difficult or impossible to confirm the 
compatibility of some existing underground storage tanks and other tank-related hardware.  In 
fact, we recently learned that several states including California and Delaware will not allow 
existing underground storage tanks to be upgraded to store ethanol blends greater than 10%.  If 
all new storage tanks would be needed, this would add 84,000 per facility or a total of 13.8 
billion dollars.  Thus, the cost of making an ethanol blend of greater than 10% could be as much 
as 26.5 billion dollars.   
 
The introduction of a mid-level ethanol blend would not eliminate the need for the use of 
additional E85 (and additional E85 refueling facilities) to facilitate the consumption of the 
projected ethanol volumes needed to comply with the RFS2 standards.TTTTTTTT  However, it 
could delay and to some extent reduce the need for additional E85 refueling facilities.  To 
evaluate the potential effect on costs of the reduced need for additional refueling facilities that 
might result from the introduction of a mid-level ethanol blend, we evaluated a scenario where 
reasonable access to E85 would only be needed in 50% of the nation.  Under our primary E85 
retail facility case, we assumed that reasonable access to E85 would be needed in 70% of the 
country, and that 40% of new E85 facilities have 2 E85 pumps and the remainder would have 1 
E85 pump.UUUUUUUU  If we were to assume that to reasonable E85 availability in 50% of the 
nation while maintaining the same assumptions regarding the number of pumps per facility, the 
total cost of new E85 refueling facilities would be 2 billion dollars.  This is approximately one 
billion dollars less than under our primary case where reasonable access is assumed to be needed 
in 70% of the country.   
 
We evaluated a sensitivity case from our primary E85 retail facility cost estimate under 
which it was assumed that 3 pumps would be needed at each E85 retail facility to maintain the 
needed E85 throughput.  Under this sensitivity case, if we to assume that reasonable E85 
availability would only be needed in 50% of the country, the total cost of additional E85 
refueling facilities needed due to the RFS2 standards would be reduced by approximately 1.4 
billion dollars.  Thus, if we were to consider the potential savings in reduced E85 refueling 
infrastructure costs that might result form the introduction of a mid-level ethanol blend, the 
overall costs of this introduction might be reduced to less than 25 billion dollars.VVVVVVVV    
                                                 
TTTTTTTT
 A discussion of the projected ethanol use levels under the RFS2 standards is discussed in Section 1.7.2 of 
this DRIA. 
UUUUUUUU
 See Section 4.2.1.1.6 of this DRIA for a discussion of E85 retail facility costs under the RFS2 program. 
VVVVVVVV
 Relative to the above upper-bound estimate of 26.5 billion dollars. 
550 
4.3 Reduced Refining Industry Costs  
 
 As renewable and alternative fuel use increases, the volume of petroleum-based products, 
such has gasoline and diesel fuel, would decrease.  This reduction in finished refinery petroleum 
products is associated with a reduction in refinery industry costs.  This cost reduction would 
essentially be the volume of fuel displaced multiplied by the cost for producing the fuel.  There is 
also a reduction in capital costs which is important because by not investing in new refinery 
capital, more resources are freed up to build plants that produce renewable and alternative fuels.  
 
 Although we conducted refinery modeling for estimating the cost of blending ethanol, we 
did not rely on the refinery model results for estimating the volume of displaced petroleum.  
Instead we conducted an energy balance around the increased use of renewable fuels, estimating 
the energy-equivalent volume of gasoline or diesel fuel displaced.  This allowed us to more 
easily apply our best estimates for how much of the petroleum would displace imports of 
finished products versus crude oil for our energy security analysis which is discussed in Chapter 
15 of the DRIA.   
 
 As part of this analysis we accounted for the change in petroleum demanded by upstream 
processes related to additional production of the renewable fuels as well as reduced production of 
petroleum fuels.  For example, growing corn used for ethanol production requires the use of 
diesel fuel in tractors, which reduces the volume of petroleum displaced by the ethanol.  
Similarly, the refining of crude oil uses by-product hydrocarbons for heating within the refinery, 
therefore the overall effect of reduced gasoline and diesel fuel consumption is actually greater 
because of the additional upstream effect.  We used the lifecycle petroleum demand estimates 
provided for in GREET model to account for the upstream consumption of petroleum for each of 
the renewable and alternative fuels, as well as for gasoline and diesel fuel.  Although there may 
be some renewable fuel used for upstream energy, we assumed that this entire volume is 
petroleum because the volume of renewable and alternative fuels is fixed as described in Chapter 
1 above.  
 
 For this proposed rule, we assumed that a portion of the gasoline displaced by ethanol is 
imported, while the other portion is produced from domestic refineries.  The assumption we 
made is that one half of the ethanol market in the Northeast, which comprises about half of the 
nation’s gasoline demand, would displace imported gasoline or gasoline blend stocks.  
Therefore, to derive the portion of the new renewable fuels which would offset imports (and not 
impact domestic refinery production), we multiplied the total volume of petroleum gasoline 
displaced by 50 percent to represent that portion of the ethanol which would be used in the 
Northeast, and 50 percent again to only account for that which would offset imports.  The rest of 
the ethanol, including half of the ethanol presumed to be used in the Northeast, is presumed to 
offset domestic gasoline production.  In the case of biodiesel and renewable diesel, all of it is 
presumed to offset domestic diesel fuel production.  For ethanol, biodiesel and renewable diesel, 
the amount of petroleum fuel displaced is estimated based on the relative energy contents of the 
renewable fuels to the fuels which they are displacing.  The savings due to lower imported 
gasoline and diesel fuel is accounted for in the energy security analysis contained in Chapter 15. 
 
551 
 For estimating the reduced U.S. refinery costs, we multiplied the estimated volume of 
domestic gasoline and diesel fuel displaced by the wholesale price for each of these fuels, which 
are $1.57 per gallon for gasoline, and $1.61 per gallon for diesel fuel at $53/bbl crude oil, and 
$2.67 per gallon for gasoline, and $3.35 per gallon for diesel fuel at $92/bbl crude oil.  For the 
volume of petroleum displaced upstream, we valued it using the wholesale diesel fuel price.  
Table 4.3-1 shows the net volumetric impact on the petroleum portion of gasoline and diesel fuel 
demand, as well as the reduced refining costs for 2022. 
 
Table 4.3-1.  U.S. Refinery Cost Reduction for the RFS2 Fuel Program in 2022 
 Total 
Volume 
Displaced 
(billion 
gallons) 
Refining Cost 
Reduction at 
$53/bbl crude oil 
price 
(billion dollars)  
Refining Cost 
Reduction at 
$92/bbl crude oil 
price 
(billion dollars) 
Upstream  Petroleum -0.8 -$1.3 -$2.7 
Gasoline 10.4 $16.3 $27.7 End Use 
Diesel Fuel 0.6 $0.9 $1.9 
 Total - $15.9 $26.9 
552 
4.4 Overall Costs to Gasoline and Diesel Fuel 
 
The previous sections of this chapter have presented estimates of the cost of producing 
and distributing ethanol, biodiesel and renewable diesel fuel.  In this section, we summarize the 
results of refinery modeling conducted by Jacobs Consultancy under contract to EPA for using 
those biofuels.900  Jacobs’s used the Haverly Linear Programming (LP) model to conduct the 
analysis.  This model is widely used by the refining industry, consultants, engineering firms and 
government agencies to analyze refinery economics, refinery operations, fuel quality changes, 
refinery capital investments, environmental changes and demand changes.  The Haverly model 
uses Jacobs’s Refining Process Technology Database to represent refining operations.    
 
The modeling was conducted to analyze the effect of the increased renewable fuel use on 
the production costs and composition of the nation’s gasoline and diesel fuel.  The refinery 
modeling output described in this section includes the changes in volumes and capital 
investments as well as the resulting capital and fixed operating costs, the variable costs, and the 
total of all these costs.  Because of the recent significant increase in crude oil prices, we 
estimated the costs of this program at two different crude oil prices.  The low price is $53/bbl 
which represents the reference crude oil price estimated by the Energy Information 
Administration (EIA) for its 2008 Annual Energy Outlook (AEO).  The high price is $92/bbl 
which represents the high crude oil price estimated by EIA for its 2008 AEO.  We describe the 
methodology for adjusting the cost of the RFS2 standard further below in the methodology 
section.
 
 
4.4.1 Description of Refinery Modeling Cases Modeled and Methodology 
 
The refinery modeling was set up to analyze the volumes required by the RFS as 
described in Chapter 1.  The primary renewable fuel modeled was ethanol in gasoline, and we 
considered a small amount of biodiesel and renewable diesel as required under EISA.  While the 
addition of ethanol was modeled with the refinery model to capture the blending costs of using a 
large amount of additional ethanol, the projected additional volme of biodiesel and renewable 
diesel was not captured by the refinery model.  Instead, the blending of biodiesel and renewable 
diesel was captured outside the refinery model, although we modeled a slightly lower the energy-
equivalent volume of diesel fuel based on the addition of the biodiesel and renewable diesel 
volume. 
 
 Jacobs conducted a Linear Programming modeling analysis of the refining industry for 
the various RFS scenarios using a model developed by Haverly’s LP technology.  The modeling 
was set up to analyze the extent to which ethanol will be used in conventional gasoline and 
reformulated gasoline by region and the resulting effects on gasoline composition. The refining 
industry was modeled based on five aggregate complex refining regions, representing Petroleum 
Administration for Defense Districts (PADD) 1, 2, 3, 4 & 5 together minus California, and 
California separately.  All of the PADDS were modeled simultaneously together in the LP model 
which allowed the refinery model to most efficiently rebalance the regional gasoline production 
volumes in response to the addition of the renewable fuels.   
  
553 
The refinery modeling was conducted in three distinct steps which involved a base case, a 
reference case and a control case.   
 
4.4.1.1 Base Case 
 
 The first step involved the establishment of a 2004 base case which calibrated the 
refinery model against 2004 volumes, gasoline quality, and refinery capital in place.  We chose 
2004 because the following year, 2005, as well as the beginning of 2006, were affected by 
hurricanes and would not be representative of a typical year, and 2007 data was not yet available 
when we started the analysis.  Refinery unit capacities from the Oil and Gas Journal and Energy 
Information Administration (EIA), as well as refinery feedstock and product volumes from EIA 
data were entered into the refinery model.  The refinery model was then run and the resulting 
gasoline quality compared and calibrated to actual gasoline quality data information from EPA’s 
Reformulated Gasoline data base.   
  
4.4.1.2 Reference Case 
 
 The reference case is a business-as-usual case that serves as a reference to the control 
cases.  Thus, the year of analysis for the reference case must be the same as that used for control 
cases.  Because the RFS2 fuel standard becomes fully implemented in 2022, we conducted our 
reference and control cases analysis in 2022.  Two categories of adjustments were made to the 
base case refinery models to enable modeling the refining industry in 2022 for the reference case.  
First, the change in certain inputs assumptions such as product volumes and energy prices 
needed to be projected.  U.S. refinery gasoline, diesel fuel and jet fuel demand were projected to 
grow to meet increased demand.  These projected volumes were used for establishing finished 
product which then led to refinery production for each PADD to meet that increased demand.  
This projected growth in U.S. refinery production is entered into the reference case version of the 
LP refinery model.   
 
 The refinery modeling was conducted using the projection of crude oil and product prices 
in 2022.  Crude and other input prices were based on Jacobs’ projection of refinery margins and 
crude prices in 2022 cases, which was also based on the historical price spreads of fuels between 
the PADDs, using information from EIA’s 2004 price information tables, Platts, and AEO 2006.  
The average price of crude oil was projected to be about $51 per barrel, although crude oil prices 
varied by PADD.  For the reference case as well as for the control cases, we assumed the same 
crude oil and product prices.  The crude oil prices and summertime and wintertime prices for 
gasoline, diesel fuel and jet fuel are summarized in Table 4.4-1. 
 
554 
Table 4.4-1.  Crude Oil and Finished Product Prices used in Refinery Modeling 
  PADD 1 PADD 2 PADD 3 PADD 4/5 
CA excl. 
California 
Crude Oil 
($/bbl) 
Year-
round 
Average 
53.6 53.0 50.6 51.8 50.2 
Summer 175.2 173.5 170.8 - 186.7 Reformulated 
Gasoline 
(c/gal) 
Winter 161.4 158.7 155.3 - 173.7 
Summer 167.6 165.1 161.4 173.6 - Conventional 
Gasoline 
(c/gal) 
Winter 154.0 151.8 148.5 160.4 - 
Summer 156.6 157.6 154.6 166.6 164.6 Diesel Fuel 
(c/gal) Winter 162.6 163.6 160.6 172.6 170.6 
Summer 158.6 158.6 156.6 164.6 164.6 Jet Fuel (c/gal) 
Winter 156.6 156.6 154.6 162.6 162.6 
 
 We also modeled the implementation of several new environmental programs that will 
have required changes in fuel quality by 2022, including the 30 ppm average gasoline sulfur 
standard, the 15 ppm cap standards on highway and nonroad diesel fuel, the Mobile Source Air 
Toxics (MSAT) 0.62 volume percent benzene standard.  Although there may still be a small 
amount high sulfur diesel fuel, we assumed that all distillate fuel would be ultra low sulfur in 
compliance with the 15 ppm cap standard.  We modeled the implementation of the 2005 Energy 
bill, which by rescinding the RFG oxygenate standard, resulted in the discontinued use of 
MTBE, and a large increase in the amount of ethanol blended into reformulated gasoline.  We 
modeled 13.2 billion gallons of ethanol in the gasoline pool (starch ethanol, cellulosic ethanol 
and sugar ethanol) and 0.3 billion gallons of biodiesel and renewable diesel fuel in the diesel 
pool for 2022, which is the “business-as-usual” volume as projected by AEO 2007.  However, 
we assessed the growth in energy demand using AEO 2008 which modeled the EISA Corporate 
Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) standards in the reference case because it will be phasing-in in 
parallel with the phase-in of the RFS2.  For the reference case, the refinery model blended the 
ethanol as E10 as the refinery model did not find it economical to blend any ethanol as E85 
(Although the refinery modeling did not capture today’s small volume of E85 in the reference 
case, not capturing this volume does not appreciably impact the results of the refinery 
modeling.).  
 
4.4.1.3 Control Case 
 
 The third step, or the control case, involved the modeling of the 34 billion gallons of 
ethanol and 1 billion gallons of biodiesel and renewable diesel to comply with the RFS 
requirements in 2022 when the proposed renewable fuels program is fully phased-in.  The cost 
and other implications of this fully phased-in control case are compared to the reference case to 
assess the cost of the program.  We also modeled two other cases which served as sensitivities to 
our primary control case.  The first is a 100 percent E10 case which modeled the saturation of the 
gasoline pool with 10 percent ethanol, but did not require additional volumes of ethanol that 
would force the use of E85.  The second case required the same volumes of renewable fuels as 
555 
our primary control case, except that ethanol was allowed to be blended at 20 percent.  We ran 
these sensitivity cases to isolate aspects of the primary control case.  We ran the E10 case to 
isolate the effects of E10 blending from that of E85 on gasoline fuel properties and costs.  We 
ran the mid-ethanol blend sensitivity case to assess what might happen to gasoline fuel properties 
and costs if a waiver were to be granted for mid-ethanol blends as some have suggested.  These 
cases are summarized below at the end of this section. 
 
The principal change in renewable fuel volumes modeled, relative to the reference case, 
was a large increase in ethanol blended into gasoline.  Table XX below summarizes the volume 
of biofuels estimated to be used in the year 2022 for the reference case and the control case. 
 
Table 4.4-2. 
Summary of Reference and Control Case Volumes in 2022 
(billion gallons) 
 Reference Case Control Case Difference 
Corn Ethanol 12.3 15 2.7 
Cellulosic Ethanol 0.2 16 15.8 
Imported Ethanol 0.4 3.1 0.27 
Biodiesel 0.27 0.70 0.43 
Renewable Diesel 0 0.19 0.19 
Total 13.5 36 22.5 
 
 The gasoline and diesel fuel product energy output for each control and sensitivity case 
modeled was maintained the same as that for the reference case.  Maintaining constant energy 
output assumes that vehicle miles traveled would remain the same between the various cases 
despite any change in gasoline and diesel fuel prices caused by the use of renewable fuels.  In 
reality the increased use of renewable fuels may result in changes to fuel prices to consumers, 
either directly as estimated in this section, or indirectly by affecting world oil prices as discussed 
in Section XX.  However, our analysis was conducted in parallel without the ability to input the 
results of the other analysis.  Furthermore, it is difficult to predict the impacts on fuel prices to 
consumers, especially in light of the federal tax subsidies which we accounted for in our 
analysis, and the many and diverse state tax subsidies which we did not attempt to account for.  
Maintaining constant fuel product energy output captures the capital cost differences between the 
cases.  Table 4.4-3 below summarizes the volumes of gasoline and diesel fuel used for the 
reference case, the primary control case and two sensitivity cases.WWWWWWWW  
  
                                                 
WWWWWWWW
  The refinery modeling was run assuming about 20 billion gallons more gasoline demand and 8 billion 
gallons more diesel fuel demand than what AEO 2008 projects for the year 2022.  This probably had only a very 
minor impact on the relative costs of the control cases compared to the reference case because the relative volume 
differences between the cases (considering the additions of renewable fuels) were modeled as intended.  The actual 
AEO 2008 gasoline and diesel fuel volumes were used as the basis to estimate the per-gallon costs. 
556 
Table 4.4-3. 
Volumes of Gasoline and Diesel Fuel Used in Refinery Modeling 
(Billion Gallons/yr) 
 Reference 
Case 
Primary 
Control Case 
Sensitivity Cases 
 13.2 Bgals 
Ethanol as 
E10 
35 Bgals of 
E10 & E85 
E10 35 Bgals of 
E10, E20 
& E85  
Gasoline 
Volume 
(Gasoline and 
Ethanol) 
169.3 176.7 171.4 176.7 
Diesel Volume 
(Diesel Only) 
69.3 68.5 68.5 68.5 
 
  All the other environmental and ASTM fuel quality constraints modeled in the reference 
case described above are assumed to apply to the control case as well.  The reference and control 
cases where modeled assuming that ethanol CG blends are entitled to the current 1.0 psi RVP 
waiver during the summer (i.e., for all 9.0 RVP and low RVP control programs) so as to assess 
the impact on summertime butane removal.  The crude oil and product prices for the control case 
were the same as the reference case.  The capital investments made for the reference case are not 
assumed to be sunk when the refinery model is assessing the economics for capital investments 
for the various control cases.  Thus, the refinery model is free to optimize the capital investments 
made for each control case incremental to the base case.  The control cases are run with capital 
costs evaluated at a 15 percent rate of return on investment (ROI) after taxes, but are then 
adjusted post-modeling to a 7 percent ROI before taxes. 
 
4.4.1.4 Ethanol Blending and Prices 
 
 A special procedure was set up in the refinery model to capture the costs of blending 
ethanol.  Because ethanol is primarily produced in the Midwest, but distributed to the final 
terminals where it is blended with the gasoline (or gasoline blendstock for blending with 
ethanol), hypothetical terminals were set up in each PADD within the refinery model which 
would receive the shipped ethanol as well as the gasoline blendstock for blending with ethanol 
(also referred to as conventional blendstock for oxygenate blending (CBOB) for conventional 
gasoline and reformulated blendstock for oxygenate blending (RBOB) for RFG and CARFG).  
The gasoline blendstock either comes from the same PADD where the terminal is located, or 
transferred from a different PADD.  This refinery modeling technique helps to more correctly 
estimate the distribution costs for both the ethanol and the gasoline.  The refinery model assessed 
ethanol’s use in each PADD based on its price relative to CG and RFG, which is based on its 
production cost and distribution costs, and its blending economics.  For the base case we 
assumed that ethanol would be splash blended into gasoline.  But by 2022 we expect that most, if 
not all, of the ethanol will be octane match-blended for blending up E10. 
 
 The price of ethanol used in the reference case, the primary control case and the 
sensitivity cases was based on the 2004 yearly average price spread between regular 
557 
conventional gasoline sold into the spot market in Houston and ethanol sold on the spot market 
on Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT).  This was used to determine a Midwest ethanol production 
price.  To derive ethanol prices for all other PADDs outside the Midwest, the Midwest ethanol 
production price was then adjusted for transportation costs to deliver ethanol from the Midwest 
to end use terminals (see Section 4.2 for additional details).  This assumes that the Midwest 
ethanol market will continue to set the price for ethanol – a reasonable assumption considering 
the significant amount of corn and other biomass available in the Midwest.  The sales prices 
assigned to ethanol are summarized in Table 4.4-4. 
 
Table 4.4-4.  Ethanol Prices used in Refinery Modeling 
 PADD 1 PADD 2 PADD 3 PADD 
4/5 CA 
excl. 
California 
Summer 159.9 153.3 163.2 168.3 168.5 
Winter 152.5 145.9 155.8 160.9 161.1 
 
 After the refinery modeling was completed, the ethanol prices and the costs for each case 
were adjusted to reflect the ethanol production and distribution costs described above in Sections 
4.1 and 4.2.  The ethanol production cost is the volume-weighted average for ethanol sourced 
from corn, cellulose and imports.  The combined ethanol production cost and combined biodiesel 
and renewable diesel costs for 2022 for the reference crude oil price and the high crude oil price 
scenarios are shown in Table 4.4-5.  The biodiesel and renewable diesel fuel production costs are 
principally comprised of the feedstock costs from the FASOM agricultural model, and this model 
estimated lower feedstock costs at the higher crude oil price.  While this outcome initially seems 
unlikely, it could be possible based on changes in production levels of some agricultural 
products, so we opted to use the FASOM feedstock costs and the lower production costs at the 
higher crude oil price.  
 
Table 4.4-5. 
Average Production Cost for Ethanol, Biodiesel and Renewable Diesel Fuel 
Crude Oil Price $53/bbl $92/bbl  
 Production 
Cost (c/gal) 
Production 
Cost (c/gal) 
Volumetric 
Fraction 
Corn Ethanol 147 154 0.51 
Cellulosic Ethanol 138 143 0.38 
Imported Ethanol 169 171 0.10 
Volume Weighted Cost 143 148 1.00 
    
Biodiesel 270 268 0.69 
Renewable Diesel Fuel 210 208 0.31 
Volume Weighted Cost 251 249 1.00 
 
 The combined ethanol production and distribution costs and the biodiesel and renewable 
diesel production and distribution costs are summarized below in Table 4.4-6.   We provided two 
sets of costs which represent the projected costs at the $53/bbl crude oil price and at the $92/bbl 
crude oil price.   
558 
 
Table 4.4-6.  Ethanol Prices used in the Cost Analysis Post-Refinery Modeling 
 Ethanol Costs Biodiesel Renewable 
Diesel 
Region PADD 1 PADD 2 PADD 3 PADD 4/5 
excl. CA 
CA U.S. U.S. 
 $53/bbl Crude Oil Price 
Production 
Cost 
143 143 143 143 143 270 210 
Distribution 
Cost 
19.4 12.1 17.5 23.6 23.4 18.2 5.1 
Total Cost 162.4 155.1 160.5 166.6 166.4 288.2 215.1 
 $92/bbl Crude Oil Price 
Production 
Cost 
148 148 148 148 148 268 208 
Distribution 
Cost 
21.3 13.3 19.3 26.0 25.7 20 5.6 
Total Cost 169.3 161.3 167.3 174 173.7 288.0 213.6 
 
 The ethanol production and distribution costs summarized in Table 4.4-6 are different in 
value compared to the ethanol prices used in the refinery modeling summarized above in Table 
4.4-4.  To capture the social costs of the RFS 2 program, we adjusted the initial costs of the 
refinery modeling cost analysis using the ethanol production and distribution costs.  This cost 
adjustment was made by multiplying the difference in ethanol price between Tables 4.4-6 and 
4.4-4 by the difference in ethanol volume modeled between the control case and the reference 
case. 
 
 We also estimated the costs of the RFS 2 program taking into account the consumption 
subsidies for corn ethanol, cellulosic ethanol, biodiesel and renewable diesel fuel.  While these 
subsidies conceal large portions of the program costs, their economic effects deserve to be 
understood.   
 
4.4.1.5 E85 Blending and Prices 
 
 We conducted the refinery modeling assuming that E85 will be blended differently in the 
future compared to how it is blended today.  Today E85 is blended at 85 percent by volume in 
the summer and at 70 percent by volume in the winter.  Ethanol must be blended at less than 85 
percent in the winter because of ethanol’s low blending Reid Vapor Pressure (RVP).  Unlike 
when ethanol is blended at 10 percent and causes a large vapor pressure increase, when ethanol 
is blended at 85 percent it blends much closer to its very low neat blending RVP of 2.2.  When 
ethanol is blended with gasoline at the terminal, the available gasoline blendstock must be used.  
This blendstock is either a conventional blendstock for oxygenate blending (CBOB) or 
reformulated blendstock for oxygenate blending (RBOB) so that when this gasoline-like material 
blended with ethanol at 10 percent, the final blend complies with the local gasoline regulations.  
For example, reformulated gasoline (RFG) must comply with the hydrocarbon standard of the 
RFG program and therefore RFG tends to have an RVP of 6.8, and the RBOB that is blended 
559 
with ethanol has an RVP of about 5.8.  When this 5.8 RVP RBOB is blended with ethanol to 
make E85, its final RVP is estimated to be 5.05.  However, the RVP minimum specified in the 
E85 ASTM standard shows the summertime lower limit of E85 is 5.5, thus, blending RBOB with 
85 percent ethanol would not comply with the ASTM lower RVP standard.  Table 4.4-7 
summarizes ethanol’s blending RVP, gasoline’s RVP and the final blend RVP for summertime 
RFG and CG gasoline, and compares the blends RVP values to that of the E85 ASTM RVP 
standards.   
 
Table 4.4-7.  Comparison of E85 RVP levels to the ASTM RVP Standard 
 Summer E85 Winter E70 
Gasoline 
RVPa 
CG  10.0 RFG  & low 
RVP 6.8 
ASTM Std CG/RFG 
14 
ASTM Std 
Gasoline 
Blendstock 
RVP 
9.0 5.8  13  
Ethanol 
Blending 
RVP 
4.9 4.9 - 6.5  
Blend 
RVP 
5.67 5.05 5.5 8.5 9.5 
a Summertime CG is allowed a 1 psi waiver for blending with ethanol, however, RFG and some  
low RVP areas and wintertime CG/RFG do not receive 1 psi waivers. 
 
 Table 4.4-7 shows that summertime RFG and wintertime gasoline cannot meet the 
ASTM RVP minimum standards based on blending ethanol with the locally available gasoline 
blendstock for blending up E10.  For this reason, we ran the refinery model assuming that all 
E85 will also be blended with some butanes or pentanes (whichever is available from the nearest 
refineries) to bring E85 up to the maximum ASTM RVP standard, in addition to the CBOB or 
RBOB being supplied to the local area.  The maximum ASTM E85 RVP standard is 8.5 in the 
summertime and 12.0 in the wintertime.   
 
 E85 is expected to be priced lower in the marketplace than E10 and even less relative to 
gasoline (E0) because of E85’s lower energy density.  E85 contains about 77,900 BTUs per 
gallon compared to E10 which contains about 111,300 BTUs per gallon.  Thus, when consumers 
consider refueling their vehicle using E85, they will bypass using it unless if it is priced at parity 
with gasoline on an energy basis.  Parity pricing means that E85 would have to be priced 25 
percent lower than E10.  Assuming that E85 is priced 25 percent lower than E10 at retail to 
account for the energy content differences, the pricing disparity between ethanol and gasoline is 
even greater at the terminal.  Table 4.4-8 summarizes the pricing of E85 at retail all the way back 
to the terminal where ethanol is usually blended into gasoline blendstock to create the E85.  
Retail markup averages about 10 cents per gallon.  Federal and state taxes average 46 cents per 
gallon (although this varies significantly by state), and transportation from the terminal to retail 
averages 4 cents per gallon.  Thus, if E10 gasoline is priced 163 cents per gallon at the terminal, 
it would be priced at 223 cents per gallon at retail.  Based on E85’s 25 percent lower energy 
density, E85 would have to be priced at 167 cents per gallon at retail to reflect its lower energy 
density.  Using the same terminal to retail costs/taxes, E85 would be priced at 107 cents per 
560 
gallon at the terminal.  All this is shown in Table 4.4-8.  The bottom row of the table shows what 
ethanol (E100) would have to be price at for terminals to breakeven using ethanol in E85 (this 
assumes that E85’s gasoline blendstock is priced the same as E10 at the terminal).  Based on 
ethanol’s energy content alone, ethanol would have to be discounted significantly compared to 
gasoline for refiners to find it cost-effective to use. 
 
Table 4.4-8.  E85 Pricing at Retail and at Terminals (cents per gallon) 
 Price at 
Retail 
Retail 
Markup 
Average 
Federal and 
State Taxes 
Transportation 
terminal to 
retail 
Terminal 
Price 
Gasoline E10 223 10 46 4 163 
E85 167 10 46 4 107 
Ethanol 
Breakeven 
Price 
- - - - 97 
 
 In addition to this effect of energy equivalency, Section 1.7 above outlines the difficulty 
of using all this E85 because of the relatively low number of fuel flexible vehicles (FFVs) that 
will be available to consume the fuel.  The relatively low number of FFVs means that the 
refueling rate of these vehicles will have to be very high.  In the year 2022, we estimated in 
Section 1.7 that FFVs will have to refuel 74 percent of the time to use the volume of ethanol 
required by the RFS2 standard.  This E85 refueling level is even more severe considering that 
that it is unlikely that every service station would make the capital investments to make E85 
available for sale.  In Section 4.2, we estimate that one out of very 4 service stations will carry 
E85.  Thus, E85 may have to be priced even lower than its fuel economy-adjusted price to entice 
FFV owners to refuel at a station carrying E85 .  To estimate the marginal lower price at which 
FFV owners would refuel at this high rate, we looked to an analysis based on a willingness to 
pay survey conducted by David Greene of the Oak Ridge National Laboratory.  The summary of 
this analysis is depicted in the Figure 4.4-1.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
561 
Figure 4.4-1 
 
 Alternative Fuel Market Share as a Function of Fuel Availability and 
Price Advantage (David L. Greene, 1997, Figure 6)
Re
fu
e
lin
g 
fre
qu
e
n
cy
 g
iv
en
 
“
re
as
on
ab
le
 a
cc
es
s”
Percent of stations offering E85 in areas of the 
country with “reasonable access”, i.e., 25%
$0.21/gal Price Advantage (1997$)X
Re
fu
e
lin
g 
fre
qu
e
n
cy
 g
iv
en
 
“
re
as
on
ab
le
 a
cc
es
s”
 
 
 
 Based on our estimates that E85 would have to be purchased 74 percent of the time and 
that one out of every four service stations would carry E85, then Figure 4.4-1 estimates that E85 
would have to be priced 21 cents per gallon lower than gasoline to match this availability and 
refueling scenario.  This cost estimate is based in 1997 dollars. Adjusting this cost estimate to 
2006 dollars increases this estimate to 26 cents per gallon.XXXXXXXX  
 
 There is one more factor which we believe could affect the price of E85.  FFV owners 
who refuel on E85 will drive fewer miles before having to refuel compared to operating their 
vehicle on gasoline.  The FFV drivers will therefore spend more time refueling their vehicle.  As 
described above, FFV owners will drive 25 percent fewer miles per gallon and thus, will have to 
spend 25 percent more time refueling.  We estimate that each refueling event requires 6 minutes 
of time, and that a person’s time is worth an average of 30 dollars per hour.  Finally we estimated 
that a typical refueling volume for a refueling event is 15 gallons.  Using these assumptions, the 
increased refueling frequency is costing the average FFV owner 5 cents per gallon more to use 
E85.  To account for this additional cost, E85 would have to be priced 5 cents per gallon lower to 
make refueling FFVs a breakeven proposition.  For our refinery modeling work, we reduced the 
refiner purchase price of E85 used in our refinery modeling analysis by this additional 5 cents 
per gallon. 
                                                 
XXXXXXXX
  If E85 is used to comply with the RFS2 standard as envisioned, and if E85 would have to be priced as low 
as we projected, refiners would probably have to find a way to recoup their financial losses for using E85.  One way 
refiners could do that would be to price E10 gasoline somewhat higher to recoup the E85 financial loss.   Since we 
are solely interested in estimating the social cost of the RFS2 program, we did not make this sort of adjustment to 
the price of E10. 
562 
 
 Table 4.4-9 summarizes the E85 refinery purchase prices at terminals by PADD used in 
our refinery modeling work.  These prices represent the total of the energy content , the price 
adjustment for reduced fuel availability and the cost for increased refueling events.  The E85 
prices should be compared to regular grade gasoline because the FFVs generally only require 
regular grade gasoline when operated on gasoline. 
 
Table 4.4-9.  Wholesale E85 Prices used within the Refinery Model 
  E85 used in Conventional 
Gasoline Areas (c/gal) 
E85 used in Reformulated 
Gasoline Areas (c/gal) 
PADD 1 Summer 76 81 
 Winter 67 72 
PADD 2 Summer 75 80 
 Winter 66 71 
PADD 3 Summer 74 79 
 Winter 65 70 
PADDs 4/5 Summer 84 80 
 Winter 75 81 
CA Summer - 86 
 Winter - 77 
 
 While we used these E85 prices within the refinery model, they don’t necessarily 
represent the societal costs for using E85.  The pricing to reflect reduced fuel availability, in 
particular, contains a significant amount of transfer payments from the refining industry to 
consumers and other entities, and these transfer payments do not represent the true cost for using 
E85.YYYYYYYY   
 
 For estimating the program costs for using E85 (shown in Tables 4.4-12 and 4.4-13), we 
adjusted E85 price back up to 5 cents per gallon less than the gasoline price for each case (the 
additional time spent refueling is a true cost).  We then used the relative energy density of the 
E85 to that of gasoline as reported by the refinery model (see energy content values in Table 4.4-
20) to account for the energy density costs for using E85.  We preferred the energy content price 
cost made by the refinery model to our preliminary E85 energy content price adjustments 
because the refinery model can also account for changes in gasoline energy content made when 
accommodating the blending of ethanol.  We are not assuming that the price adjustment that we 
made to account for lower E85 availability account for any additional social cost.  If the FFV 
driver would have to drive out of his way from time-to-time to find the E85, then there would be 
some extra cost associated with the lower availability.  But most of the time FFV drivers would 
likely learn where to find E85 along the routes that they normally frequent, thus, no additional 
effort and cost would be incurred for refueling on E85.  Thus, we assume that the lower E85 
price to account for reduced E85 availability is purely a transfer payment from the refiner to the 
FFV owner.   
 
                                                 
YYYYYYYY
  The possibility for this potentially large transfer payment associated with using ethanol in E85 would 
cause refiners to encourage the development of a cellulosic diesel fuel industry to avoid this E85 issue.  
563 
4.4.1.6 Other Adjustments to the Costs 
 
 As discussed above, we needed to adjust the estimated program costs from costs based on 
$51/barrel crude oil, the crude oil price at which the refinery model was run, to $53/bbl and 
$92/bbl, the crude oil costs that served as the basis for our cost analysis.  To make these 
adjustments we estimated the wholesale gasoline and diesel fuel prices (which are the surrogate 
for the gasoline and diesel fuel production costs) at the adjusted crude oil price and compared 
these adjusted wholesale gasoline and diesel fuel adjusted prices to the baseline wholesale 
gasoline and diesel fuel prices.  The baseline wholesale gasoline and diesel fuel prices, based on 
an average $51/bbl crude oil price, are summarized in Table 4.4-1.  To adjust these wholesale 
prices, we needed to estimate how the price of crude oil will affect them.  We conducted a 
regression between the annual average spot price of price of Western Texas Intermediate crude 
oil and the annual average retail gasoline and diesel fuel prices for the years 2002 through 2006.  
This regression is reflected in Table 4.4-10 as Gasoline Retail Price = Crude Oil Price multiplied 
times 2.95 plus 65.7, or Gasoline Retail Price = Crude Oil Price x “X” + “Y.”  The slope “X” 
and intercept “Y” for this equation are summarized in Table 4.4-10.  The X and Y factors for 
diesel fuel are also summarized in Table 4.4-10 as well.  However, we needed to estimate the 
wholesale prices instead of the retail prices, so we adjusted the equations to estimate the 
wholesale price using the Jacob’s wholesale prices as the calibrating values.  The regression, 
including the adjustment values to derive the wholesale prices equations are summarized in 
Table 4.4-10. 
 
Table 4.4-10. 
Equations Used for Estimating Wholesale Average Gasoline and Diesel Fuel Prices* 
 Equation for Retail Prices Equation for Wholesale Prices 
 X Y X Adjusted Y 
Gasoline 2.95 65.7 2.95 +7.7 
Diesel Fuel 3.46 41.5 3.46 -17.0 
* The equation is used by multiplying the crude oil price ($/bbl) times the X and then adding Y to that 
product resulting in a gasoline or diesel fuel cost expressed in cents per gallon. 
 
  
 The equations were used to estimate the average wholesale gasoline and diesel fuel 
prices.  These average wholesale gasoline and diesel fuel prices are summarized in Table 4.4-11. 
 
Table 4.4-11 
Average Gasoline and Diesel Fuel Wholesale Prices by Crude Oil Price 
(c/gal) 
Crude Oil Price Gasoline Diesel Fuel 
51 158 149 
53 164 157 
92 279 313 
 
 Table 4.4-11 shows the nationwide average costs, but our cost analysis was conducted on 
a PADD basis, thus, it was necessary to estimate revised gasoline and diesel fuel wholesale 
prices in each PADD.  This was accomplished by generating a ratio of the average wholesale 
564 
gasoline and diesel fuel prices at the higher crude oil price relative to the average wholesale and 
applying this ratio to the gasoline price in each PADD.  It is important to note gasoline and diesel 
fuel pricing changes captured by our crude oil/gasoline and diesel fuel price relationship price 
model.  Prior to 2005, diesel fuel was priced about the same as gasoline (+/- 5 cents per gallon on 
a yearly average).  In 2005 and 2006, when crude oil was priced higher, diesel fuel was priced 13 
cents per gallon higher than gasoline.  Thus, the equation picks up this relatively higher diesel 
fuel price at the higher crude oil prices in 2005 and 2006 and projects an even greater relative 
higher price for diesel fuel at our high crude oil price of $92/bbl.  A higher relative diesel fuel 
price at higher crude oil prices in the future may be appropriate for a couple reasons.  The first 
reason is that from January to mid-October 2008, when crude oil prices were very high, diesel 
fuel averaged 51 cents per gallon higher than gasoline.  While we cannot say for certain that this 
association would always hold true at higher crude oil prices, we do have a possible explanation 
for a possible relationship here.  Higher crude oil prices are likely to affect gasoline demand 
more than diesel fuel as more of the trips made by gasoline powered light-duty vehicles are 
discretionary.  For example, people may readily change their vacations plans at higher crude oil 
prices, while diesel fuel used to power trucks that bring food to markets would be expected to 
continue.  Thus, as crude oil prices increase, gasoline consumption is more elastic resulting in 
greater reductions in gasoline demand compared to diesel fuel.  We therefore believe that higher 
crude oil prices will tend towards relatively higher diesel fuel prices compared to gasoline. 
 
 For other reasons, diesel fuel prices may trend higher relative to gasoline prices looking 
toward the future.  Because EISA required that corporate average feul economy (CAFE) 
standards be increased for light duty motor vehicles, over time light duty vehicles, which are 
almost exclusively gasoline powered, will become more fuel efficient.  This will cause gasoline 
demand to decrease, while diesel demand is projected to continue to increase.  A second reason 
why refinery gasoline production will decrease is that most of the renewable fuel volume being 
produced to comply with the RFS is ethanol, and it will displace gasoline.  This will contribute to 
the over supply of gasoline and the relative undersupply of diesel fuel, thus causing gasoline 
prices to be soft relative to diesel fuel prices.  
  
Another adjustment we made to the costs directly estimated by the LP refinery cost 
model was to add a cost for distributing gasoline.  The refinery cost model assigned a low 
distribution costs to gasoline for moving the gasoline from the refinery to the terminal.  We 
estimate that this distribution cost should be about 4 cents per gallon, but the refinery model only 
assigned 2.5 cents per gallon for this.  Thus, we credited ethanol 1.5 cents per gallon for each 
gasoline-equivalent gallon of ethanol blended into each PADD’s gasoline, since this roughly 
corresponded to the volume of gasoline displaced by the ethanol. 
 
The assumption used throughout this proposed rulemaking is that ethanol’s fuel economy 
is directly proportional to its energy density and its concentration in the fuel.  Since the 
volumetric energy content of ethanol is approximately 33 percent less than conventional 
gasoline, we assumed this loss in fuel economy proportional to its concentration in the fuel.  
Some studies have suggested, however, that ethanol’s decrease in fuel economy may be less than 
its relative decrease in volumetric energy content of the fuel.  In other words, there is less of a 
fuel consumption decrease than what the lower energy density of ethanol would suggest.  
565 
However, for a variety of reasons, we have reason to question the data from these studies.  We 
therefore intend to investigate this issue more for the final rule as new data become available. 
 
4.4.2  Refinery Modeling Results 
  
 In this subsection, we summarize the results of the three refinery modeling cases that we 
conducted, the primary control case, and the sensitivity cases, which include the E10 case and 
the mid-ethanol blend case.  Additional detail concerning the refinery modeling results is 
contained in Jacob’s refinery modeling report contained in the docket. 
 
4.4.2.1 Control Case 
 
 Tables 4.4-12 and 4.4-13 summarize the costs for the control case excluding federal 
ethanol, biodiesel and renewable diesel tax subsidies with crude oil priced at $53/bbl and 
$92/bbl, respectively.  The costs are reported by different cost components as well as aggregated 
total and per-gallon costs.ZZZZZZZZ  This estimate of costs reflects the changes in gasoline that are 
occurring with the expanded use of ethanol, biodiesel and renewable diesel.  The operating costs 
include the labor, utility and other operating costs and are a direct output from the refinery 
model.  These costs are adjusted to reflect ethanol’s production cost plus distribution costs 
instead of the ethanol prices used in the refinery cost model.  The fixed costs are 3 percent of the 
reduced capital costs.  The costs associated with lower energy density gasoline are accounted for 
using the fractional change in energy density shown in Table 4.4-20, multiplied times the 
wholesale price of gasoline.  By excluding the federal ethanol, biodiesel and renewable diesel 
fuel consumption subsidies, we avoid the transfer payments caused by these subsidies that would 
hide a portion of the program’s costs.  The variable operating costs line item in Table 4.4-12 and 
4.4-13 capture several different aspects of this category of costs.  In addition to ethanol’s 
blending costs captured by the refinery model, this category of costs captures ethanol’s higher 
production and distribution cost.  At $53 per barrel crude oil costs, ethanol’s production and 
distribution costs are higher than the gasoline wholesale cost.  Another item of the variable cost 
is the 5 cents per gallon refueling costs.  Finally, this category of costs captures the 5 cents per 
E85 gallon cost which covers the cost of producing fuel flexible vehicles (FFVs) instead of non-
FFVs.     
 
                                                 
 
ZZZZZZZZ
 EPA typically assesses social benefits and costs of a rulemaking.  However, this analysis is more limited in 
its scope by sometimes examining the marginal production cost and the average production cost of ethanol and 
gasoline.  
566 
Table 4.4-12. 
Summary of Control Case Costs (without Tax Subsidies)  
(million dollars/year and c/gal, except as noted; 2006 dollars, 7% ROI before taxes, $53/bbl crude oil price) 
 
Cost to Gasoline Cost to Diesel Fuel  
Refinery Capital Costs ($Billion) -7.89 - 
Amortized Refinery Capital Costs ($MM/yr) -842 - 
Fixed Operating Cost ($MM/yr) -232 - 
Variable Operating Cost ($MM/yr) 7,690 590 
Lower Energy Density ($MM/yr) 10,340 187 
Total Cost ($MM/yr) 16,960 777 
Amortized Refinery Capital Costs (c/gal) -0.48 - 
Fixed Operating Cost (c/gal) -0.13 - 
Variable Operating Cost (c/gal) 5.66 0.66 
Lower Energy Density (c/gal) 5.85 0.54 
Total Cost Excluding Subsidies (c/gal) 10.91 1.20 
 
 
Table 4.4-13. 
Summary of Control Case Costs (without Tax Subsidies)  
(million dollars/year and c/gal, except as noted; 2006 dollars, 7% ROI before taxes, $92/bbl crude oil price) 
 
Cost to Gasoline Cost to Diesel Fuel  
Amortized Refinery Capital Costs ($MM/yr) -842 - 
Fixed Operating Cost ($MM/yr) -232 - 
Variable Operating Cost ($MM/yr) -12,410 -419 
Lower Energy Density ($MM/yr) 17,598 373 
Total Cost ($MM/yr) 4,120 -46 
Refinery Capital Costs (c/gal) -0.48 - 
Fixed Operating Cost (c/gal) -0.13 - 
Variable Operating Cost (c/gal) -6.70 -1.15 
Lower Energy Density (c/gal) 9.95 1.08 
Total Cost Excluding Subsidies (c/gal) 2.65 -0.07 
 
 Our analysis shows that when considering all the costs associated with these fuel changes 
resulting from the expanded use of ethanol, that these various possible gasoline use scenarios 
will cost the U.S. nearly $17 billion per year in the year 2022 when crude oil is priced at $53 per 
barrel.  Expressed as per-gallon costs, these fuel changes would cost the U.S. 10.91 cents per 
gallon of gasoline.  The addition of biodiesel and renewable diesel fuel is estimated to cost about 
$780 million per year in the year 2022, or cost 1.20 cents per gallon.   
 
 At $92 per barrel crude oil, the addition of the ethanol is estimated to cost 4.1 billion per 
year in 2022, and cost 2.65 cents per gallon.  The addition of biodiesel and renewable diesel fuel 
is estimated to reduce the cost of diesel fuel by 46 million dollars in 2022, and reduce the per-
gallon cost of diesel fuel by 0.07 cents per gallon. 
 
 Tables 4.4-12 and 4.4-13 express the total and per-gallon gasoline costs for the RFS case 
with the federal ethanol, biodiesel and renewable diesel subsidies included with crude oil priced 
at $53/bbl and $92/bbl, respectively.  The federal tax subsidy is 45 cents per gallon for each 
gallon of new corn-based ethanol blended into gasoline and 101 cents per gallon for each gallon 
of cellulosic ethanol.  Imported ethanol is also assumed to receive the 45 cents per gallon starch 
567 
ethanol subsidy, although we assume that a greater volume of imported ethanol would be used 
than that which can flow through the Caribbean Basin, tariff free.  Thus the 51 cents per gallon 
tariff would apply to that incremental volume of imported ethanol above the allowable Caribbean 
Basin initiative volume.  We estimate that imported ethanol would earn 23 cents per gallon net 
subsidy.  The biodiesel subsidy is 100 cents per gallon, and the renewable diesel fuel subsidy is 
50 cents per gallon.AAAAAAAAA  The cost adjustment is estimated by multiplying the subsidy 
times the volume of new ethanol, biodiesel and renewable diesel estimated to be used.   
 
Table 4.4-14. 
Estimated Control Case Costs (Reflecting Tax Subsidies) 
(million dollars/year and cents/gallon; 2004 dollars, 7% ROI before taxes, $53/bbl crude oil price) 
 Cost to Gasoline Cost to Diesel Fuel 
Total Cost ($MM/yr) 16,957 777 
Federal Subsidy ($MM/yr) -17,699 -525 
Revised Total Cost ($MM/yr) -742 252 
Per-Gallon Cost Excluding Subsidies (c/gal) 10.91 1.20 
Federal Subsidy (c/gal) -11.39 -0.81 
Total Cost Including Subsidies (c/gal) -0.48 0.39 
 
Table 4.4-15. 
Estimated Control Case Costs (Reflecting Tax Subsidies) 
(million dollars/year and cents/gallon; 2004 dollars, 7% ROI before taxes, $92/bbl crude oil price) 
 
Cost to Gasoline Cost to Diesel Fuel 
Total Cost ($MM/yr) 4,116 -46 
Federal Subsidy ($MM/yr) -17,699 -535 
Revised Total Cost ($MM/yr) -13,583 -571 
Per-Gallon Cost Excluding Subsidies (c/gal) 2.65 -0.07 
Federal Subsidy (c/gal) -11.39 -0.81 
Total Cost Including Subsidies (c/gal) -8.74 -0.88 
 
 
 The cost including subsidies would represent gasoline and diesel fuel’s apparent cost as 
reflected to the fuel industry as a whole because the federal tax subsidies tends to transfer a 
portion of the actual costs.  Our analysis estimates that when the oil price is $53/bbl, the fuel 
industry will see a 0.48 cent per gallon decrease in the apparent cost of producing gasoline, and a 
0.39 increase in the apparent cost of producing diesel fuel.  At the higher oil price of $93/bbl, the 
apparent cost of producing gasoline is estimated to decrease by 8.7 cents per gallon, and the 
apparent cost of producing diesel fuel is expected to decrease by 0.88 cents per gallon.  These 
costs would also represent the apparent cost to consumers “at the pump” if the full tax credit 
were passed along to the consumers.  However, it is possible that only a portion of the tax 
subsidy will be passed along to the consumer (historically, this has been the case).  Thus, the 
price impact at the pump may be somewhere between the values in Tables 4.4-10 and 4.4-11, 
and Tables 4.4-12 and 4.4-13.  However, consumers would also pay the full tax subsidy through 
higher taxes in addition to the values in Tables 4.4-12 and 4.4-13.   
 
                                                 
AAAAAAAAA
  The recent economic stimulus law passed by Congress extended the biodiesel and renewable diesel fuel 
subsidies, and it also increased the renewable diesel fuel subsidy to 100 cents per gallon.  However, the increase in 
renewable diesel fuel subsidy occurred too late to account for this change in our cost analysis.   
568 
 Table 4.4-14 summarizes the volumetric inputs to refineries in each PADD for this 
control case.  Because of the increased use of biofuels, petroleum inputs would be expected to 
decrease, and this is confirmed. 
 
Table 4.4-16. 
Summary of the Total and Incremental Volumetric Refinery Inputs by PADD 
(thousand barrels/day) 
Control Difference Control Difference Control Difference Control Difference Control Difference
Case from Ref Case Case from Ref Case Case from Ref Case Case from Ref Case Case from Ref Case
PADD Crude 1,525 0 3,317 -245 8,642 -458 1,726 -21 2,098 -39
GTL Naphtha 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
GTL Diesel 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
VGO HS 0 0 0 0 483 -139 0 0 4 -24
VGO LS 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
HS AR (A960) 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
LS AR (Alg) 200 -1 0 0 267 139 0 0 0 0
Normal Butane    31 5 61 6 112 0 38 1 40 0
Isobutane        14 4 22 0 44 -23 10 -4 14 -10
MTBE 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Ethanol - E10 360 14 237 46 180 85 82 27 163 -8
Ethanol - E20 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Ethanol - E85 475 475 174 174 370 370 67 67 118 118
Reformer Feed 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Methanol 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Natural Gas (FOE) 67 -12 145 4 557 -13 119 -3 175 2
Hydrogen (MSCF) 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Pentanes Plus 0 0 32 0 52 0 19 0 0 0
Import CBOB 10% 277 277 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Import CBOB 20% 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Import RBOB 10% 123 -77 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Import RBOB 20% 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Import Alkylate 46 30 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Import Raffinate 4 -44 0 0 0 0 4 4 46 0
Import Reformate 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Import FCC Naphtha 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Import Lt Naphtha 14 14 0 0 23 -7 0 0 1 0
Import Hvy Naph 0 0 0 0 42 0 0 0 0 0
Transfer Lt Naphtha 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 12 -12
Transfer Reformate 0 0 0 -5 0 0 0 0 0 0
Transfer Alkylate 60 0 6 3 0 0 0 0 60 0
Transfer FCC Naphtha 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Transfer Raffinate 0 0 4 2 0 0 0 0 60 0
Transfer RBOB 10% 662 -34 79 29 0 0 0 0 0 0
Transfer RBOB 20% 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Transfer CBOB 10% 1,300 2 421 -29 0 0 1 1 0 0
Transfer CBOB 20% 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Isooctane 2 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 35 7
Isooctene 1 -10 0 -2 0 0 0 0 0 0
PADD 1 PADD 2 PADD 4/5 CAPADD 3
 
 
 
 Table 4.4-16 shows that inputs of crude oil decreases substantially in most of the PADDs.  
In two of the PADDs, vacumn gas oil (VGO) inputs to refineries decreases, which is reasonable 
since VGO is a feedstock to fluidized catalytic cracker units, a large gasoline blendstock 
production unit within refineries. 
 
 Table 4.4-17 below summarizes the refinery output volumes and changes in refinery 
output volumes relative to the reference case by PADD.   
 
569 
Table 4.4-17. 
Summary of Total and Incremental Refinery Outputs by PADD 
(thousand barrels/day) 
Control Difference Control Difference Control Difference Control Difference Control Difference
Case from Ref Case Case from Ref Case Case from Ref Case Case from Ref Case Case from Ref Case
Propane 33 -1 54 -10 145 0 26 -2 58 0
Propylene 19 0 43 0 245 0 2 0 12 0
Normal Butane 0 0 0 -4 30 -16 0 0 0 0
Isobutane 0 0 0 0 0 0 4 4 14 6
PC Naphtha 16 0 40 0 433 0 0 0 0 0
PC Gasoil 0 0 496 -60 158 0 0 0 0 0
CG Reg 0 -73 0 -552 0 -1,176 0 -246 0 0
CG Prem 0 0 0 0 0 -2 0 -33 0 0
CG E10 Reg 1,916 436 1,667 495 1,069 928 671 220 115 3
CG E10 Prem 268 10 343 14 262 11 143 43 22 1
RFG E10 Reg 1,099 -322 273 -55 358 -105 0 0 1,218 -94
RFG E10 Prem 285 14 65 3 92 4 0 0 258 8
CG E20 Reg 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
RFG E20 Reg 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
E85 to CG 156 156 133 133 306 306 78 78 0 0
E85 to RFG 398 398 70 70 125 125 0 0 137 137
Transfer RBOB 10% 0 0 0 0 741 -5 0 0 0 0
Transfer RBOB 20% 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Transfer CBOB 10% 0 0 0 0 1,722 -27 0 0 0 0
Transfer CBOB 20% 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Jet/Kero A (450ppm) 27 0 115 0 1,363 0 380 0 300 0
X-Fer Diesel Rundown to 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
HSD Gr 76 (0.2%) 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
LSD Gr 74 (.05%) 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
ULSD (15 ppm) 565 13 648 -29 2,189 -34 515 4 0 0
CARB Diesel 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 354 -4
X-Fer C5's to Storage 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
1% Residual Fuel 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Residual Fuel 86 16 57 0 251 -21 151 5 68 -5
Slurry 31 -1 80 -9 158 0 0 0 30 0
Asphalt & Wax 143 0 210 0 158 0 5 0 44 0
Gasoil 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 10 0
Lubes 19 0 17 0 158 0 0 0 20 0
Benzene 11 0 11 0 51 0 0 0 0 0
Toluene 0 0 0 0 35 0 0 0 0 0
Xylenes 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0
Cumene 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Cyclohexane 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Transfer Raffinate 0 0 0 0 64 2 0 0 0 0
Transfer Alkylate 0 0 0 0 126 3 0 0 0 0
Transfer Reformate 0 0 0 0 0 -5 0 0 0 0
Transfer FCC naphtha 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Transfer Lt Naphtha 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 12 -12
Transfer Blendstock 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Sulfur (STons) 1 0 4 0 16 -1 2 0 4 0
Coke (STon) 1 -1 12 -2 65 -4 7 0 19 -1
PADD 1 PADD 2 PADD 4/5 CAPADD 3
 
 
 
 Table 4.4-18 summarizes the change in refinery unit capacities by PADD comparing the 
control case to the reference case.     
 
570 
Table 4.4-18. 
Change in Refinery Unit Capacities by PADD relative to the Reference Case  
(thousand barrels/day) 
Refinery Unit PADD 1 PADD 2 PADD 3 PADD 4/5 CA U.S.
Crude Tower 0 -421 -398 0 0 -818
Vacuum Tower 0 -188 -160 5 0 -343
Sats Gas Plant -29 0 -35 1 -4 -66
Unsats Gas Plant 0 -1 -53 0 -12 -66
FCC DeC5 Tower 0 0 0 0 0 0
FCC 0 0 -175 0 -63 -238
FCC Splitter 0 -6 -97 0 -20 -123
Hydrocracker 0 0 0 -3 0 -3
H-Oil Unit 0 0 0 0 0 0
Delayed Coker 0 0 -91 0 0 -91
Visbreaker 48 0 0 0 0 48
Thermal Naphtha Splitter 0 -4 -11 0 -1 -16
CRU Reformer 0 0 0 0 0 0
SRU Reformer 0 0 0 0 3 3
BTX Reformer 0 1 0 0 0 1
C4 Isomerization 0 0 0 0 -4 -4
C5/C6 Isomerization -1 0 0 0 0 -1
HF Alkylation 0 0 0 0 0 0
H2SO4 Alkylation -22 0 -51 -15 -26 -113
Dimersol 0 0 0 0 0 0
Cat Poly 9 0 0 0 0 9
Isooctane 0 0 0 0 0 0
DHT - Total 7 0 -93 3 0 -84
DHT 2nd RCT - Total 11 53 -69 -4 15 7
DHT Arom Saturation 0 0 0 0 0 0
NHT - Total Fd -16 0 0 -2 0 -17
CGH - Generic 2 -48 25 8 0 -13
CGH - Olefin Sat'n 0 0 0 0 0 0
FCCU Fd HDT 0 0 0 -34 60 26
LSR Splitter 0 16 0 0 0 16
LSR Bz Saturator 0 0 0 0 0 0
Reformate Saturator -9 0 -1 0 0 -9
Reformate Splitter -26 0 -2 0 0 -28
SDA 0 0 0 0 0 0
MTBE 0 0 0 0 0 0
TAME 0 0 0 0 0 0
Hydrogen Plant - Total MSCF 7 34 36 -19 20 77
Lube Unit 0 0 0 0 0 0
Sulfur Plant 0 0 -1,402 -56 -96 -1,553
Merox Jet 0 0 0 0 0 0
Merox Diesel 0 0 0 0 0 0
BTX Reformer - Tower feed 0 0 0 0 0 0
BTX Reformer - Extract feed 1 1 0 0 0 1
 
 
 
 Most of the capacity throughput changes are negative, reflecting the decreased processing 
of crude oil and vacuum gas oil and decreased downstream refining units as projected by the 
refinery model.  Of the negative throughput changes, the large reduced volume of the fluidized 
catalytic cracker unit is important.  As discussed above, the refinery model likely chose to 
decrease the fluidized catalytic cracker throughput to crack less heavy hydrocarbons to light 
hydrocarbons, producing less gasoline material to  offset the increased volume of ethanol.  
Another important decrease in refinery unit throughput is the alkylation unit.  Because the 
571 
alkylation unit is responsible for increasing octane, its decrease reflects the rebalancing by the 
refinery model to adjust for the large increase in the volume of high octane ethanol.  
 
 These changes in refinery unit throughputs are associated with changes in capital 
investments.  Table 4.4-19 summarizes the projected change in capital investments between the 
control case and the reference case.  This Table shows that incremental to the reference case, 
refiners are expected to reduce their capital investments by $7.9 billion compared to business as 
usual.  Most of the reduction occurs in PADDs 2 and 3 where large volumes of ethanol, and 
other gasoline blendstocks are expected to enter the gasoline pool.  Of course, this capital cost 
decrease is countered by the capital costs incurred to build new ethanol plants and to put into 
place the distribution system that the new ethanol requires (see Table 4.4-21 below). 
 
572 
Table 4.4-19. 
Change in Refinery Unit Investments by PADD (million dollars/year) 
Refinery Unit PADD 1 PADD 2 PADD 3 PADD 4/5 CA U.S.
Crude Tower 0 -995 -665 0 202 -1,660
Vacuum Tower 0 -527 -315 85 30 -756
Sats Gas Plant -112 0 -103 3 17 -249
Unsats Gas Plant 0 0 -260 0 0 -362
FCC DeC5 Tower 0 0 0 0 0 0
FCC 0 0 -1,280 0 0 -2,066
FCC Splitter 0 -6 -47 0 0 -69
Hydrocracker 0 0 0 -65 0 -65
H-Oil Unit 0 0 0 0 0 0
Delayed Coker 0 0 -1,261 0 0 -1,261
Visbreaker 170 0 0 0 0 170
Thermal Naphtha Splitter 0 -5 -4 0 3 -11
CRU Reformer 0 0 0 0 0 0
SRU Reformer 0 0 0 0 32 72
BTX Reformer 0 11 2 0 0 13
C4 Isomerization 0 0 0 0 14 -23
C5/C6 Isomerization -64 0 0 0 0 -64
HF Alkylation 0 0 0 0 0 0
H2SO4 Alkylation -372 0 -557 -227 10 -1,617
Dimersol 0 0 0 0 0 0
Cat Poly 72 0 0 0 0 72
Isooctane 0 0 0 0 0 0
DHT - Total 42 0 -689 17 32 -631
DHT 2nd RCT - Total 50 344 -313 -17 60 133
DHT Arom Saturation 0 0 0 0 0 0
NHT - Total Fd -70 0 0 -6 0 -76
CGH - Generic 8 -200 101 26 0 -64
CGH - Olefin Sat'n 0 0 0 0 0 0
FCCU Fd HDT -2 0 0 -349 60 443
LSR Splitter 0 7 0 0 8 7
LSR Bz Saturator 0 0 0 0 0 0
Reformate Saturator -39 0 -2 0 50 -41
Reformate Splitter -39 0 -1 0 150 -40
SDA 0 0 0 0 0 0
MTBE 0 0 0 0 0 0
TAME 0 0 0 0 0 0
Hydrogen Plant - Total MSCF 19 118 95 -49 27 255
Lube Unit 0 0 0 0 56 0
Sulfur Plant 0 0 -3 0 437 -4
Merox Jet 0 0 0 0 0 0
Merox Diesel 0 0 0 0 0 0
BTX Reformer - Tower feed 0 1 0 0 0 1
BTX Reformer - Extract feed 3 3 0 0 0 6
Total -334 -1,250 -5,304 -582 0 -7,887
 
 
 
 Table 4.4-19 essentially expresses the change in refinery capacity input shown in Table 
4.4-18, but expresses the changes in terms of dollars instead of thousands of barrels per day.  The 
total reduced capital investment is 7.89 billion dollars.  
  
 Table 4.4-20 summarizes the gasoline volume and qualities by different gasoline types 
for the control case, and also, for comparison, lists the same for the reference case.   
 
573 
Table 4.4-20. 
Gasoline Volume, Quality and Energy Density by Gasoline Type  
at the PADD Terminal 
RFG Ref Case Control Ref Case Control Ref Case Control Ref Case Control Ref Case Control Ref Case Control
Total ('000 BPD) 1,692 1,384 391 338 551 450 - - 1,562 1,476 4,197 3,649
Ethanol ('000 BPD) 171 140 39 34 56 45 - - 158 149 424 369
RVP (psi) 10.7 10.6 10.4 11.3 9.7 10.6 - - 9.5 9.4 10.1 10.2
Sulfur (ppm) 23 24 23 23 20 22 - - 9 10 17 18
Octane (R+M/2) 88.1 88.3 88.0 88.2 88.0 88.2 - - 87.6 87.7 87.9 88.0
Aromatics (vol%) 19.9 19.9 20.0 19.6 19.5 19.5 - - 21.3 21.7 20.4 20.6
Benzene (vol%) 0.55 0.58 0.58 0.56 0.51 0.48 - - 0.51 0.52 0.53 0.54
Olefins (vol%) 11.7 11.6 10.3 10.4 8.7 11.1 - - 5.7 5.7 8.9 9.0
Oxygen (wt%) 3.7 3.7 3.7 3.7 3.7 3.7 - - 3.7 3.7 3.7 3.7
E200 (vol%) 55.1 55.4 59.7 58.8 54.3 54.0 - - 57.7 57.4 56.4 56.4
E300 (vol%) 93.9 95.1 84.3 95.2 87.4 95.2 - - 86.2 86.2 89.3 91.5
Energy (MMBtu/Bbl) 4.954 4.948 4.920 4.905 4.983 4.961 - - 4.991 5.001 4.969 4.967
CG
Total ('000 BPD) 2,263 2,184 2,052 2,009 1,568 1,331 829 813 135 137 6,847 6,475
Ethanol ('000 BPD) 176 221 152 203 40 134 56 82 14 14 436 654
RVP (psi) 11.6 11.6 11.7 11.5 10.7 10.4 11.3 11.2 10.5 10.6 11.4 11.3
Sulfur (ppm) 24 24 23 24 24 22 27 28 25 26 24 24
Octane (R+M/2) 87.7 87.9 88.0 88.0 88.0 88.2 86.9 87.0 89.1 89.1 87.8 87.9
Aromatics (vol%) 24.2 22.4 24.4 22.5 27.2 22.3 19.4 17.3 28.4 28.5 24.4 21.9
Benzene (vol%) 0.61 0.53 0.64 0.52 0.59 0.50 1.16 1.04 0.60 0.56 0.68 0.58
Olefins (vol%) 13.9 14.7 11.1 11.0 14.9 11.9 6.9 7.4 17.1 15.1 12.5 12.0
Oxygen (wt%) 2.9 3.7 2.7 3.7 0.9 3.7 2.5 3.7 3.6 3.7 2.3 3.7
E200 (vol%) 55.4 55.6 55.7 57.8 46.5 55.6 59.6 63.2 55.8 55.4 54.0 57.3
E300 (vol%) 93.4 95.4 84.3 95.4 87.4 95.4 83.5 95.8 86.2 86.2 87.9 95.3
Energy (MMBtu/Bbl) 4.980 4.947 4.965 4.931 5.069 4.951 5.011 4.962 4.969 4.983 4.999 4.946
E85
Total ('000 BPD) - 554 - 202 - 431 - 78 - 137 - 1,402
Ethanol ('000 BPD) - 475 - 174 - 370 - 67 - 118 - 1,204
RVP (psi) - 10.1 - 10.8 - 11.1 - 12.0 - 11.7 - 10.8
Sulfur (ppm) - 10 - 9 - 9 - 9 - 9 - 10
Octane (R+M/2) - 107.7 - 107.8 - 107.9 - 107.9 - 107.9 - 107.8
Aromatics (vol%) - 1.1 - 0.6 - 0.5 - 0.0 - 0.3 - 0.7
Benzene (vol%) - 0.03 - 0.02 - 0.01 - 0.00 - 0.01 - 0.02
Olefins (vol%) - 2.2 - 2.1 - 2.2 - 1.1 - 1.2 - 2.0
Oxygen (wt%) - 30.5 - 30.6 - 30.7 - 30.8 - 30.7 - 30.6
E200 (vol%) - 127.0 - 128.4 - 128.7 - 129.6 - 129.1 - 128.1
E300 (vol%) - 95.6 - 96.1 - 96.2 - 96.6 - 96.5 - 96.0
Energy (MMBtu/Bbl) - 3.652 - 3.630 - 3.623 - 3.596 - 3.607 - 3.632
All Mogas
Total ('000 BPD) 3,955 4,122 2,443 2,550 2,120 2,212 829 891 1,697 1,751 11,044 11,526
Ethanol ('000 BPD) 347 836 191 411 95 550 56 149 171 281 860 2,226
RVP (psi) 11.2 11.1 11.5 11.4 10.5 10.6 11.3 11.3 9.6 9.7 10.9 10.9
Sulfur (ppm) 24 22 23 22 23 19 27 26 10 11 22 20
Octane (R+M/2) 87.9 90.7 88.0 89.6 88.0 92.1 86.9 88.8 87.8 89.4 87.8 90.4
Aromatics (vol%) 22.4 18.7 23.7 20.4 25.2 17.5 19.4 15.8 21.8 20.6 22.9 18.9
Benzene (vol%) 0.58 0.48 0.63 0.48 0.57 0.40 1.16 0.95 0.52 0.48 0.62 0.50
Olefins (vol%) 12.9 12.0 10.9 10.2 13.3 9.8 6.9 6.9 6.6 6.1 11.1 9.9
Oxygen (wt%) 3.2 7.4 2.9 5.9 1.7 9.1 2.5 6.2 3.7 5.9 2.9 7.1
E200 (vol%) 55.3 65.1 56.4 63.6 48.5 69.5 59.6 69.0 57.5 62.8 54.9 65.6
E300 (vol%) 93.6 95.3 84.3 95.4 87.4 95.5 83.5 95.9 86.2 87.0 88.4 94.2
Energy (MMBtu/Bbl) 4.969 4.773 4.958 4.824 5.046 4.695 5.011 4.843 4.989 4.890 4.988 4.792
CA USPADD 1 PADD 2 PADD 3 PADD 4/5
 
 
 
 Several very important differences are evident in Table 4.4-20.  First, the energy content 
of the control case gasoline is much lower than that of the reference case due to the addition of 
low energy content ethanol.  Another obvious change is the 4 volume percent decrease in 
aromatics content across the gasoline pool.  This change is caused by two factors.  One factor is 
the increase in high octane ethanol in E10 which allows for decreased production of high octane 
reformate, which is high in aromatics.  Another factor is the blending of E85.  The ethanol in 
E85 will dilute the aromatics contained in its gasoline blendstock.  Another important change is 
the increase in the gasoline pool octane.  Since the reference case gasoline pool was compliant in 
octane, the increased octane of the control case represents octane giveaway.  Because of 
574 
ethanol’s very high octane and high concentration in E-85, E85 contains a much higher octane 
level, and when averaged with the rest of the gasoline pool, results in a sizable increase the 
gasoline pool’s average octane level, or octane giveaway.  Similarly, the blending of E85 causes 
the decrease in gasoline pool benzene level. 
 
 The increased use of renewable and alternative fuels would require capital investments in 
corn and cellulosic ethanol plants, and renewable diesel fuel plants.  In addition to producing the 
fuels, storage and distribution facilities along the whole distribution chain, including at retail, 
will have to be constructed for these new fuels.  Conversely, as these renewable and alternative 
fuels are being produced, they supplant gasoline and diesel fuel demand which results in less 
new investments in refineries compared to business-as-usual.  In Table 4.4-21, we list the total 
incremental capital investments that we project would be made for this proposed RFS2 
rulemaking incremental to the reference case.  These aggregate capital costs are estimated by 
deriving a total capital cost per gallon of product produced for each plant type and multiplying 
that capital cost per gallon factor by the total additional volume of that fuel supplied between the 
reference case and the control case.   
 
Table 4.4-21. 
Projected Total RFS Program U.S. Capital Investments 
(billion dollars) 
Plant Type Capital Costs 
Corn Ethanol 4.0 
Cellulosic Ethanol 50.1 
Ethanol Distribution 12.4 
Bio/Renew Diesel 
Fuel Production and 
Distribution 
0.25 
Refining  -7.9 
Total 58.9 
 
 
 Table 4.4-21 shows that the total U.S. incremental capital investments attributed to this 
program by 2022 is $58.9 billion.  One contributing reason why the capital investments made for 
renewable fuels technologies is so much more than the decrease in refining industry capital 
investments is that a large part of the decrease in petroleum gasoline supply was from reduced 
imports.  In addition, renewable fuels technologies are more capital intensive per gallon of fuel 
produced than incremental increases in gasoline and diesel fuel production at refineries. 
 
 To understand entire costs of the program and their impacts on the U.S. economy, and to 
compare those costs to the benefits, we estimated the year-by-year costs from 2009, the first year 
of the program, to 2030.  We first estimated renewable fuels volumes  for each renewable fuels 
type based on the RFS2 volume standards and based on our projections of which renewable fuels 
would be used to comply with the standard.  These volumes represent the increment between the 
RFS2 control case and the reference case.  Based on AEO 2008, we also estimated the overall 
gasoline and diesel fuel volumes.  Table 4.4-22 below summarizes the projected year-by-year 
incremental renewable fuel, and total gasoline and diesel fuel volumes. 
575 
 
Table 4.4-22. 
Summary of Year-by-Year Volumes (Billion Gallons/year) 
Corn Cellulosic Imported Diesel Renewable
Gasoline Ethanol Ethanol Ethanol Fuel Biodiesel Diesel Fuel
Year Volume Volume Volume Volume Volume Volume Volume
2009 148.7 0.34 0.00 0.00 54.3 0.08 0.00
2010 149.8 1.04 0.00 0.00 55.8 0.23 0.01
2011 150.4 1.60 0.06 0.00 57.3 0.37 0.03
2012 151.4 2.12 0.25 0.00 58.2 0.62 0.04
2013 152.4 2.82 0.75 0.00 58.7 0.61 0.06
2014 153.2 3.39 1.50 0.16 59.3 0.69 0.07
2015 154.0 3.90 2.75 0.45 60.0 0.66 0.09
2016 154.7 3.84 4.00 0.80 60.7 0.54 0.10
2017 155.1 3.70 5.25 1.25 61.3 0.52 0.12
2018 155.1 3.51 6.75 1.71 61.9 0.51 0.13
2019 155.2 3.31 8.25 2.15 62.6 0.49 0.15
2020 154.8 3.17 10.25 2.10 63.4 0.47 0.16
2021 155.1 2.93 13.25 2.04 64.2 0.45 0.17
2022 155.4 2.71 15.75 2.50 65.0 0.43 0.19
2023 154.8 2.71 15.75 2.50 65.9 0.43 0.19
2024 154.3 2.71 15.75 2.50 66.8 0.43 0.19
2025 153.4 2.71 15.75 2.50 67.7 0.43 0.19
2026 153.2 2.71 15.75 2.50 68.8 0.43 0.19
2027 153.2 2.71 15.75 2.50 69.8 0.43 0.19
2028 153.3 2.71 15.75 2.50 70.9 0.43 0.19
2029 153.3 2.71 15.75 2.50 71.9 0.43 0.19
2030 153.7 2.71 15.75 2.50 73.0 0.43 0.19
 
 
  
Also for our year-by-year cost analysis, we needed year-by-year estimates of the 
production and distribution cost for each renewable fuel type.  The feedstock costs were 
available for the years 2012, 2017 and 2022 from FASOM for corn ethanol and soy oil, used for 
producing biodiesel, with crude oil priced at $53/bbl and $92/bbl.  We entered those feedstock 
costs into the respective cost models and interpolated and extrapolated the production costs for 
the years provided to develop production costs for the in-between years.  For cellulosic ethanol, 
we assumed the same feedstock costs for all years, but we adjusted the production costs based on 
our adjusted NREL production costs, interpolating between the years for which we have specific 
cost data.  Since the costs change so much for cellulosic ethanol, the costs in any one year were 
based on the accumulated costs from the previous years.  For example, the production costs in 
the year 2015 are a function of the production costs times the new volume of cellulosic ethanol 
in 2015, plus the production costs times the volume of new cellulosic ethanol in 2014, and so on.  
This avoids underestimating the costs in the later years.  Imported ethanol costs by year are from 
Section 4.1 above.  Tables 4.4-23 and 4.4-24 summarize the renewable fuels production and 
distribution costs by year along with the projected crude oil, gasoline and diesel fuel wholesale 
costs.  Table 4.4-23 represents the projected costs based on crude oil priced at $53 per barrel, and 
Table 4.4-24 presents the projected costs based on crude oil priced at $92 per barrel.    
576 
Table 4.4-23. 
Renewable Fuel Production and Distribution Costs Used in Year-by-Year Analysis  
($53/bbl Crude Oil Case) 
Wholesale Corn Cellulosic Imported Wholesale Renewable
Crude Oil Gasoline Ethanol Ethanol Ethanol Diesel Fuel Biodiesel Diesel Fuel
Year Price $/bbl Price Prod Cost Prod Cost Prod Cost Price Prod Cost Prod Cost
2009 68.3 204 155 - 178 220 270 210
2010 65.2 195 154 229 177 209 270 210
2011 62.7 188 153 211 176 200 270 210
2012 60.1 180 152 193 175 191 270 210
2013 57.4 172 151 175 174 182 273 212
2014 54.7 164 150 157 173 172 276 214
2015 52.0 156 149 139 172 163 279 217
2016 49.4 148 148 138 172 154 282 219
2017 49.5 149 147 137 171 154 285 221
2018 50.2 151 147 136 171 157 282 219
2019 50.9 153 147 134 171 159 279 217
2020 51.5 155 147 133 170 161 276 214
2021 52.1 156 147 132 170 163 273 212
2022 52.8 159 147 131 170 166 270 210
2023 53.8 161 147 131 170 169 270 210
2024 54.7 164 147 131 168 172 270 210
2025 55.7 167 147 131 168 176 270 210
2026 56.6 170 147 131 168 179 270 210
2027 55.8 167 147 131 168 176 270 210
2028 56.8 170 147 131 168 180 270 210
2029 57.9 174 147 131 168 184 270 210
2030 58.7 176 147 131 168 186 270 210
 
 
 
 
577 
Table 4.4-24. 
Renewable Fuel Production and Distribution Costs Used in Year-by-Year Analysis  
($92/bbl Crude Oil Case) 
Wholesale Corn Cellulosic Imported Wholesale Renewable
Crude Oil Gasoline Ethanol Ethanol Ethanol Diesel Fuel Biodiesel Diesel Fuel
Year Price $/bbl Price Prod Cost Prod Cost Prod Cost Price Prod Cost Prod Cost
2009 67.8 203 161 - 180 218 269 208
2010 69.2 207 160 - 179 223 269 208
2011 71.0 212 160 216 178 229 269 208
2012 73.1 218 160 203 177 236 269 208
2013 75.0 224 160 188 176 243 272 210
2014 76.8 229 160 175 175 249 274 212
2015 78.6 234 159 161 174 255 277 214
2016 80.4 240 159 155 174 261 279 216
2017 82.8 247 159 152 173 270 282 218
2018 84.2 251 158 149 173 274 279 216
2019 86.3 257 157 148 173 282 277 214
2020 88.3 263 156 146 172 289 275 212
2021 90.7 270 155 144 172 297 272 210
2022 91.8 273 154 143 172 301 270 209
2023 89.9 268 154 143 172 294 270 209
2024 91.2 272 154 143 170 299 270 209
2025 90.9 271 154 143 170 298 270 209
2026 91.8 273 154 143 170 301 270 209
2027 93.1 277 154 143 170 306 270 209
2028 94.4 281 154 143 170 310 270 209
2029 95.4 284 154 143 170 313 270 209
2030 96.4 287 154 143 170 317 270 209
 
 
 
 Based on the volumes and renewable fuels production and distribution costs, we 
estimated the program costs in years other than 2022.  We started with the year 2022 costs as our 
basis.  We then adjusted those costs using the volume and price relationship between ethanol and 
gasoline were used to estimate the costs in other years.   
578 
Table 4.4-25. 
Year-by-Year Annual Average and Per-Gallon Costs for Gasoline 
Total Subsidized Total Subsidized 
Annual Gasoline Gasoline Annual Gasoline Gasoline
Cost Cost Subsidy Cost Cost Cost Subsidy Cost
Year $MM/yr c/gal $MM/yr c/gal $MM/yr c/gal $MM/yr c/gal
2009 -52 -0.03 153 -0.14 172 0.12 153 0.01
2010 37 0.03 468 -0.29 441 0.29 468 -0.02
2011 513 0.34 783 -0.18 540 0.36 783 -0.16
2012 1,363 0.90 1,208 0.10 536 0.35 1,208 -0.44
2013 2,244 1.47 2,028 0.14 705 0.46 2,028 -0.87
2014 3,738 2.44 3,116 0.41 1,451 0.95 3,116 -1.09
2015 5,761 3.74 4,733 0.67 2,268 1.47 4,733 -1.60
2016 7,508 4.85 6,073 0.93 2,700 1.74 6,073 -2.18
2017 8,910 5.75 7,326 1.02 2,916 1.88 7,326 -2.84
2018 10,384 6.70 8,794 1.03 3,268 2.11 8,794 -3.56
2019 11,747 7.57 10,248 0.97 3,319 2.14 10,248 -4.46
2020 13,031 8.42 12,245 0.51 3,154 2.04 12,245 -5.87
2021 14,998 9.67 15,207 -0.14 2,867 1.85 15,207 -7.96
2022 16,957 10.91 17,708 -0.48 2,962 1.91 17,708 -9.49
2023 16,584 10.71 16,488 0.06 3,517 2.27 16,488 -8.38
2024 16,259 10.54 16,488 -0.15 2,979 1.93 16,488 -8.76
2025 15,867 10.34 16,488 -0.40 3,079 2.01 16,488 -8.74
2026 15,501 10.12 16,488 -0.64 2,732 1.78 16,488 -8.98
2027 15,806 10.31 16,488 -0.44 2,231 1.46 16,488 -9.30
2028 15,427 10.07 16,488 -0.69 1,771 1.16 16,488 -9.60
2029 15,005 9.79 16,488 -0.97 1,372 0.89 16,488 -9.86
2030 14,725 9.58 16,488 -1.15 977 0.64 16,488 -10.09
$92/bbl Crude Oil Price$53/bbl Crude Oil Price
 
 
579 
Table 4.4-26. 
Year-by-Year Annual Average and Per-Gallon Costs for Diesel Fuel 
Total Subsidized Total Subsidized 
Annual Diesel Fuel Diesel Fuel Annual Diesel Fuel Diesel Fuel
Cost Cost Subsidy Cost Cost Cost Subsidy Cost
Year $MM/yr c/gal $MM/yr c/gal $MM/yr c/gal $MM/yr c/gal
2009 83 0.15 83 0.00 84 0.15 83 0.00
2010 260 0.47 235 0.04 226 0.41 235 -0.02
2011 460 0.80 387 0.13 350 0.61 387 -0.07
2012 814 1.40 640 0.30 533 0.92 640 -0.18
2013 890 1.52 639 0.43 505 0.86 639 -0.23
2014 1,103 1.86 729 0.63 549 0.93 729 -0.30
2015 1,155 1.93 707 0.75 503 0.84 707 -0.34
2016 1,051 1.73 596 0.75 396 0.65 596 -0.33
2017 1,048 1.71 583 0.76 348 0.57 583 -0.38
2018 1,001 1.62 571 0.69 296 0.48 571 -0.44
2019 952 1.52 558 0.63 229 0.37 558 -0.53
2020 906 1.43 546 0.57 164 0.26 546 -0.60
2021 864 1.35 533 0.51 93 0.14 533 -0.69
2022 817 1.26 521 0.46 49 0.08 521 -0.73
2023 798 1.21 521 0.42 87 0.13 521 -0.66
2024 781 1.17 521 0.39 61 0.09 521 -0.69
2025 761 1.12 521 0.35 67 0.10 521 -0.67
2026 742 1.08 521 0.32 49 0.07 521 -0.69
2027 758 1.09 521 0.34 23 0.03 521 -0.71
2028 739 1.04 521 0.31 0 0.00 521 -0.74
2029 717 1.00 521 0.27 -21 -0.03 521 -0.75
2030 703 0.96 521 0.25 -41 -0.06 521 -0.77
$53/bbl Crude Oil Price $92/bbl Crude Oil Price
 
 
 
4.4.2.2 Sensitivity Cases 
 
 We also ran two sensitivity cases to the 2022 control case.  The two sensitivity cases 
were:  1) ethanol use is increased beyond the reference case until the gasoline pool is saturated 
with ethanol at 10 percent, and 2) ethanol, biodiesel and renewable diesel fuel  are used at the 
same volumes as the primary year 2022 control case, however, the ethanol is primarily blended 
with gasoline at 20 percent which dramatically reduces the volume of E85 required.  We ran 
sensitivity cases to isolate aspects of the primary control case.  We ran the E10 case to isolate the 
effects of E10 blending from that of E85 on gasoline fuel properties and costs.  We ran the mid-
ethanol blend sensitivity case to assess what might happen to gasoline fuel properties and costs if 
a waiver were to be granted for mid-ethanol blends as some have suggested. 
    
580 
4.4.2.2.1 E10 Sensitivity Case 
 
 Tables 4.4-27 and 4.4-28 summarize the costs for the E10 sensitivity case ignoring 
federal ethanol tax subsidies and at two different crude oil prices.  The costs are reported by 
different cost component as well as aggregated total and the per-gallon costs.BBBBBBBBB  This 
estimate of costs reflects the changes in gasoline that are occurring with the expanded use of 
ethanol.  The operating costs include the labor, utility and other operating costs and are a direct 
output from the refinery model.  These costs are adjusted to reflect ethanol’s production cost plus 
distribution costs instead of the ethanol prices used in the refinery cost model.  The fixed costs 
were assumed to be 3 percent of the capital costs.  The costs associated with lower energy 
density gasoline are accounted for using the fractional change in energy density shown in Table 
4.4-28 multiplied times the wholesale price of gasoline.  By ignoring the federal ethanol tax 
subsidies in the table, we avoid the transfer payments caused by these subsidies that would hide a 
portion of the program’s costs. 
 
Table 4.4-27. 
Summary of E10 Case Costs (without Ethanol Tax Subsidies)  
(million dollars/year and c/gal, except as noted; 2004 dollars,  
7% ROI before taxes, $53/bbl crude oil price) 
 Cost to Gasoline 
Refinery Capital Costs ($Billion) -1.23 
Amortized Refinery Capital Costs ($MM/yr) -131 
Fixed Operating Cost ($MM/yr) -36 
Variable Operating Cost ($MM/yr) 940 
Lower Energy Density ($MM/yr) 1,930 
Total Cost ($MM/yr) 2,704 
Refinery Capital Costs (c/gal) -0.08 
Fixed Operating Cost (c/gal) -0.02 
Variable Operating Cost (c/gal) 0.76 
Lower Energy Density (c/gal) 1.13 
Total Cost Excluding Subsidies (c/gal) 1.79 
 
 
                                                 
 
BBBBBBBBB
 EPA typically assesses social benefits and costs of a rulemaking.  However, this analysis is more limited 
in its scope by sometimes relying on the marginal production price which includes some market distortions , while 
other times relying on the average production cost for ethanol.   
581 
Table 4.4-28. 
Summary of E10 Case Costs (without Ethanol Tax Subsidies)  
(million dollars/year and c/gal, except as noted; 2004 dollars,  
7% ROI before taxes, $92/bbl crude oil price) 
 
Cost to Gasoline 
Amortized Refinery Capital Costs ($MM/yr) -131 
Fixed Operating Cost ($MM/yr) -36 
Variable Operating Cost ($MM/yr) -1,348 
Lower Energy Density ($MM/yr) 2,690 
Total Cost ($MM/yr) 1,180 
Refinery Capital Costs (c/gal) -0.08 
Fixed Operating Cost (c/gal) -0.02 
Variable Operating Cost (c/gal) -0.69 
Lower Energy Density (c/gal) 1.57 
Total Cost Excluding Subsidies (c/gal) 0.78 
 
 Our analysis shows that when considering all the costs associated with these fuel changes 
resulting from the expanded use of ethanol, that increased ethanol use up to 100 percent E10 will 
cost the U.S. $2.7 billion per year in the year 2022 when crude oil is priced at $53 per barrel.  
Expressed as per-gallon costs, these fuel changes would cost the U.S. 1.79 cents per gallon of 
gasoline.  At $92 per barrel crude oil, the addition of the ethanol up to 100 percent E10 is 
estimated to cost $1,180 million per year in 2022, and cost 0.78 cents per gallon.  These cost 
impacts are for far lower than for the control case described above due to the far lower volumes 
of ethanol, but also the lack of blending of E85. 
 
 Tables 4.4-29 and 4.4-30 expresses the total and per-gallon gasoline costs for the RFS 
case with the federal ethanol, biodiesel and renewable diesel subsidies included with crude oil 
priced at $53/bbl and $92/bbl, respectively.  The federal tax subsidy is 45 cents per gallon for 
each gallon of new corn-based ethanol blended into gasoline and 101 cents per gallon for each 
gallon of cellulosic ethanol.  The biodiesel subsidy is 100 cents per gallon, and the renewable 
diesel fuel subsidy is 50 cents per gallon.  The cost adjustment is estimated by multiplying the 
subsidy times the volume of new ethanol, biodiesel and renewable diesel estimated to be used.   
 
Table 4.4-29. 
Estimated E10 Case Cost (Reflecting Ethanol Tax Subsidies)  
(million dollars/year and cents/gallon; 2004 dollars,  
7% ROI before taxes, $53/bbl crude oil price) 
 Cost to Gasoline 
Total Cost ($MM/yr) 2,704 
Federal Subsidy ($MM/yr) -3,491 
Revised Total Cost ($MM/yr) -787 
Per-Gallon Cost Excluding Subsidies (c/gal) 1.79 
Federal Subsidy (c/gal) -2.32 
Total Cost Including Subsidies (c/gal) -0.53 
 
582 
Table 4.4-30. 
Estimated E10 Case Cost (Reflecting Ethanol Tax Subsidies)  
(million dollars/year and cents/gallon; 2004 dollars, 
7% ROI before taxes, $92/bbl crude oil price) 
 
Cost to Gasoline 
Total Cost ($MM/yr) 1,179 
Federal Subsidy ($MM/yr) -3,491 
Revised Total Cost ($MM/yr) -2,312 
Per-Gallon Cost Excluding Subsidies (c/gal) 0.78 
Federal Subsidy (c/gal) -2.32 
Total Cost Including Subsidies (c/gal) -1.54 
 
 The cost including subsidies may better represent gasoline and diesel fuel’s apparent cost 
as reflected to the fuel industry as a whole and to consumers “at the pump” because the federal 
subsidies tends to transfer a portion of the actual costs.  Our analysis estimates that when the oil 
price is $53/bbl, the fuel industry and consumers will see a 0.53 cent per gallon decrease in the 
apparent cost of producing gasoline.  At the higher oil price of $92/bbl, the apparent cost of 
producing gasoline is estimated to decrease by 1.54 cents per gallon. 
 
 Table 4.4-31 summarizes the volumetric inputs to refineries in each PADD for this E10 
control case.   
 
583 
Table 4.4-31. 
Summary of the Total and Incremental Volumetric Refinery Inputs by PADD 
(thousand barrels/day) 
Control Difference Control Difference Control Difference Control Difference Control Difference
Case from Ref Case Case from Ref Case Case from Ref Case Case from Ref Case Case from Ref Case
PADD Crude 1,525 0 3,444 -118 9,037 -63 1,750 3 2,138 1
GTL Naphtha 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
GTL Diesel 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
VGO HS 0 0 0 0 613 -8 0 0 28 -1
VGO LS 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
HS AR (A960) 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
LS AR (Alg) 205 4 0 0 137 8 0 0 0 0
Normal Butane    25 -1 45 -10 112 0 36 -1 40 0
Isobutane        9 0 23 2 62 -4 13 -1 23 0
MTBE 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Ethanol - E10 404 58 250 59 217 121 87 31 172 0
Ethanol - E20 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Ethanol - E85 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Reformer Feed 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Methanol 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Natural Gas (FOE) 80 1 142 2 576 6 122 1 172 0
Hydrogen (MSCF) 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Pentanes Plus 0 0 32 0 52 0 19 0 0 0
Import CBOB 10% 421 421 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Import CBOB 20% 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Import RBOB 10% 187 -13 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Import RBOB 20% 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Import Alkylate 31 15 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Import Raffinate 33 -15 0 0 0 0 0 0 46 0
Import Reformate 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Import FCC Naphtha 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Import Lt Naphtha 0 0 0 0 21 -9 0 0 1 0
Import Hvy Naph 0 0 0 0 42 0 0 0 0 0
Transfer Lt Naphtha 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 22 -2
Transfer Reformate 0 0 0 -5 0 0 0 0 0 0
Transfer Alkylate 60 0 10 7 0 0 0 0 60 0
Transfer FCC Naphtha 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Transfer Raffinate 0 0 0 -2 0 0 0 0 60 0
Transfer RBOB 10% 734 38 79 29 0 0 0 0 0 0
Transfer RBOB 20% 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Transfer CBOB 10% 1,300 2 421 -29 0 0 14 14 0 0
Transfer CBOB 20% 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Isooctane 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 29 1
Isooctene 10 -1 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
CAPADD 1 PADD 2 PADD 3 PADD 4/5
 
 
 
 Table 4.4-32 below summarizes the refinery output volumes and changes in refinery 
output volumes relative to the reference case by PADD.   
 
584 
Table 4.4-32. 
Summary of Total and Incremental Refinery Outputs by PADD 
(thousand barrels/day) 
Control Difference Control Difference Control Difference Control Difference Control Difference
Case from Ref Case Case from Ref Case Case from Ref Case Case from Ref Case Case from Ref Case
Propane 35 1 59 -5 139 -6 27 -1 59 1
Propylene 19 0 43 0 245 0 2 0 12 0
Normal Butane 0 0 3 -1 47 2 0 0 0 0
Isobutane 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 10 1
PC Naphtha 16 0 40 0 433 0 0 0 0 0
PC Gasoil 0 0 527 -29 158 0 0 0 0 0
CG Reg 0 -73 0 -552 0 -1,176 0 -246 0 0
CG Prem 0 0 0 0 0 -2 0 -33 0 0
CG E10 Reg 1,935 455 1,745 573 1,334 1,192 723 273 114 2
CG E10 Prem 339 80 332 4 254 3 138 38 22 0
RFG E10 Reg 1,455 34 332 4 469 6 0 0 1,312 0
RFG E10 Prem 273 2 63 1 89 1 0 0 250 0
CG E20 Reg 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
RFG E20 Reg 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
E85 to CG 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
E85 to RFG 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Transfer RBOB 10% 0 0 0 0 813 67 0 0 0 0
Transfer RBOB 20% 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Transfer CBOB 10% 0 0 0 0 1,735 -13 0 0 0 0
Transfer CBOB 20% 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Jet/Kero A (450ppm) 27 0 115 0 1,363 0 380 0 300 0
X-Fer Diesel Rundown 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
HSD Gr 76 (0.2%) 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
LSD Gr 74 (.05%) 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
ULSD (15 ppm) 556 5 627 -50 2,210 -14 524 12 0 0
CARB Diesel 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 354 -4
X-Fer C5's to Storage 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
1% Residual Fuel 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Residual Fuel 70 0 57 0 269 -3 149 4 74 2
Slurry 31 -1 87 -3 158 0 1 1 30 0
Asphalt & Wax 143 0 210 0 158 0 5 0 44 0
Gasoil 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 10 0
Lubes 19 0 17 0 158 0 0 0 20 0
Benzene 11 0 11 0 51 0 0 0 0 0
Toluene 0 0 0 0 35 0 0 0 0 0
Xylenes 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0
Cumene 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Cyclohexane 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Transfer Raffinate 0 0 0 0 60 -2 0 0 0 0
Transfer Alkylate 0 0 0 0 130 7 0 0 0 0
Transfer Reformate 0 0 0 0 0 -5 0 0 0 0
Transfer FCC naphtha 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Transfer Lt Naphtha 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 22 -2
Transfer Blendstock 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Sulfur (STons) 1 0 4 0 17 0 3 0 4 0
Coke (STon) 2 0 13 -1 68 -1 7 0 20 0
PADD 1 PADD 2 PADD 4/5 CAPADD 3
 
 
 
Table 4.4-34 summarizes the change in refinery unit throughputs by PADD comparing 
the E10 case to the reference case.     
 
 
585 
Table 4.4-34. 
Change in Refinery Unit Capacities by PADD relative to the Reference Case  
(thousand barrels/day) 
Refinery Unit PADD 1 PADD 2 PADD 3 PADD 4/5 CA U.S.
Crude Tower 0 -202 -59 0 0 -261
Vacuum Tower 0 -90 -29 4 0 -115
Sats Gas Plant 0 0 -10 2 0 -8
Unsats Gas Plant 0 -1 -6 0 0 -6
FCC DeC5 Tower 0 0 0 0 0 0
FCC 0 0 -18 0 -4 -22
FCC Splitter 1 -6 -10 0 -1 -16
Hydrocracker 0 0 0 3 0 3
H-Oil Unit 0 0 0 0 0 0
Delayed Coker 0 0 -11 0 0 -11
Visbreaker 0 0 0 0 0 0
Thermal Naphtha Splitter 0 -4 -1 0 0 -5
CRU Reformer 0 0 0 0 0 0
SRU Reformer 0 0 0 0 3 3
BTX Reformer 0 0 0 0 0 0
C4 Isomerization 0 0 0 0 0 0
C5/C6 Isomerization 4 0 0 0 0 4
HF Alkylation 0 0 0 0 0 0
H2SO4 Alkylation 0 0 -7 2 -5 -9
Dimersol 0 0 0 0 0 0
Cat Poly 0 0 0 0 0 0
Isooctane 0 0 0 0 0 0
DHT - Total 7 0 -12 11 0 6
DHT 2nd RCT - Total 6 -25 -11 9 0 -21
DHT Arom Saturation 0 0 0 0 0 0
NHT - Total Fd 1 0 0 -1 0 0
CGH - Generic -4 16 12 -15 0 8
CGH - Olefin Sat'n 0 0 0 0 0 0
FCCU Fd HDT 7 0 0 -29 0 -22
LSR Splitter 0 17 0 0 0 17
LSR Bz Saturator 0 0 0 0 0 0
Reformate Saturator -2 0 0 0 0 -2
Reformate Splitter -6 0 -1 0 0 -7
SDA 0 0 0 0 0 0
MTBE 0 0 0 0 0 0
TAME 0 0 0 0 0 0
Hydrogen Plant - Total MSCF 14 -16 107 17 -3 119
Lube Unit 0 0 0 0 0 0
Sulfur Plant 0 0 -98 -41 -5 -143
Merox Jet 0 0 0 0 0 0
Merox Diesel 0 0 0 0 0 0
BTX Reformer - Tower feed 0 0 0 0 0 0
BTX Reformer - Extract feed 0 0 0 0 0 0
 
 
 
  
586 
Table 4.4-35. 
Change in Refinery Unit Investments by PADD (million dollars/yr) 
Refinery Unit PADD 1 PADD 2 PADD 3 PADD 4/5 CA U.S.
Crude Tower 0 -486 -62 0 0 -547
Vacuum Tower 0 -219 -34 83 0 -170
Sats Gas Plant 0 0 -38 5 0 -34
Unsats Gas Plant 2 0 -52 0 0 -49
FCC DeC5 Tower 0 0 0 0 0 0
FCC 0 0 -225 0 -26 -251
FCC Splitter 0 -6 -3 0 0 -10
Hydrocracker 0 0 0 49 0 49
H-Oil Unit 0 0 0 0 0 0
Delayed Coker 0 0 -121 0 0 -121
Visbreaker 0 0 0 0 0 0
Thermal Naphtha Splitter 0 -4 0 0 0 -5
CRU Reformer 0 0 0 0 0 0
SRU Reformer 0 0 0 0 71 71
BTX Reformer 0 0 0 0 0 0
C4 Isomerization 0 0 0 0 0 0
C5/C6 Isomerization 26 0 0 0 0 26
HF Alkylation 0 0 0 0 0 0
H2SO4 Alkylation 5 0 -57 20 -104 -136
Dimersol 0 0 0 0 0 0
Cat Poly 0 0 0 0 0 0
Isooctane 0 0 0 0 0 0
DHT - Total 45 0 -125 64 0 -15
DHT 2nd RCT - Total 28 -167 -34 40 0 -133
DHT Arom Saturation 0 0 0 0 0 0
NHT - Total Fd 4 0 0 -4 0 0
CGH - Generic -22 101 28 -58 0 49
CGH - Olefin Sat'n 0 0 0 0 0 0
FCCU Fd HDT 51 0 0 -314 0 -264
LSR Splitter 0 7 0 0 0 7
LSR Bz Saturator 0 0 0 0 0 0
Reformate Saturator -9 0 -1 0 0 -10
Reformate Splitter -15 0 -1 0 0 -15
SDA 0 0 0 0 0 0
MTBE 0 0 0 0 0 0
TAME 0 0 0 0 0 0
Hydrogen Plant - Total MSCF 38 -37 284 87 -40 332
Lube Unit 0 0 0 0 0 0
Sulfur Plant 0 0 0 0 0 0
Merox Jet 0 0 0 0 0 0
Merox Diesel 0 0 0 0 0 0
BTX Reformer - Tower feed 0 0 0 0 0 0
BTX Reformer - Extract feed 0 0 0 0 0 0
Total 153 -811 -440 -29 0 -1,226
 
 
 
 These changes in refinery unit throughputs are associated with changes in capital 
investments.  Table 4.4-35 summarizes the projected change in capital investments between the 
reference case and the EIA control case.  This Table shows that incremental to the reference 
case, refiners are expected to reduce their capital investments by $1.2 billion compared to 
business as usual.  Most of the reduction occurs in PADDs 2 and 3.  This capital cost decrease is 
countered by the capital costs incurred to build new ethanol plants and put into place the 
distribution system that the new ethanol requires. 
587 
 
Table 4.4-36. 
Gasoline Volume, Quality and Energy Density by Gasoline Type at the PADD Terminal 
RFG Ref Case Control Ref Case Control Ref Case Control Ref Case Control Ref Case Control Ref Case Control
Total ('000 BPD) 1,692 1,728 391 396 551 558 - - 1,562 1,562 4,197 4,244
Ethanol ('000 BPD) 171 175 39 40 56 56 - - 158 158 424 429
RVP (psi) 10.7 10.8 10.4 10.6 9.7 9.8 - - 9.5 9.5 10.1 10.2
Sulfur (ppm) 23 24 23 24 20 22 - - 9 9 17 18
Octane (R+M/2) 88.1 88.1 88.0 88.0 88.0 88.0 - - 87.6 87.6 87.9 87.9
Aromatics (vol%) 19.9 19.9 20.0 20.0 19.5 19.5 - - 21.3 21.3 20.4 20.4
Benzene (vol%) 0.55 0.56 0.58 0.58 0.51 0.51 - - 0.51 0.51 0.53 0.54
Olefins (vol%) 11.7 12.2 10.3 10.6 8.7 9.3 - - 5.7 5.7 8.9 9.3
Oxygen (wt%) 3.7 3.7 3.7 3.7 3.7 3.7 - - 3.7 3.7 3.7 3.7
E200 (vol%) 55.1 55.3 59.7 57.8 54.3 53.9 - - 57.7 57.6 56.4 56.2
E300 (vol%) 93.9 93.9 84.3 82.9 87.4 85.8 - - 86.2 86.2 89.3 89.0
Energy (MMBtu/Bbl) 4.954 4.950 4.920 4.939 4.983 4.976 - - 4.991 4.992 4.969 4.968
CG
Total ('000 BPD) 2,263 2,274 2,052 2,078 1,568 1,588 829 1,588 135 136 6,847 6,937
Ethanol ('000 BPD) 176 230 152 210 40 160 56 160 14 14 436 701
RVP (psi) 11.6 11.8 11.7 11.5 10.7 10.7 11.3 10.7 10.5 10.6 11.4 11.4
Sulfur (ppm) 24 24 23 24 24 22 27 22 25 24 24 24
Octane (R+M/2) 87.7 88.1 88.0 88.0 88.0 88.0 86.9 88.0 89.1 89.2 87.8 87.9
Aromatics (vol%) 24.2 22.3 24.4 22.5 27.2 22.2 19.4 22.2 28.4 29.0 24.4 21.7
Benzene (vol%) 0.61 0.51 0.64 0.53 0.59 0.50 1.16 0.50 0.60 0.60 0.68 0.58
Olefins (vol%) 13.9 14.5 11.1 10.7 14.9 12.1 6.9 12.1 17.1 16.6 12.5 11.9
Oxygen (wt%) 2.9 3.7 2.7 3.7 0.9 3.7 2.5 3.7 3.6 3.6 2.3 3.7
E200 (vol%) 55.4 55.4 55.7 58.9 46.5 55.0 59.6 55.0 55.8 55.2 54.0 57.3
E300 (vol%) 93.4 93.9 84.3 82.9 87.4 85.8 83.5 85.8 86.2 86.2 87.9 88.1
Energy (MMBtu/Bbl) 4.980 4.931 4.965 4.923 5.069 4.971 5.011 4.971 4.969 4.973 4.999 4.942
All Mogas
Total ('000 BPD) 3,955 4,003 2,443 2,473 2,120 2,146 829 861 1,697 1,698 11,044 11,181
Ethanol ('000 BPD) 347 404 191 250 95 217 56 87 171 172 860 1,129
RVP (psi) 11.2 11.3 11.5 11.4 10.5 10.4 11.3 11.4 9.6 9.6 10.9 10.9
Sulfur (ppm) 24 24 23 24 23 22 27 28 10 10 22 22
Octane (R+M/2) 87.9 88.1 88.0 88.0 88.0 88.0 86.9 86.9 87.8 87.8 87.8 87.9
Aromatics (vol%) 22.4 21.3 23.7 22.1 25.2 21.5 19.4 16.3 21.8 21.9 22.9 21.2
Benzene (vol%) 0.58 0.53 0.63 0.54 0.57 0.50 1.16 1.04 0.52 0.52 0.62 0.57
Olefins (vol%) 12.9 13.5 10.9 10.6 13.3 11.4 6.9 6.7 6.6 6.6 11.1 10.9
Oxygen (wt%) 3.2 3.7 2.9 3.7 1.7 3.7 2.5 3.8 3.7 3.7 2.9 3.7
E200 (vol%) 55.3 55.3 56.4 58.7 48.5 54.7 59.6 63.3 57.5 57.4 54.9 56.9
E300 (vol%) 93.6 93.9 84.3 82.9 87.4 85.8 83.5 90.2 86.2 86.2 88.4 88.5
Energy (MMBtu/Bbl) 4.969 4.939 4.958 4.926 5.046 4.972 5.011 4.957 4.989 4.990 4.988 4.952
CA USPADD 1 PADD 2 PADD 3 PADD 4/5
 
 
 
4.4.2.2.2 Mid-Ethanol Blend Sensitivity Case 
 
 For this case, the year 2022 control case volumes were run assuming that ethanol was 
mostly blended as E20.  About 10 percent of the gasoline pool was required to remain E10 to 
provide gasoline that would be compatible with nonroad gasoline powered engines and legacy 
cars.  Most of the remainder of the gasoline was blended with ethanol at 20 percent by volume 
until the gasoline pool was saturated, allowing for a small amount of E85 to achieve the 
necessary volume of ethanol to comply with the RFS2 standard.   
 
 Tables 4.4-37 and 4.4-38 summarize the costs for the RFS case excluding federal ethanol, 
biodiesel and renewable fuels consumption subsidies with crude oil priced at $53/bbl and 
$92/bbl, respectively.  The costs are reported by different cost component as well as aggregated 
total and the per-gallon costs.CCCCCCCCC  The operating costs include the labor, utility and other 
                                                 
 
588 
operating costs and are a direct output from the refinery model.  These costs are adjusted to 
reflect ethanol’s production cost plus distribution costs instead of the ethanol prices used in the 
refinery cost model.  The fixed costs are 3 percent of the capital costs.  The costs associated with 
lower energy density gasoline are accounted for using the fractional change in energy density 
shown in Table 4.4-37, multiplied times the wholesale price of gasoline.   
 
Table 4.4-37. 
Summary of Mid-Ethanol Blend Case Costs (without Tax Subsidies)  
(million dollars/year and c/gal, except as noted; 2004 dollars, 7% ROI before taxes, $53/bbl crude oil price) 
 Cost to Gasoline Cost to Diesel Fuel  
Refinery Capital Costs ($Billion) -7.30 - 
Amortized Refinery Capital Costs ($MM/yr) -780 - 
Fixed Operating Cost ($MM/yr) -215 - 
Variable Operating Cost ($MM/yr) 5,404 590 
Lower Energy Density Gasoline ($MM/yr) 9,630 187 
Total Cost ($MM/yr) 14,043 777 
Refinery Capital Costs (c/gal) -0.44 - 
Fixed Operating Cost (c/gal) -0.12 - 
Vaiable Operating Cost (c/gal) 4.15 0.66 
Lower Energy Density Gasoline (c/gal) 5.45 0.54 
Total Cost Excluding Subsidies (c/gal) 9.04 1.20 
 
Table 4.4-38. 
Summary of Mid-Ethanol Blend Case Costs (without Tax Subsidies)  
(million dollars/year and c/gal, except as noted; 2004 dollars, 7% ROI before taxes, $92/bbl crude oil price) 
 
Cost to Gasoline Cost to Diesel Fuel  
Amortized Refinery Capital Costs ($MM/yr) -780 - 
Fixed Operating Cost ($MM/yr) -215 - 
Variable Operating Cost ($MM/yr) -16,662 -419 
Lower Energy Density Gasoline ($MM/yr) 16,390 373 
Total Cost ($MM/yr) -1,267 -46 
Refinery Capital Costs (c/gal) -0.44 - 
Fixed Operating Cost (c/gal) -0.12 - 
Variable Operating Cost (c/gal) -9.53 -1.15 
Lower Energy Density Gasoline (c/gal) 9.28 1.08 
Total Cost Excluding Subsidies (c/gal) -0.82 -0.07 
 
 
 Our analysis shows that when considering all the costs associated with these fuel changes 
resulting from the expanded use of ethanol, that these various possible gasoline use scenarios 
will cost the U.S. $14.0 billion per year in the year 2022 when crude oil is priced at $53 per 
barrel.  Expressed as per-gallon costs, these fuel changes would cost the U.S. 9.04 cents per 
gallon of gasoline.  The addition of biodiesel and renewable diesel fuel is estimated to cost about 
$780 million per year in the year 2022, or cost 1.20 cents per gallon.   
 
 At $92 per barrel crude oil, the addition of the ethanol is estimated to decrease the cost of 
                                                                                                                                                             
CCCCCCCCC
 EPA typically assesses social benefits and costs of a rulemaking.  However, this analysis is more limited 
in its scope by examining the average cost of production of ethanol and gasoline without accounting for the effects 
of farm subsidies that tend to distort the market price of agricultural commodities.   
589 
producing gasoline in 2022 by 1.3 billion per year, or 0.82 cents per gallon.  The addition of 
biodiesel and renewable diesel fuel is estimated to reduce the cost of diesel fuel by 46 million 
dollars in 2022, and reduce the per-gallon cost of diesel fuel by 0.07 cents per gallon. 
 
 Tables 4.4-39 and 4.4-40 expresses the total and per-gallon gasoline costs for the RFS 
case with the federal ethanol, biodiesel and renewable diesel subsidies included with crude oil 
priced at $53/bbl and $92/bbl, respectively.  The federal tax subsidy is 45 cents per gallon for 
each gallon of new corn-based ethanol blended into gasoline and 101 cents per gallon for each 
gallon of cellulosic ethanol.  The biodiesel subsidy is 100 cents per gallon, and the renewable 
diesel fuel subsidy is 50 cents per gallon.  The cost adjustment is estimated by multiplying the 
subsidy times the volume of new ethanol, biodiesel and renewable diesel estimated to be used.   
 
Table 4.4-39. 
Estimated Mid-Ethanol Blend Case Costs (Reflecting Tax Subsidies)  
(million dollars/year and cents/gallon; 2004 dollars, 7% ROI before taxes, $52/bbl crude oil price) 
 Gasoline Costs Diesel Fuel Costs 
Total Cost ($MM/yr) 11,561 777 
Federal Subsidy ($MM/yr) -17,699 -525 
Revised Total Cost ($MM/yr) -6,139 252 
Per-Gallon Cost Excluding Subsidies (c/gal) 7.44 1.20 
Federal Subsidy (c/gal) -11.39 -0.81 
Total Cost Including Subsidies (c/gal) -3.95 0.39 
 
Table 4.4-40. 
Estimated Mid-Ethanol Blend Case Costs (Reflecting Tax Subsidies)  
(million dollars/year and cents/gallon; 2004 dollars, 7% ROI before taxes, $93/bbl crude oil price) 
 
Gasoline Costs Diesel Fuel Costs 
Total Cost ($MM/yr) -3,749 -46 
Federal Subsidy ($MM/yr) -17,699 -535 
Revised Total Cost ($MM/yr) -21,449 -571 
Per-Gallon Cost Excluding Subsidies (c/gal) -2.41 -0.07 
Federal Subsidy (c/gal) -11.39 -0.81 
Total Cost Including Subsidies (c/gal) -13.80 -0.88 
 
 The cost including subsidies may better represent gasoline and diesel fuel’s apparent cost 
as reflected to the fuel industry as a whole and to consumers “at the pump” because the federal 
subsidies tends to transfer a portion of the actual costs.  Our analysis estimates that when the oil 
price is $53/bbl, the fuel industry and consumers will see a 3.95 cent per gallon decrease in the 
apparent cost of producing gasoline, and a 0.39 increase in the apparent cost of producing diesel 
fuel.  At the higher oil price of $93/bbl, the apparent cost of producing gasoline is estimated to 
decrease by 13.8 cents per gallon, and the apparent cost of producing diesel fuel is expected to 
decrease by 0.88 cents per gallon. 
 
 Table 4.4-41 summarizes the volumetric inputs to refineries in each PADD for this 
control case.  Because of the increased use of biofuels, petroleum inputs would be expected to 
decrease, and this is confirmed. 
590 
 
Table 4.4-41. 
Summary of the Total and Incremental Volumetric Refinery Inputs by PADD 
(thousand barrels/day) 
Control Difference Control Difference Control Difference Control Difference Control Difference
Case from Ref Case Case from Ref Case Case from Ref Case Case from Ref Case Case from Ref Case
PADD Crude 1,525 0 3,316 -247 8,633 -467 1,703 -44 2,121 0
GTL Naphtha 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
GTL Diesel 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
VGO HS 0 0 0 0 551 -70 0 0 7 0
VGO LS 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
HS AR (A960) 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
LS AR (Alg) 199 -2 0 0 199 70 0 0 0 0
Normal Butane    28 2 38 -16 112 0 42 5 40 0
Isobutane        14 4 22 1 62 -5 14 0 0 0
MTBE 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Ethanol - E10 62 -285 39 -152 34 -62 13 -42 27 0
Ethanol - E20 699 699 438 438 358 358 153 153 310 0
Ethanol - E85 0 0 0 0 94 94 0 0 0 0
Reformer Feed 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Methanol 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Natural Gas (FOE) 78 -1 143 3 570 1 122 0 176 0
Hydrogen (MSCF) 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Pentanes Plus 0 0 0 -32 52 0 8 -10 0 0
Import CBOB 10% 277 277 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Import CBOB 20% 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Import RBOB 10% 123 -77 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Import RBOB 20% 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Import Alkylate 25 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Import Raffinate 39 -9 0 0 0 0 0 0 46 0
Import Reformate 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Import FCC Naphtha 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Import Lt Naphtha 0 0 0 0 16 -14 0 0 1 0
Import Hvy Naph 0 0 0 0 42 0 0 0 0 0
Transfer Lt Naphtha 0 0 4 4 0 0 0 0 0 0
Transfer Reformate 0 0 0 -5 0 0 0 0 0 0
Transfer Alkylate 60 0 6 3 0 0 0 0 23 0
Transfer FCC Naphtha 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Transfer Raffinate 0 0 0 -2 0 0 0 0 60 0
Transfer RBOB 10% 650 -47 79 29 0 0 0 0 0 0
Transfer RBOB 20% 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Transfer CBOB 10% 1,300 2 421 -29 0 0 17 17 0 0
Transfer CBOB 20% 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Isooctane 7 7 0 0 0 0 0 0 42 0
Isooctene 21 10 0 -2 8 8 0 0 5 0
PADD 1 PADD 2 PADD 4/5 CAPADD 3
 
 
591 
Table 4.4-42. 
Summary of Total and Incremental Refinery Outputs by PADD 
(thousand barrels/day) 
Control Difference Control Difference Control Difference Control Difference Control Difference
Case from Ref Case Case from Ref Case Case from Ref Case Case from Ref Case Case from Ref Case
Propane 33 -1 53 -11 130 -15 22 -6 55 -3
Propylene 19 0 43 0 245 0 2 0 12 0
Normal Butane 0 0 6 2 45 -1 0 0 0 0
Isobutane 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 19 10
PC Naphtha 16 0 40 0 433 0 0 0 0 0
PC Gasoil 0 0 495 -60 158 0 0 0 0 0
CG Reg 0 -73 0 -552 0 -1,176 0 -246 0 0
CG Prem 0 0 0 0 0 -2 0 -33 0 0
CG E10 Reg 0 -1,480 0 -1,172 0 -141 0 -450 0 -113
CG E10 Prem 334 75 317 -11 240 -11 134 34 18 -4
RFG E10 Reg 0 -1,421 0 -328 0 -463 0 0 0 -1,312
RFG E10 Prem 276 5 65 3 92 4 0 0 253 3
CG E20 Reg 2,009 2,009 1,825 1,825 1,397 1,397 757 757 125 125
RFG E20 Reg 1,449 1,449 343 343 373 373 0 0 1,409 1,409
E85 to CG 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
E85 to RFG 0 0 0 0 110 110 0 0 0 0
Transfer RBOB 10% 0 0 0 0 729 -17 0 0 0 0
Transfer RBOB 20% 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Transfer CBOB 10% 0 0 0 0 1,738 -11 0 0 0 0
Transfer CBOB 20% 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Jet/Kero A (450ppm) 27 0 115 0 1,363 0 380 0 300 0
X-Fer Diesel Rundown t 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
HSD Gr 76 (0.2%) 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
LSD Gr 74 (.05%) 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
ULSD (15 ppm) 559 8 650 -27 2,182 -41 526 14 0 0
CARB Diesel 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 354 -4
X-Fer C5's to Storage 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 41 41
1% Residual Fuel 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Residual Fuel 83 12 57 0 244 -28 146 1 54 -18
Slurry 29 -3 80 -9 153 -5 0 0 30 0
Asphalt & Wax 143 0 210 0 158 0 5 0 44 0
Gasoil 0 0 9 0 0 0 0 0 10 0
Lubes 19 0 17 0 158 0 0 0 20 0
Benzene 11 0 11 0 51 0 0 0 0 0
Toluene 0 0 0 0 35 0 0 0 0 0
Xylenes 0 0 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 0
Cumene 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Cyclohexane 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Transfer Raffinate 0 0 0 0 60 -2 0 0 0 0
Transfer Alkylate 0 0 0 0 89 -34 0 0 0 0
Transfer Reformate 0 0 0 0 0 -5 0 0 0 0
Transfer FCC naphtha 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Transfer Lt Naphtha 0 0 0 0 4 4 0 0 0 -24
Transfer Blendstock 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Sulfur (STons) 1 0 4 0 16 -1 2 0 4 0
Coke (STon) 1 0 12 -2 64 -5 7 0 21 1
PADD 1 PADD 2 PADD 4/5 CAPADD 3
 
 
Table 4.4-43 summarizes the change in refinery unit throughputs by PADD comparing 
the mid-ethanol blend case to the reference case.     
 
592 
Table 4.4-43. 
Change in Refinery Unit Capacities by PADD relative to the Reference Case  
(thousand barrels/day) 
Refinery Unit PADD 1 PADD 2 PADD 3 PADD 4/5 CA U.S.
Crude Tower 0 -421 -467 -41 -1 -930
Vacuum Tower 0 -188 -200 -11 0 -399
Sats Gas Plant 9 0 -24 -22 -14 -51
Unsats Gas Plant 0 -1 -46 0 -12 -59
FCC DeC5 Tower 0 0 0 0 0 0
FCC 0 0 -151 0 -63 -214
FCC Splitter 0 -6 -82 0 -20 -108
Hydrocracker 0 0 0 -5 0 -5
H-Oil Unit 0 0 0 0 0 0
Delayed Coker 0 0 -91 0 0 -91
Visbreaker 0 0 0 0 0 0
Thermal Naphtha Splitter 0 -4 -11 0 1 -14
CRU Reformer 0 0 0 0 0 0
SRU Reformer 0 0 0 0 -30 -30
BTX Reformer 0 1 0 0 0 1
C4 Isomerization 0 0 0 0 -3 -3
C5/C6 Isomerization -16 0 0 0 0 -16
HF Alkylation 0 0 0 0 0 0
H2SO4 Alkylation 27 0 -46 -8 -29 -56
Dimersol 0 0 0 0 0 0
Cat Poly 0 0 0 0 0 0
Isooctane 0 0 0 0 0 0
DHT - Total 10 0 -17 -1 0 -8
DHT 2nd RCT - Total 15 56 -17 -8 24 71
DHT Arom Saturation 0 0 0 0 0 0
NHT - Total Fd 14 0 0 11 0 25
CGH - Generic 11 -49 -51 10 0 -79
CGH - Olefin Sat'n 0 0 0 0 0 0
FCCU Fd HDT -1 0 0 -34 0 -35
LSR Splitter 0 17 0 0 0 17
LSR Bz Saturator 0 0 0 0 0 0
Reformate Saturator -16 -9 5 0 -50 -70
Reformate Splitter -48 -27 15 0 -150 -210
SDA 0 0 0 0 0 0
MTBE 0 0 0 0 0 0
TAME 0 0 0 0 0 0
Hydrogen Plant - Total MSCF -2 81 253 17 83 432
Lube Unit 0 0 0 0 0 0
Sulfur Plant 0 0 -935 -98 -11 -1,044
Merox Jet 0 0 0 0 0 0
Merox Diesel 0 0 0 0 0 0
BTX Reformer - Tower feed 0 0 0 0 0 0
BTX Reformer - Extract feed 0 1 0 0 0 1
 
 
 These changes in refinery unit throughputs are associated with changes in capital 
investments.  Table 4.4-44 summarizes the projected change in capital investments between the 
mid-ethanol blend case and the reference case.   
593 
Table 4.4-44. 
Change in Refinery Unit Investments by PADD (million dollars/yr) 
Refinery Unit PADD 1 PADD 2 PADD 3 PADD 4/5 CA U.S.
Crude Tower 0 -995 -739 -154 -1 -1,889
Vacuum Tower 0 -527 -423 -18 -1 -968
Sats Gas Plant 53 0 -63 -102 -68 -181
Unsats Gas Plant 1 0 -240 0 -101 -341
FCC DeC5 Tower 0 0 0 0 0 0
FCC 0 0 -1,032 0 -786 -1,818
FCC Splitter 0 -6 -38 0 -16 -60
Hydrocracker 0 0 0 -95 0 -95
H-Oil Unit 0 0 0 0 0 0
Delayed Coker 0 0 -1,261 0 0 -1,261
Visbreaker 0 0 0 0 0 0
Thermal Naphtha Splitter 0 -5 -4 0 1 -9
CRU Reformer 0 0 0 0 0 0
SRU Reformer 0 0 0 0 -180 -180
BTX Reformer 2 11 0 0 0 13
C4 Isomerization 0 0 0 0 -15 -15
C5/C6 Isomerization -198 0 0 0 0 -198
HF Alkylation 0 0 0 0 0 0
H2SO4 Alkylation 443 0 -518 -99 -508 -682
Dimersol 0 0 0 0 0 0
Cat Poly 0 0 0 0 0 0
Isooctane 0 0 0 0 0 0
DHT - Total 63 0 -146 -6 0 -89
DHT 2nd RCT - Total 66 354 -104 -34 186 468
DHT Arom Saturation 0 0 0 0 0 0
NHT - Total Fd 97 0 0 35 0 132
CGH - Generic 46 -203 -202 34 0 -325
CGH - Olefin Sat'n 0 0 0 0 0 0
FCCU Fd HDT -9 0 0 -349 0 -358
LSR Splitter 0 7 0 0 0 7
LSR Bz Saturator 0 0 0 0 0 0
Reformate Saturator -96 -56 14 0 -318 -455
Reformate Splitter -56 -33 8 0 -166 -247
SDA 0 0 0 0 0 0
MTBE 0 0 0 0 0 0
TAME 0 0 0 0 0 0
Hydrogen Plant - Total MSCF -5 266 607 84 289 1,241
Lube Unit 0 0 0 0 0 0
Sulfur Plant 0 0 -2 -1 0 -3
Merox Jet 0 0 0 0 0 0
Merox Diesel 0 0 0 0 0 0
BTX Reformer - Tower feed 0 1 0 0 0 1
BTX Reformer - Extract feed 0 3 0 0 0 4
Total 407 -1,183 -4,144 -703 0 -7,308
 
 
 Table 4.4-44 shows that incremental to the reference case, refiners are expected to reduce 
their capital investments by $7.3 billion compared to business as usual.  Most of the reduction 
occurs in PADDs 2 and 3 where large volumes of ethanol, and other gasoline blendstocks are 
expected to enter the gasoline pool.  Of course, this capital cost decrease is countered by capital 
costs incurred to build new ethanol plants and put into place the distribution system that the new 
ethanol requires. 
 
594 
Table 4.4-45. 
Gasoline Volume, Quality and Energy Density by Gasoline Type at the PADD Terminal 
RFG Ref Case Control Ref Case Control Ref Case Control Ref Case Control Ref Case Control Ref Case Control
Total ('000 BPD) 1,692 1,725 391 408 551 465 - - 1,562 1,661 4,197 4,260
Ethanol ('000 BPD) 171 321 39 76 56 85 - - 158 310 424 791
RVP (psi) 10.7 10.3 10.4 10.2 9.7 9.1 - - 9.5 9.3 10.1 9.8
Sulfur (ppm) 23 19 23 18 20 22 - - 9 9 17 15
Octane (R+M/2) 88.1 90.2 88.0 90.2 88.0 90.3 - - 87.6 88.3 87.9 89.5
Aromatics (vol%) 19.9 15.6 20.0 15.8 19.5 15.0 - - 21.3 19.1 20.4 16.9
Benzene (vol%) 0.55 0.46 0.58 0.42 0.51 0.44 - - 0.51 0.47 0.53 0.46
Olefins (vol%) 11.7 10.8 10.3 7.6 8.7 8.2 - - 5.7 5.7 8.9 8.2
Oxygen (wt%) 3.7 6.8 3.7 6.8 3.7 6.7 - - 3.7 6.8 3.7 6.8
E200 (vol%) 55.1 64.2 59.7 65.0 54.3 60.1 - - 57.7 62.1 56.4 63.0
E300 (vol%) 93.9 89.5 84.3 88.2 87.4 85.6 - - 86.2 86.2 89.3 87.6
Energy (MMBtu/Bbl) 4.954 4.806 4.920 4.784 4.983 4.848 - - 4.991 4.905 4.969 4.847
CG
Total ('000 BPD) 2,263 2,344 2,052 2,142 1,568 1,637 829 891 135 143 6,847 7,156
Ethanol ('000 BPD) 176 440 152 401 40 306 56 166 14 27 436 1,340
RVP (psi) 11.6 11.5 11.7 11.3 10.7 10.4 11.3 11.1 10.5 10.2 11.4 11.1
Sulfur (ppm) 24 22 23 23 24 21 27 28 25 26 24 23
Octane (R+M/2) 87.7 90.2 88.0 90.1 88.0 90.1 86.9 87.2 89.1 90.3 87.8 89.8
Aromatics (vol%) 24.2 20.2 24.4 20.4 27.2 20.2 19.4 13.4 28.4 24.4 24.4 19.5
Benzene (vol%) 0.61 0.45 0.64 0.46 0.59 0.45 1.16 1.02 0.60 0.55 0.68 0.53
Olefins (vol%) 13.9 12.9 11.1 10.2 14.9 11.0 6.9 6.3 17.1 16.8 12.5 10.9
Oxygen (wt%) 2.9 6.9 2.7 6.8 0.9 6.8 2.5 6.9 3.6 6.8 2.3 6.8
E200 (vol%) 55.4 62.2 55.7 64.1 46.5 61.1 59.6 68.5 55.8 64.9 54.0 63.3
E300 (vol%) 93.4 84.9 84.3 86.3 87.4 84.9 83.5 90.9 86.2 83.8 87.9 86.0
Energy (MMBtu/Bbl) 4.980 4.813 4.965 4.809 5.069 4.845 5.011 4.811 4.969 4.841 4.999 4.819
E85
Total ('000 BPD) - 0 - 0 - 110 - 0 - 0 - 110
Ethanol ('000 BPD) - 0 - 0 - 94 - 0 - 0 - 95
RVP (psi) - 10.5 - 10.5 - 12.2 - 10.3 - 10.4 - 12.2
Sulfur (ppm) - 10 - 10 - 9 - 10 - 9 - 9
Octane (R+M/2) - 107.8 - 107.8 - 108.0 - 107.6 - 107.7 - 108.0
Aromatics (vol%) - 0.7 - 0.7 - 0.0 - 0.7 - 0.7 - 0.0
Benzene (vol%) - 0.02 - 0.02 - 0.00 - 0.05 - 0.02 - 0.00
Olefins (vol%) - 2.1 - 2.1 - 2.3 - 0.2 - 1.1 - 2.3
Oxygen (wt%) - 30.6 - 30.6 - 30.8 - 30.6 - 30.6 - 30.8
E200 (vol%) - 128.1 - 128.0 - 129.9 - 127.7 - 127.8 - 129.9
E300 (vol%) - 96.1 - 96.0 - 96.6 - 96.0 - 96.1 - 96.6
Energy (MMBtu/Bbl) - 3.635 - 3.636 - 3.598 - 3.635 - 3.637 - 3.598
All Mogas
Total ('000 BPD) 3,955 4,069 2,443 2,550 2,120 2,212 829 891 1,697 1,804 11,044 11,526
Ethanol ('000 BPD) 347 760 191 477 95 485 56 167 171 337 860 2,226
RVP (psi) 11.2 11.0 11.5 11.2 10.5 10.2 11.3 11.1 9.6 9.4 10.9 10.6
Sulfur (ppm) 24 21 23 22 23 21 27 28 10 11 22 20
Octane (R+M/2) 87.9 90.2 88.0 90.1 88.0 91.0 86.9 87.2 87.8 88.5 87.8 89.8
Aromatics (vol%) 22.4 18.3 23.7 19.6 25.2 18.1 19.4 13.4 21.8 19.5 22.9 18.3
Benzene (vol%) 0.58 0.46 0.63 0.46 0.57 0.43 1.16 1.02 0.52 0.48 0.62 0.50
Olefins (vol%) 12.9 12.0 10.9 9.8 13.3 10.0 6.9 6.3 6.6 6.6 11.1 9.9
Oxygen (wt%) 3.2 6.9 2.9 6.8 1.7 8.0 2.5 6.9 3.7 6.8 2.9 7.1
E200 (vol%) 55.3 63.0 56.4 64.2 48.5 64.3 59.6 68.5 57.5 62.4 54.9 63.8
E300 (vol%) 93.6 86.8 84.3 86.6 87.4 85.6 83.5 90.9 86.2 86.0 88.4 86.7
Energy (MMBtu/Bbl) 4.969 4.810 4.958 4.805 5.046 4.784 5.011 4.811 4.989 4.900 4.988 4.818
PADD 3 PADD 4/5 CA USPADD 1 PADD 2
 
595 
Chapter 5:  Economic Impacts and Benefits 
 
 
5.1 Agricultural Impacts  
5.1.1 Models Utilized 
 
As described in the Preamble, we used a suite of tools to model the potential domestic 
and international impacts of this rulemaking on the agricultural sector.  The Forest and 
Agricultural Sector Optimization Model (FASOM), developed by Professor Bruce McCarl of 
Texas A&M University and others, provides detailed information on domestic agricultural and 
greenhouse gas impacts of renewable fuels.  The Food and Agricultural Policy Research Institute 
(FAPRI) at Iowa State University and the University of Missouri-Columbia maintains a number 
of econometric models that are capable of providing detailed information on impacts on 
international agricultural markets from the wider use of renewable fuels in the U.S.   
 
FASOM is a long-term economic model of the U.S. agriculture sector that maximizes 
total revenues for producers while meeting the demands of consumers.  Using a number of 
inputs, FASOM determines which crops, livestock, and processed agricultural products would be 
produced in the U.S.  In each model simulation, crops compete for price sensitive inputs such as 
land and labor at the regional level.  The cost of these and other inputs are used to determine the 
price and level of production of primary commodities (e.g., field crops, livestock, and biofuel 
products).  FASOM also estimates prices using costs associated with the processing of primary 
commodities into secondary products (e.g., converting livestock to meat and dairy, crushing 
soybeans to soybean meal and oil).  FASOM does not capture short-term fluctuations (i.e., 
month-to-month, annual) in prices and production, however, as it is designed to identify long-
term trends. 
 
 The FASOM model also contains a forestry component.  Running both the forestry and 
agriculture components of the model would show the interaction between these two sectors.  
However, the analysis for this proposal only shows the results from the agriculture component 
with no interaction from the forestry sector, as the forestry component of the model is in the 
process of being updated.  We plan to utilize a complete version of the model for our analysis in 
the final rule, where agricultural land use impacts also affect forestry land use, and cellulosic 
ethanol produced from the forestry sector will affect cellulosic ethanol production in the 
agriculture sector. 
 
FASOM uses supply and demand curves for the 11 major U.S. domestic regions,212 
which are calibrated to historic price and production data.  FASOM also includes detailed supply 
                                                 
212
 U.S. regions consist of the Pacific Northwest (West and East), Pacific Southwest, Rocky Mountains, Great 
Plains, Southwest, South Central, Corn Belt, Lake States, Southeast, and the Northeast.   
596 
and demand data for corn, wheat, soybeans, rice and sorghum across 37 foreign regions.213  
FASOM contains transportation costs to all regions and then uses all of this information to 
determine U.S. exports to the point where prices are then equated in all markets. 
 
We chose to use FASOM to model the full potential impacts on the domestic agricultural 
sector given higher renewable fuel volumes, in part because FASOM also provides detailed 
greenhouse gas information resulting from these changes (see Chapter 2 of this RIA for more 
information).  FASOM is not able to model land use and agricultural sector changes 
internationally, however.  Therefore, we are working with the FAPRI models to better 
understand international agricultural impacts.  Additional details on the FASOM model are 
included in the docket.214 
 
The FAPRI models are econometric models covering many agricultural commodities.  
These models capture the biological, technical, and economic relationships among key variables 
within a particular commodity and across commodities.  They are based on historical data 
analysis, current academic research, and a reliance on accepted economic, agronomic, and 
biological relationships in agricultural production and markets.  The international modeling 
system includes international grains, oilseeds, ethanol, sugar, and livestock models.  In general, 
for each commodity sector, the economic relationship that supply equals demand is maintained 
by determining a market-clearing price for the commodity.  In countries where domestic prices 
are not solved endogenously, these prices are modeled as a function of the world price using a 
price transmission equation.  Since econometric models for each sector can be linked, changes in 
one commodity sector will impact other sectors.  Elasticity values for supply and demand 
responses are based on econometric analysis and on consensus estimates.  Additional details on 
the FAPRI models are included in the docket.  
 
Agricultural and trade policies for each commodity in a country are included in the 
models to the extent that they affect the supply and demand decisions of the economic agents.  
These policies include taxes on exports and imports, tariffs, tariff rate quotas, export subsidies, 
intervention prices, and set-aside rates.  The FAPRI models assume that existing agricultural and 
trade policy variables will remain unchanged in the outlook period. 215 
 
We recognize that there are inherent challenges in reconciling the results from two 
different models, however we believe that using two models provides a more robust analysis 
than either model would be able to provide alone.  Part of the difference in the model results is 
due to the fact that the two models have different time horizons. Since FASOM is a long term 
econometric model, short term spikes are smoothed out over the five year reporting period.  In 
comparison, the FAPRI model captures annual fluctuations that may include short-term supply 
and demand responses.  Some of the discrepancies may be attributed to different underlying 
assumptions pertaining to elasticities of supply and demand for different commodities.  These 
                                                 
213
 FASOM Foreign Regions include:  the European Economic Community, North Central Europe, Southwest 
Europe, Eastern Europe, Adriatic, Eastern Mediterranean, Former Soviet Union, North Africa, East Africa, West 
Africa, South Africa, Red Sea, Iran, India, Taiwan, Japan, South Korea, North Korea, China, Bangladesh, Indonesia, 
Myanmar, Pakistan, Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam, West Asia, Southeast Asia, Australia, Caribbean, Eastern 
Mexico, Eastern South America, Western South America, Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Other.   
214
 INSERT CITE to 2008 RTI Report. 
215
 INSERT CITE to FAPRI Report. 
597 
differences, in turn, affect projections of imports and exports, acreage shifting, and total 
consumption and production of various commodities.  Some of the differences in results are 
described in more detail in the following sections.  We will continue to work with the two 
models to isolate some of the key differences in assumptions and calibrate the models to a more 
consistent Reference Case in time for the Final Rulemaking. 
5.1.2 Volumes 
 
For the agricultural sector analysis using the FASOM and FAPRI models of the RFS2 
biofuel volumes, we assumed 15 billion gallons (Bgal) of corn ethanol would be produced for 
use as transportation fuel by 2022, an increase of 2.7 Bgal from the Reference Case.  In addition, 
we modeled 0.99 Bgal per year of biodiesel use as fuel, an increase of 0.6 Bgal from the 
Reference Case, as well as an increase of 10 Bgal of cellulosic ethanol in 2022 from the 
agriculture sector.  To satisfy the cellulosic ethanol requirements, the FASOM model was able to 
choose how much cellulosic ethanol was produced through the different production pathways.  
This is purely based on the economics of each feedstock, taking account the various harvesting 
and processing costs for each feedstock, and the income the agriculture sector derives from each 
feedstock.  In FASOM, this volume consists of 7.5 billion gallons of cellulosic ethanol coming 
from corn residue in 2022, 1.3 billion gallons from switchgrass and 1.4 billion gallons from 
sugarcane bagasse.  The volumes for the individual cellulosic ethanol feedstocks were not set 
exogenously. 
 
Given the short time frame for conducting this analysis, some of the projected sources of 
biofuels analyzed in the RFS2 proposal are not currently modeled in FASOM and FAPRI.  For 
example, biodiesel from corn oil fractionation is not currently accounted for in FASOM.  In 
addition, since FASOM is a domestic agricultural sector model, it can’t be utilized to examine 
U.S. biofuel imports.  Also, neither of the two models used for this analysis — FASOM or 
FAPRI — include biofuels derived from domestic municipal solid waste or from the U.S. 
forestry sector.  Thus, for the RFS2 agricultural sector analysis, these biofuel sources were 
estimated outside of the agricultural sector models (see Chapter 1).  We estimate that 
approximately 2 billion gallons of cellulosic ethanol will be produced from municipal solid 
waste, and 4 billion gallons of cellulosic ethanol will be produced from the forestry sector in 
2022. 
 
All the results presented in this section are relative to the AEO 2007 Reference Case 
renewable fuel volumes, which include 12.28 Bgal of grain-based ethanol, 0.38 Bgal of 
biodiesel, and 0.27 Bgal of cellulosic ethanol in 2022.  The domestic figures are provided by 
FASOM and FAPRI, and all of the international numbers are provided by FAPRI.  For a more 
detailed set of results of the agricultural sector impacts of the RFS2 volumes, see the analytical 
reports submitted by FASOM and FAPRI in the docket of this rule. 
 
5.1.3 Biofuel Feedstock Assumptions 
 
 In order to run a representative model of the U.S. and international agriculture sectors to 
analyze the impact of the RFS2 biofuel volumes requirement, a series of assumptions and input 
parameters were set in order to achieve two major goals in our analysis.  First, that the input 
598 
assumptions are based on the most current data and projections available in government, 
industry, and academia; and second, to ensure that the two agriculture models, FASOM and 
FAPRI, were analyzing similar real-world assumptions, and thus present a detailed and 
consistent worldwide analysis.  Table 5.1-1 lists some of the key assumptions associated with the 
agriculture sector modeling, as well as the source for these assumptions.  Additional details on 
the assumptions included in FASOM216 and FAPRI217 are included in the docket. 
 
A series of information was gathered from and reviewed by other government agencies, 
such as USDA and DOE.  These include corn and soybean yields,218 corn ethanol dry and wet 
mill plant processing energy use, corn ethanol yields, corn ethanol by-product use, and estimated 
corn stover yields.  For other assumptions, we relied on external expertise, such as FAPRI; the 
Greenhouse gases, Regulated Emissions and Energy use in Transportation (GREET) model;219 
the Assessment System for Population Exposure Nationwide (ASPEN) model;220 and the 
Agriculture Resource Management Survey (ARMS).221   
 
Table 5.1-1 lists some of the key assumptions associated with the agriculture sector 
modeling, as well as the source for these assumptions.  Projected crop yields, both domestically 
and internationally, constitute one of the most influential factors of this agricultural analysis.  
The yields presented in Table 5.1 are based on the USDA projections through 2017 (the last year 
of their baseline projections report) and then extrapolated out to 2022.  The yields in this table 
represented the national weighted average yields, which vary by region.  These yields are based 
on historical averages for the region, which increase over time in both the AEO Reference case 
and the EISA Control Case.  FASOM assumes the rate of increase is (1.6% per year).  For this 
proposal, we modeled the same yields in both the Reference Case and the Control Case, 
assuming there was no significant impact on yields due to commodity price changes resulting 
from the RFS2 volumes (i.e., no price-induced yield changes).  In addition, we did not model 
changes in yields that might occur based on increased planting on marginal land or management 
practices (e.g., residue removal, corn after corn rotations) as a result of the RFS2 volumes. 
 
For cellulosic biofuels from corn residues, the current assumptions in FASOM for residue 
removal rates are based on the Graham et. al. paper222 and the Perlack et al study.223  This 
                                                 
216
 INSERT CITE to 2008 RTI Report. 
217
 INSERT CITE to 2008 FAPRI Report. 
218
 USDA Agricultural Projections to 2017 (OCE-2008-1), February, 2008. 
219
 The GREET model is run by Argonne National Laboratory at the Department of Energy.  GREET can simulate 
more than 100 fuel production pathways and more than 80 vehicle/fuel systems. 
220
 ASPEN is a computer simulation model used to estimate toxic air pollutant concentrations is called the 
Assessment System for Population Exposure Nationwide, or. This model is based on the EPA’s Industrial Source 
Complex Long Term model (ISCLT) which simulates the behavior of the pollutants after they are emitted into the 
atmosphere. ASPEN uses estimates of toxic air pollutant emissions and meteorological data from National Weather 
Service Stations to estimate air toxics concentrations nationwide. 
221
 ARMS is sponsored by the Economic Research Service (ERS) and National Agricultural Statistics Service 
(NASS) at USDA, and provides observations of field-level farm practices, the economics of the farm business, and 
the characteristics of the American farm household. 
222
 See also http://www.cpnrd.org/Harvesting%20Stover.pdf 
223
 Available at http://feedstockreview.ornl.gov/pdf/billion_ton_vision.pdf.  
599 
approach uses a maximum percent removal of residues on acres based on tillage practices.224  
Other recent papers have raised the issue that a more relevant metric is a minimum amount of 
mass that must remain on an acre of land to prevent runoff and maintain soil carbon levels.225  
However, we were unable to obtain national or regional estimates in time for the proposal.  We 
intend to review these assumptions between proposal and final, and, if possible, update these 
assumptions as appropriate.  In addition, we plan to review in more detail the sustainable 
removal rates for other crops such as wheat and rice residues.226,227 
 
FASOM assumes fertilizer application rates increase over time, in proportion to the 
increase in yields.  As shown in Table 5.1-1, for every 1% increase in corn yields, a 0.16% 
increase in nitrogen must be applied.  In addition, when residues are removed from the field, 
some of the nutrients that are contained in the residue must be replaced through additional 
fertilizer use.  For the proposal, we assumed that 7 additional pounds of nitrogen and 3.6 lbs of 
phosphorous must be applied per ton of residue removed.  We will continue to review these 
assumptions for the final rule.   
 
Lastly, there is a limit to how many acres crops can be planted on.  The Conservation 
Reserve Program (CRP)228 is run by the Natural Resources Conservation Service at USDA.  This 
program is designed to maintain Federal, State, and tribal environmental laws by making 
payments to farmers equivalent to the income otherwise earned from developing the land 
enrolled in the program.  In the 2008 Farm Bill, the number of acres enrolled in the CRP was 
given a minimum limit of 32 million acres.  It is assumed that USDA will increase payments to 
match the rising costs of crops that could be grown on CRP acres through the 2022 time period 
for this analysis. 
  
                                                 
224
 Many site specific factors associated with the sustainable removal of residue (e.g., crop type, soil type, soil 
fertility, slope, and climate) affect which geographic regions are suitable for crop residue removal. Detailed 
modeling of these factors was beyond the scope of this analysis.  
225
 Wilhelm et. al Corn Stover to Sustain Soil Organic Carbon Further Constrains Biomass Supply, Ag Journal 
(2007) 
226
 Kerstetter JD, Lyons JK. Logging and agricultural residue supply curves for the Pacific Northwest. Washington 
State University Energy Publication; 2001 
227
 Banowetz et al.  Assessment of straw biomass feedstock resources in the Pacific Northwest. Biomass and 
Bioenergy.  In Press   
228
 See: http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/programs/CRP/ 
600 
Table 5.1-1. 
Agriculture Model Assumptions 
Assumption Notes 
Feedstock Production 
U.S. national average corn yields are approximately 
170 bu/acre in 2017 and 180 bu/acre in 2022 (a 
1.6% annual increase over the baseline year) 
U.S. national average soybean yields are 
approximately 50 bu/acre in 2022 (a 0.4% annual 
increase) 
Consistent with USDA projections 
(http://www.ers.usda.gov/publications/oc
e081/)  
International corn yields increasing over time, for 
example: 
Argentina ~140 bu/acre in 2022 (a 0.8% annual 
increase) 
Brazil ~68 bu/acre in 2022 (a 1.1% annual increase) 
International soybean yields increasing over time, 
for example: 
Argentina ~48 bu/acre in 2022 (a 0.7% annual 
increase) 
Brazil ~50 bu/acre in 2022 (a 1.1% annual increase) 
FAPRI Models 
Corn residue removal rates of 50% are allowed for 
no till practices; 35% removal rate allowed for 
reduced till practices (no removal from conventional 
till) 
 
Derived from Graham et. al., Agronomy 
Journal, 99:1–11 (2007). “Current and 
Potential U.S. Corn Stover Supplies.”  
and Perlack, R. D., L. L. Wright, A. F. 
Turhollow, R. L. Graham, B. J. Stokes, 
and D. C. Erbach. 2005. Biomass as 
Feedstock for a Bioenergy and 
Bioproducts Industry: the Technical 
Feasibility of a Billion-ton Annual 
Supply. Report prepared for the U.S. 
Department of Energy and the U.S. 
Department of Agricutlure.  
The Conservation Reserve Program (CRP) has a 
minimum limit of 32 million acres enrolled in the 
program at any given time 
2008 Farm Bill 
 
USDA baseline assumptions 
Fertilizer Use 
U.S. nitrogen application rate in corn is 
approximately 136 lbs/acre in the corn belt in 2022 
 
U.S. phosphorous application rate in corn is 
approximately 28 lbs/acre in the corn belt in 2022 
Based on ARMS data, adjusted for 
differences in regions and irrigation 
practices 
For U.S. assume higher yields require some 
increase in inputs.  For each 1% increase in corn 
yields, an additional 0.16% of nitrogen is applied. 
Same increment in fertilizer rate for all 
farming rotations (e.g., corn / soybean 
and corn / corn) and land types (e.g., 
prime and marginal land); see below for 
stover removal impacts 
Nitrogen nutrient replacement application = 7 
lbs/ton corn residue removed  
 
Phosphorous nutrient replacement application = 3.6 
lbs/ton corn residue removed 
These numbers come from the Argonne 
National Lab Report, Fuel Cycle 
Assessment of Selected Bioethanol 
Production Pathways in the United 
States.  (November 7, 2006).  (Used 
and cited by GREET) 
Processing 
601 
1 bushel of corn produces 17 lbs of dried distillers 
grains (dry tons).   
1 pound of DDG substitutes 0.9 pounds of corn and 
0.1 pound of soybean meal feed 
www.ethanol.org  
 
USDA baseline assumptions 
5.1.4 Economic Impacts – Domestic – Control Case 
 
 For this analysis, the FASOM model is utilized for all domestic agriculture impacts.  
Although the FAPRI models do not provide the same amount of detail on GHG emissions for the 
domestic agriculture impacts as the FASOM model, FAPRI does estimate some of the same 
outputs, such as national crop acres, prices, and exports.  Additionally, a common set of inputs 
were provided to both models, such as corn yields, energy prices, and the number of acres 
enrolled in the Conservation Reserve Program (CRP).  In this chapter, we present both the 
FASOM and FAPRI results to demonstrate the range of potential agricultural impacts.  Though 
our primary domestic analysis relies upon the FASOM model, as it contains more detail and 
scope beyond the FAPRI model for the U.S., this allows for a useful comparison between the 
two models, reinforces the accuracy of our domestic analysis, and ensures consistency when 
analyzing the impacts of the RFS2 fuel volume requirements on the domestic and international 
agriculture markets. 
Commodity Prices 
 
To satisfy the demands for increased biofuels for the RFS2 proposal, the FASOM model 
predicts an increase in prices for the primary feedstocks of biofuels.  The proposed increase in 
corn ethanol production results in an increase in U.S. corn prices of $0.15 per bushel (4.6%) 
above the Reference Case price of $3.19 per bushel in 2022.  Similarly, by 2022, the increase in 
demand for biodiesel production leads to an increase of U.S. soybean prices, which would 
increase by $0.29 per bushel (2.9%) above the Reference Case price of $9.97 per bushel.  One of 
the major feedstocks of cellulosic ethanol is sugarcane bagasse, and as the demand for cellulosic 
ethanol increases with the RFS2 proposal, the price of sugarcane in 2022 would increase 
$13.34/ton (41%) above the Reference Case price of $32.49 per ton.  There are also indirect 
effects from the RFS2 proposal reflected in commodity prices.  For instance, corn is a major 
component in animal feed in the U.S., and as corn prices rise in 2022, beef prices would increase 
$0.93 per hundred pounds (1.4%), relative to the Reference Case price of $67.72 per hundred 
pounds. Higher U.S. corn prices would have a direct impact on the value of U.S. agricultural 
land.  As demand for corn and other farm products increases, the price of U.S. farm land would 
also increase.  Our analysis shows that land prices would increase by approximately 21% by 
2022, relative to the Reference Case.   
 
The FAPRI models also provide some domestic agriculture impacts in the U.S.  In 2022, 
FAPRI predicts that U.S. corn prices would increase $0.22 per bushel (8.2%) above the 
Reference Case to $2.91 per bushel.  Soybean prices would increase $0.42 per bushel (5.7%) 
above the Reference Case to $7.86 per bushel in 2022. 
 
602 
Table 5.1-2. 
Change in U.S.  Commodity Prices from the Reference Case 
(2006$) 
FASOM Model 
Commodity Change % Change 
Corn $0.15/bushel 4.6% 
Soybeans $0.29/bushel 2.9% 
Sugarcane $13.34/ton 41% 
Fed Beef $0.93/hundred pounds 1.4% 
FAPRI Model 
Commodity Change % Change  
Corn $0.22/bushel 8.2% 
Soybeans $0.42/bushel 5.7% 
 
In FASOM, the increase in demand for cellulosic ethanol also leads to the production of 
feedstocks in the Control Case that previously had no value in the Reference Case.  This includes 
dedicated energy crops, such as switchgrass, as well as crop residues, such as corn stover.  The 
price of switchgrass in 2022 is $30.18 per wet ton, and the farm gate feedstock price of corn 
residue is $32.74/wet ton in the Control Case.  These prices do not include the storage, handling, 
or delivery costs.  We intend to update the costs assumptions (described in more detail in Section 
4.1.1 of the DRIA) for the final rule.  Since the FAPRI models do not explicitly model cellulosic 
ethanol production from agriculture residues or dedicated energy crops, comparable price 
impacts are not available. 
Commodity Use Changes 
 
Changes in the consumption patterns of U.S. corn can be seen by the increasing 
percentage of corn used for ethanol.  FASOM estimates that the amount of domestically 
produced corn used for ethanol in 2022 would increase to 33%, relative to the 28% usage rate 
under the Reference Case.  The rising price of corn and soybeans in the U.S. would have a direct 
impact on how corn is used.  Higher domestic corn prices would lead to lower U.S. exports as 
the world markets shift to other sources of these products or expand the use of substitute grains.  
FASOM estimates that U.S. corn exports would drop 263 million bushels (-9.9%) to 2.4 billion 
bushels by 2022.  In value terms, U.S. exports of corn would fall by $487 million (-5.7%) to $8 
billion in 2022.  FAPRI estimates that U.S. corn exports would decrease 288 million bushels (-
7.6%) to 3.5 billion bushels in 2022.  In value terms, U.S. corn exports not change, maintaining 
its value of $10.2 billion. 
 
 U.S. exports of soybeans would also decrease under this proposal.  FASOM estimates 
that U.S. exports of soybeans would decrease 96.6 million bushels (-9.3%) to 943 million 
bushels in 2022.  In value terms, U.S. exports of soybeans would decrease by $691 million (-
6.7%) to $9.7 billion in 2022.  FAPRI predicts that U.S. soybean exports would decrease 43 
million bushels (-5.1%) to 802 million bushels and in value terms, U.S. soybean exports would 
increase by $19.4 million (0.3%) to $6.3 billion in 2022. 
 
603 
Table 5.1-3. 
Reductions in U.S. Exports from the Reference Case in 2022 
FASOM Model 
Exports Change % Change 
Corn in Bushels 263 million -9.9% 
Soybeans in Bushels 96.6 million -9.3% 
Total Value of Exports Change % Change  
Corn (2006$) -$487 million -5.7% 
Soybeans (2006$) -$691 million -6.7% 
FAPRI Model 
Exports Change % Change 
Corn in Bushels 288 million -7.6% 
Soybeans in Bushels 96.6 million -5.1% 
Total Value of Exports Change % Change  
Corn (2006$) $0 0% 
Soybeans (2006$) $19.4 million 0.3% 
 
 Higher U.S. demand for corn for ethanol production would cause a decrease in the use of 
corn for U.S. livestock feed.  Substitutes are available for corn as a feedstock, and this market is 
price sensitive.  Several ethanol processing byproducts could also be used to replace a portion of 
the corn used as feed, depending on the type of animal.  Distillers dried grains with solubles 
(DDGS) are a byproduct of dry mill ethanol production, and gluten meal and gluten feed are 
byproducts of wet milling ethanol production.  Based on the assumption that 1 bushel of corn 
produces 17 lbs of DDGS, and that 1 pound of DDGS substitutes for 0.9 lbs if corn and 0.1 lbs of 
soybean meal in animal feed (see Table 5.1-1), FASOM predicts that the use of these ethanol 
byproducts in feed would increase 19% to 30 million tons, compared to 25 million tons under the 
Reference Case in 2022.   
 
Table 5.1-4. 
Percent Change in Ethanol Byproducts Use in Feed 
Relative to the Reference Case 
Category 2022 
Ethanol Byproducts 19% 
 
 The EISA cellulosic ethanol requirements result in the production of residual agriculture 
products as well as dedicated energy crops.  By 2022, FASOM estimates 90 million tons of corn 
residue are harvested for cellulosic ethanol production, as well as 18 million tons of switchgrass.  
Additionally, sugarcane bagasse for cellulosic ethanol production increases by 15.7 million tons 
to 19.7 million tons relative to the Reference Case. 
Land Use Change 
 
In order to satisfy the increased demand for corn ethanol, FASOM estimates an increase 
of 3.2 million acres, 3.9%, in harvested corn acres, above the 83.4 million acres harvested under 
604 
the Reference Case.229  Most of the new corn acres come from a reduction in existing crop acres, 
such as rice, wheat, and hay.  Rice acres, in 2022, decreases by 151 thousand acres (-3.8%) to 3.8 
million acres in the Control Case.  Wheat acres decrease by 676 thousand acres (-1.5%) to 43.6 
million acres in 2022.  Hay acres decrease by 625 thousand acres (-1.1%) to 54.2 million acres in 
2022.  Similarly, FAPRI estimates that harvested U.S. corn acres increase by 3.6 million acres, 
4.2%, in 2022.  See Table 5.1-5 for changes in crop acres in the FASOM model.  As stated 
above, the FASOM model does not currently account for the impacts of the RFS2 biofuel 
volume requirements’ impact on the forestry sector.  We plan on using the forestry component in 
combination with the agriculture component to analyze the final rule. 
 
Table 5.1-5. 
Change in Crop Acres Relative to the Reference Case in 2022 
(millions of acres) 
Crop Change % Change 
Corn 3.2 3.9% 
Hay -0.6 -1.1% 
Rice -0.2 -3.8% 
Soybeans -0.4 -0.5% 
Sugarcane 0.7 55% 
Switchgrass 2.8 N/A 
Wheat 0.7 -1.5% 
 
Though demand for biodiesel increases, the models predict a fall in U.S. soybean acres 
harvested, assuming soybean-based biodiesel meets the EISA GHG emission reduction 
thresholds.  According to the FASOM model, harvested soybean acres would decrease by 
approximately 0.4 million acres (-0.5%) relative to the Reference Case acreage of 71.5 million 
acres in 2022.  Despite the decrease in soybean acres, soybean oil production would increase by 
0.4 million tons (4.0%) by 2022 over the Reference Case.  Additionally, FASOM predicts that 
soybean oil exports would decrease 1.3 million tons (-52%) in 2022 relative to the Reference 
Case.  
 
Likewise, FAPRI estimates that the increased demand for biodiesel from soybean oil 
results chiefly in a reduction in soybean oil exports, rather than an increase in acres harvested.  
Harvested soybean acres decrease by 0.9 million acres (-1.3%) to 69.1 million acres in 2022.  
FAPRI also estimates little change in soybean oil production, with a decrease of 32 million 
pounds (-0.1%) to 26.9 billion pounds in 2022.  Exports in 2022 decrease by 2.9 billion pounds 
(-26.8%), to 7.9 billion pounds in 2022. 
 
 In the FASOM model, as the demand for cellulosic ethanol increases, most of the 
production is derived from corn residue harvesting.  FASOM projects that the least cost options 
for meeting the cellulosic ethanol mandate will be primarily residue based feedstocks.  However, 
this assumption is highly dependent on the assumed densities associated with switchgrass 
production, as well as the sustainable removal rates associated with residue crops.  If more mass 
                                                 
229
 FASOM estimates that total planted corn acres increase to 93.8 million acres from the Reference Case level of 
90.1 million acres in 2017.  Total planted acres increases to 92.2 million acres from the Reference Case level of 89 
million acres in 2022.   
605 
is required on the land to prevent erosion or soil carbon loss, there could be insufficient residue 
for cellulosic feedstocks.  In addition, there are harvesting, transporting, and storing logistical 
issues that must be overcome before large-scale cellulosic biofuels can be produced, as described 
in Chapter 1.   
 
One of the primary crop residue feedstocks for cellulosic ethanol production is sugarcane 
bagasse.  As demand for cellulosic ethanol increases, sugarcane acres increase by 0.7 millions 
acres (55%) to 1.9 million acres in 2022.  In addition, some of the cellulosic ethanol comes from 
switchgrass, which is not produced under the Reference Case.  In the scenario analyzed, 2.8 
million acres of switchgrass will be planted by 2022.  As mentioned above, FAPRI does not 
explicitly model the production of cellulosic ethanol and the resulting impacts on the agriculture 
sector.  For both the Reference Case and the Control Case, we assume 32 million acres would 
remain in the Conservation Reserve Program (CRP).  Therefore, some of the new corn, soybean, 
and switchgrass acres may be indirectly coming from former land that is not re-enrolled in the 
program.  Figure 5.1-1 shows the change in acres for all crops in the U.S. in 2022.  Figure 5.1-2 
shows the production levels of cellulosic feedstocks by region in 2022. 
 
Figure 5.1-1. 
FASOM Model Estimated Change in 
U.S. Crop Acres Relative to the Reference Case in 2022 
(millions of acres) 
 
-1.5
-1.0
-0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
Ba
rle
y
Co
rn
Co
tto
n
W
he
a
t
H
ay
Oa
ts
R
ic
e
Si
la
ge
So
rg
hu
m
So
yb
e
a
n
s
Su
ga
rb
e
e
t
Su
ga
rc
a
n
e
Sw
itc
hG
ra
ss
Ot
he
r
To
ta
l
M
ill
io
n
s 
o
f A
cr
es
606 
Figure 5.1-2. 
Control Case Cellulosic Feedstock Production in the U.S. in 2022 
(thousands of acres) 
607  
As crop acres increase to meet the additional demand for corn and other crops for biofuel 
production, fertilizer use increases as a result.  In 2022, FASOM estimates that nitrogen fertilizer 
use in the U.S. agricultural sector would increase by 897 million pounds, 3.4% over the 
Reference Case level of 26.2 billion pounds, and that phosphorous fertilizer use would increase 
by 496 million pounds, 8.6% higher than the Reference Case level of 5.8 billion pounds.  The 
FAPRI model does not provide estimates for fertilizer use. 
 
Table 5.1-6. 
Change in U.S. Fertilizer Use  
Relative to the Reference Case 
(millions of pounds) 
 
Fertilizer Change %Change 
Nitrogen 897 3.4% 
Phosphorous 496 8.6% 
 
Impact on U.S. Farm Income 
 
The increase in renewable fuel production provides a significant increase in net farm 
income to the U.S. agricultural sector.  FASOM predicts that net U.S. farm income would 
increase by $7.1 billion dollars (10.6%) in 2022 relative to the AEO 2007 Reference Case. 
Impact on U.S. Food Prices 
 
Due to higher commodity prices, FASOM estimates that U.S. food costs230 would 
increase by $10 per person per year by 2022, relative to the Reference Case.231  Total effective 
farm gate food costs would increase by $3.3 billion (0.2%) in 2022.232  To put these changes in 
perspective, average U.S. per capita food expenditures in 2007 were $3,778 or approximately 
10% of personal disposable income.  The total amount spent on food in the U.S. in 2007 was 
$1.14 trillion dollars.233 
5.1.5 Economic Impacts – Domestic – Sensitivities 
 
                                                 
230
 FASOM does not calculate changes in price to the consumer directly.  The proxy for aggregate food price change 
is an indexed value of all food prices at the farm gate.  It should be noted, however, that according to USDA, 
approximately 80 percent of consumer food expenditures are a result of handling after it leaves the farm (e.g., 
processing, packaging, storage, marketing, and distribution).  These costs consist of a complex set of variables, and 
do not necessarily change in proportion to an increase in farm gate costs.  In fact, these intermediate steps can 
absorb price increases to some extent, suggesting that only a portion of farm gate price changes are typically 
reflected at the retail level.  See http://www.ers.usda.gov/publications/foodreview/septdec00/FRsept00e.pdf. 
231
 These estimates are based on U.S.  Census population projections of 318 million people in 2017 and 330 million 
people in 2022.  See http://www.census.gov/population/www/projections/natsum.html. 
232
 Farm Gate food prices refer to the prices that farmers are paid for their commodities.   
233
 See www.ers.usda.gov/Briefing/CPIFoodAndExpenditures/Data/table15.htm.   
608  
 In the impact analysis volumes of the RFS2 volumes, a number of key assumptions were 
set in both in the Reference Case and the Control Case.  Namely, energy prices in both cases are 
from the AEO 08 Reference Case,234 national average corn yields in 2022 reached 183 bu/acre, 
and the number of acres enrolled in CRP is 32 million acres in 2022.  In order to demonstrate 
their influence, the FASOM model was used to analyze variations on these key assumptions and 
observe the impacts on corn prices, harvested acres, and exports.  With each sensitivity run, only 
one variable is changed, such as energy prices, corn yields, or acres in CRP, for both the 
Reference Case and the Control Case.  The impact of the RFS2 volumes is observed under each 
set of new circumstances.  In the original analysis, U.S. corn prices increase by $0.15/bu, 4.6%, 
to $3.34/bu; U.S. harvested corn acres increase by 3.2 million acres, 3.9%, to 86.6 million acres; 
and U.S. corn exports decrease by 263 million bushels, -9.9%, to 2.4 billion bushels in 2022. 
 
 The Reference Case and the Control Case contain energy prices from the AEO 08 
Reference Case, in which gasoline prices are approximately $2.36 per gallon in 2022.  As a 
sensitivity, the FASOM model ran a “high price case”, where all other variables remaining equal, 
energy prices are from the AEO 08 High Price Case,235 in which gasoline prices are 
approximately $3.28 per gallon in 2022.  Higher energy prices lead to increased costs for crop 
production, leading to relatively higher prices.  Under these circumstances, U.S. corn prices 
increase by approximately $0.15/bu, 4.6%, to $3.42/bu in 2022.  Additionally, harvested U.S. 
corn acres increase by 2.7 million acres, 3.3%, to 85.3 million acres; and U.S. corn exports 
decrease by 278 million bushels (-11%) to 2.3 billion bushels in 2022. 
 
 Another key assumption examined here is the estimated technological rate of progress for 
corn yields.  Different projected corn yield values in a given year have large implications for 
domestic agricultural land use and the export commodity market.  If yields are relatively low, 
more land is required to supply the amount of corn demanded for biofuel production, which 
would also lead to relatively lower corn exports and higher corn prices.  Conversely, if yields are 
relatively high, less land is required to meet the demand for corn ethanol, corn exports would be 
relatively higher, and corn prices would be relatively lower.  In the original analysis, national 
average corn yields are approximately 183 bu/acre in 2022.  In the “low yield case”, corn yields 
are equal to 163 bu/acre in 2022.  Under this scenario, implementation of the RFS2 volumes 
would lead to U.S. corn prices increasing by $0.34/bu (9.8%) to $3.84/bu in 2022.  Also, U.S. 
corn acres increase by 1.1 million acres (1.3%) to 90.1 million acres and U.S. corn exports 
decrease by 425 million bushels (-20%) to 1.7 billion bushels in 2022.  In the “high yield case”, 
corn yields are equal to 208 bu/acre in 2022.  Under these circumstances, implementation of the 
RFS2 volumes would lead to and increase of U.S. corn prices by $0.07/bu (2.6%) to $2.95/bu, an 
increase in U.S. corn acres of 1.4 million acres (1.7%) to 82 million acres, and a decrease of U.S. 
corn exports of 493 million bushels (-13.3%) to 3.2 billion bushels. 
 
 The final key assumption varied here regards the number of acres enrolled in CRP.  In the 
original analysis, the number of acres in CRP were limited with a minimum of 32 million acres 
in accordance with the 2008 Farm Bill.  As a sensitivity analysis, a scenario was examined where 
there is no minimum restriction imposed in the CRP program, and farmers may produce crops on 
these acres if it proves to be economically beneficial.  With no limits on CRP acreage and more 
                                                 
234
 See: http://www.eia.doe.gov/oiaf/aeo/aeoref_tab.html 
235
 See: http://www.eia.doe.gov/oiaf/aeo/aeohighprice.html 
609  
land becomes available for crop production, corn prices will be relatively lower.  Under these 
circumstances, implementation of the RFS2 volumes would result in an increase in U.S. corn 
prices of $0.12/bu (3.7%) to $3.25/bu, an increase in U.S. corn acres of 2.6 million acres (3%) to 
87.7 million acres, and a decrease of 299 million bushels of corn exports (-10.5%) to 2.5 billion 
bushels in 2022. 
 
Figure 5.1-3. 
Change in U.S. Corn Prices in 2022 
(2006$ per bushel) 
 
Change in U.S. Corn Price in 2022
Relative to the Reference Case
$0.00 $0.05 $0.10 $0.15 $0.20 $0.25 $0.30 $0.35 $0.40
CRP - All Can Revert
Corn Yield - High Case
Corn Yield - Low  Case
AEO 08 High Price Case
Control Case
2006$ per bushel
 
 
 
610  
Figure 5.1-4. 
Change in U.S. Harvested Corn Acres in 2022 
(millions of acres) 
 
Change in U.S. Harvested Corn Acres in 2022
Relative to the Reference Case
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5
CRP - All Can Revert
Corn Yield - High Case
Corn Yield - Low  Case
AEO 08 High Price Case
Control Case
Millions of Acres
 
 
 
Figure 5.1-5. 
Change in U.S. Corn Exports in 2022 
(billions of bushels) 
 
Change in U.S. Corn Exports in 2022
Relative to the Reference Case
-0.6 -0.5 -0.4 -0.3 -0.2 -0.1 0.0
CRP - All Can Revert
Corn Yield - High Case
Corn Yield - Low  Case
AEO 08 High Price Case
Control Case
Billions of Bushels
 
611  
5.1.6 Economic Impacts - International 
 
The FAPRI models are utilized to assess the international impacts on trade, land use, and 
food consumption as a result of the RFS2 biofuels requirement in the U.S.  In the FAPRI models, 
links between the U.S. and international models are made through commodity prices and net 
trade equations.  In general, for each commodity sector, the economic relationship that quantity 
supplied equals quantity demanded is achieved through a market-clearing price for the 
commodity.  In other countries domestic prices are modeled as a function of the world price 
using a price transmission equation.  Since econometric models for each sector can be linked, 
changes in one commodity sector will impact the other sectors.  
 
The model for each commodity consists of a number of countries/regions, including a 
rest-of-the-world aggregate to close the model.  The models specify behavioral equations for 
production, use, stocks, and trade between countries/regions. The models solve for representative 
world prices by equating excess supply and demand across countries.  Using price transmission 
equations, the domestic price for each country is linked with the representative world price 
through exchange rates.  It is through changes in world prices that change in worldwide 
commodity production and trade is determined. 
 
Global Commodity Price Changes 
 
As the RFS2 proposal alters various commodity production and prices in the U.S., it 
follows that the world price for these same commodities, and therefore their production and 
trade, are affected as well.  As the U.S. increases its use of corn for ethanol production, the 
FAPRI model estimates that it reduces corn net exports (as mentioned above), which results in 
the world price of corn increasing by $0.26/bu (7.5%) to $3.69/bu in 2022.  Similarly, the 
decrease in U.S. net exports of soybeans has a corresponding effect on the world price of 
soybeans, which increases by $0.52/bu (5.6%) to $9.94/bu in 2022.  As a primary feedstock for 
domestic biodiesel production, the U.S. decreases in net exports of soybean oil to satisfy the 
increased demand for biodiesel, causing world soybean oil prices to increase by $120.93/ton 
(12.2%) to $1,116.43/ton in 2022.   
 
World biofuel prices are also affected by the RFS2 proposal.  As mentioned above in 
section 5.1.2, the U.S. satisfies a portion of the increased demand for biofuels by increasing its 
imports of ethanol.  The FAPRI model predicts that this increased demand on the world supply 
of ethanol leads to an increase its world price by $0.38/gallon (60.8%) to $1.00/gallon in 2022.  
Though the U.S. does not change it’s level of import or export of biodiesel, which is zero, the 
change in the price of biodiesel feedstocks, such as soybean oil, affects the world price of 
biodiesel, which increases by $0.10/gallon (2.11%) to $4.89/gallon in 2022. 
 
612  
Table 5.1-7. 
Global Commodity Price Changes in 2022 
(2006$ per unit) 
 
Commodity Change 
(2006$ per Unit) 
% Change 
Corn $0.26/bushel 7.5% 
Soybeans $0.52/bushel 5.6% 
Soybean Oil $120.93/ton 12.2% 
Ethanol $0.38/gallon 60.8% 
Biodiesel $0.10/gallon 2.11% 
 
 
World Trade in Biofuels 
 
 As the U.S. increases its demand for increased use of biofuels, this will also lead to 
impacts on the world trade market for biofuels.  With the RFS2 proposal, the U.S. will increase 
its imports of ethanol.  EPA estimates that in 2022, the U.S. will increase net imports of ethanol 
by 2.5 billion gallons (388%) to 3.1 billion gallons.   In response, the only net exporter of ethanol 
in the world, Brazil, increases production of ethanol and increases its net exports by 2.2 billion 
gallons (65.9%) to 5.4 billion gallons.  However, since the U.S. demand for ethanol imports 
exceeds the increase in Brazilian net exports, other countries see a reduction in their net imports 
of ethanol.  China decreases its net imports by 96 million gallons (-60.3%) to 64 million gallons, 
Canada decreases its net imports by 31 million gallons (-7.1%) to 412 million gallons, and the 
European Union decreases its net imports of ethanol by 40 million gallons (-7.4%) to 507 million 
gallons in 2022.  Additionally, India decreases its net imports of ethanol by 57 million gallons (-
12.7%) to 388 million gallons, Japan decreases net imports of ethanol by 10 million gallons (-
2.6%) to 365 million gallons, and South Korea decreases net imports of ethanol by 5 million 
gallons (-2.9%) to 175 million gallons.  The rest of the world decreases net imports of ethanol by 
2 million gallons (-0.4%) to 477 million gallons in 2022. 
 
613  
Figure 5.1-6. 
Ethanol Net Exports by Country in 2022 
(billions of gallons) 
Ethanol Net Exports in 2022
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Br
az
il
Ch
in
a
Ca
n
ad
a
Eu
ro
pe
a
n 
Un
io
n
In
dia
Ja
pa
n
So
u
th
 
Ko
re
a
Un
ite
d 
St
at
es
R
es
t o
f W
o
rld
To
ta
l N
et
Ex
po
rts
B
ill
io
n
s 
o
f G
al
lo
n
s
Reference Case Control Case
 
 
 Though the U.S. does not import any biodiesel either in the AEO 2007 Reference Case 
nor the EISA Control Case, the decrease in soybean oil exports from the U.S. of 2.9 billion 
pounds (-27%) to 7.9 billion pounds, as estimated by the FAPRI model has implications in the 
biodiesel trade market.  The decrease in U.S. soybean oil exports leads to an increase in the 
world price of soybean oil, causing other countries to increase their net exports of soybean oil.  
Argentina and Brazil increase their soybean oil net exports by 354 million pounds and 676 
million pounds, respectively, in 2022.  Since the world price of soybean oil increases at a much 
larger rate (12.2%) than the world price of biodiesel (2.1%) due to the RFS2 proposal, it 
becomes relatively more profitable to increase net exports of soybean oil for major producers.  
This results in less soybean oil being used in the production of biodiesel and therefore a decrease 
in biodiesel net exports.  In 2022, Argentina decreases their biodiesel net exports by 8 million 
gallons (-3.0%) to 269 million gallons, and Brazil decreases their biodiesel net exports by 19 
million gallons (-7.3%) to 240 million gallons.  In response, the EU reduces their net imports of 
biodiesel by 26 million gallons (-5.2%) to 479 million gallons and Japan reduces its net imports 
of biodiesel by 1 million gallons (-1.3%). 
 
614  
Figure 5.1-7. 
Biodiesel Net Exports by Country in 2022 
(billions of gallons) 
Biodiesel Net Exports in 2022
-0.6
-0.5
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
 
 
 
Ar
ge
n
tin
a
 
 
 
Br
az
il
 
 
 
In
do
n
es
ia
 
 
 
M
al
ay
si
a
 
 
 
Un
ite
d 
St
at
es
 
 
 
Eu
ro
pe
an
Un
io
n
 
 
 
Ja
pa
n
 
 
 
RO
W
To
ta
l N
et
Ex
po
rts
B
ill
io
n
s 
o
f G
al
lo
n
s
Reference Case Control Case
 
 
International Land Use Change 
 
 Changes to the global commodity trade markets and world commodity prices result in 
changes in international land use.  The FAPRI model provides international change in crop acres 
as a result of the RFS2 proposal.  Brazil has the largest positive change in crop acres in 2022, 
followed by the U.S., Nigeria, India, Paraguay, and China.  As the U.S. increases its net imports 
of ethanol by 2.5 billion gallons in 2022, the major supplier of this increase in ethanol is Brazil 
which produces ethanol from sugarcane.  The FAPRI model estimates that Brazil crop acres 
increase by 3.1 million acres (2.0%) to 153.6 million acres relative to the Reference Case.  The 
major crop contributing to this increase is sugarcane, which increases by 2.0 million acres (8.7%) 
in 2022 to 24.4 million acres.  Total U.S. acres increase by 2.3 million acres (1.0%) in 2022 to 
232.6 million acres.  The major crop contributing to this increase is corn, which increases by 3.7 
million acres (4.2%) to 90 million acres in order to satisfy the increased demand for corn ethanol.    
Though Brazil and the U.S. increase their crop acres to meet the increased demand for biofuel, 
other countries, such as Nigeria and India, respond by increasing their major food crops: 
sorghum and rice, respectively.  Nigeria has an increase in crop acres of 1.5 million acres (5.9%) 
to 27.3 million acres in 2022.  This increase is entirely due to an increase in sorghum acres, 
which represents a 7.6% increase in sorghum acres in 2022.  India’s total crop acres increase by 
1.0 million acres (0.3%) to 326 million acres in 2022.  Rice is the largest contributor to this 
increase, rising by 0.4 million acres (0.4%) in 2022, though soybeans, sorghum, and corn also 
615  
increase by 0.25, 0.31, and 0.21 million acres, respectively.  Total crop acres in Paraguay 
increase by 0.8 million acres (6.9%) to 12 million acres.  This increase is entirely due to the 
increase of soybean acres, which rise 6.9% in 2022.  China’s total crop acres increase by 0.4 
million acres (0.2%) to 257.8 million acres in 2022.  The crop with the largest increase is corn, 
which rises by 0.7 million acres (1.0%) 70.4 million acres in 2022. 
 
Figure 5.1-8. 
Change in World Crop Acres By Country in 2022 
(millions of acres) 
Change in World Crop Acres in 2022
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Brazil US Nigeria India Paraguay China Rest of
World
Entire World
M
ill
io
n
s 
o
f A
cr
es
 
 
International Crop Yields 
 
 When analyzing the change in international crop acres in response to the RFS2 proposal, 
it is important to note that different countries have different yields for each crop.  The FAPRI 
model bases each country’s crop yield on historical trends and projects this technical rate of 
progress into the future.  Similar to the FASOM model, the yield for each crop is the same in 
both the Reference Case and the Control Case in that neither model has price induced crop 
yields.  Table 5.1-8 lists the production and yields for the top four producers of corn and 
soybeans in the Control Case in 2022. 
 
616  
Table 5.1-8. 
Corn and Soybean Control Case Production and Yields for the  
Top Four Producing Countries in 2022 
Corn 
Country Production 
(billions of bushels) 
Yield 
(bushels/acre) 
U.S. 16.6 184 
China 7.0 99 
Brazil 2.5 68 
EU 2.3 111 
Soybeans 
Country Production 
(billions of bushels) 
Yield 
(bushels/acre) 
Brazil 3.8 50 
U.S. 3.4 49 
Argentina 2.4 48 
China 0.6 30 
 
World Food Consumption 
 
The RFS2 mandate results in higher international commodity prices, which would impact 
world food consumption.236  As mentioned above, with the RFS2 proposal world corn prices 
would increase by 7.5% to $3.69 per bushel in 2022, relative to the Reference Case.  The impact 
on world soybean prices is somewhat smaller, increasing 5.6% to $9.94 per bushel in 2022.  
Since major agricultural commodity prices increase globally, it is anticipated that world 
consumption of food would decrease.  The FAPRI model indicates that world consumption of 
corn for food falls by 1.1 million metric tons (-0.5%) in 2022 relative to the Reference Case.  
Similarly, the FAPRI model estimates that world consumption of wheat for food would decrease 
by 0.6 million metric tons (-0.1%) in 2022.  World consumption of oil for food (e.g., vegetable 
oils) decreases by 1.8 million metric tons (-1.4%) by 2022.  The model also estimates a small 
change in world meat consumption, decreasing by 0.3 million metric tons (-0.1%) in 2022.  
When considering all the food uses included in the model, world food consumption decreases by 
0.9 million metric tons (-0.04%) by 2022.  While FAPRI provides estimates of changes in world 
food consumption, estimating effects on global nutrition is beyond the scope of this analysis. 
 
                                                 
236
 The food commodities included in the FAPRI model include corn, wheat, sorghum, barley, soybeans, sugar, 
peanuts, oils, beef, pork, poultry, and dairy products.   
617  
Table 5.1-9. 
Change in World Food Consumption Relative to the Reference Case 
(millions of metric tons) 
Category Change % Change 
Corn -1.1 -0.5% 
Wheat -0.6 -0.1% 
Vegetable Oils -1.8 -1.4% 
Meat -0.3 -0.1% 
Total Food -0.9 -0.4% 
 
 
 
5.2 Petroleum and Energy Security Impacts 
 
5.2.1 Impact on U.S. Petroleum Imports 
 
In 2007, U.S. petroleum imports represented 19.5 percent of total U.S. imports of all 
goods and services.237  In 2005, the United States imported almost 60 percent of the petroleum it 
consumed.  This compares roughly to 35 percent of petroleum from imports in 1975.238  
Transportation accounts for 70 percent of the U.S. petroleum consumption.  It is clear that 
petroleum imports have a significant impact on the U.S. economy.  Diversifying transportation 
fuels in the U.S. is expected to lower U.S. petroleum imports.  To estimate the impacts of this 
proposal on the U.S.’s dependence on imported oil, we calculate avoided U.S. expenditures on 
petroleum imports. 
  
 EPA analyzed two approaches to estimate the reductions in U.S. petroleum imports.  The 
first approach utilizes a model of the U.S. energy sector, the National Energy Modeling System 
(NEMS), to quantify the type and volume of reduced petroleum imports based on supply and 
demand for specific fuels in a given year.  The National Energy Modeling System (NEMS) is a 
computer-based, energy-economy modeling system of U.S. energy markets through the 2030 
time period.  NEMS projects U.S. production, imports, conversion, consumption, and prices of 
energy; subject to assumptions on world energy markets, resource availability and costs, 
behavioral and technological choice criteria, cost and performance characteristics of energy 
technologies, and demographics.  NEMS is designed and implemented by the Energy 
Information Administration (EIA) of the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE).  For this analysis, 
the NEMS model was run with the 2007 AEO levels of biofuels in the reference case compared 
with the biofuel volume RFS2 requirments. 
 
Considering the regional nature of U.S. imports of petroleum imports, a second approach 
was utilized as well to estimate the impacts of the RFS2 proposal on U.S. oil imports.  This 
approach is labeled “Regional Gasoline Market” approach.  This approach makes the assumption 
that one half of the ethanol market is in the Northeast portion of the U.S., which also comprises 
                                                 
237
 Bureau of Economic Affairs:  “U.S. International Transactions, Fourth Quarter of  2007” 
by Elena L. Nguyen and Jessica Melton Hanson, April 2008. 
238
 Davis, Stacy C.; Diegel, Susan W., Transportation Energy Data Book: 25th Edition, Oak Ridge National 
Laboratory, U.S. Department of Energy, ORNL-6974, 2006. 
618  
about half of the nation’s gasoline demand.  For this analysis, it is estimated that ethanol would 
displace imported gasoline or gasoline blend stocks in the Northeast, but not elsewhere in the 
country.  Therefore, to derive the portion of the new renewable fuels which would offset U.S. 
petroleum imports (and not impact domestic refinery production), we multiplied the total volume 
of petroleum fuel displaced by 50 percent to represent that portion of the ethanol which would be 
used in the Northeast, and 50 percent again to only account for that which would offset imports.  
The rest of the ethanol, including half of the ethanol presumed to be used in the Northeast, is 
presumed to offset domestic gasoline production, which ultimately offsets crude oil inputs at 
refineries.  Biodiesel and renewable diesel are presumed to offset domestic diesel fuel 
production.    
 
The results shown in Table 5.2-1-1 below reflect the net lifecycle reductions in U.S. oil 
imports projected by NEMS.  The net lifecycle reductions include the upstream petroleum used 
to produce renewable fuels, gasoline and diesel, as well as the petroleum directly used by end-
users. 
 
Table 5.2-1-1. 
Net Reductions in Oil Imports in 2022  
(Using the NEMS Model)  
(millions of barrels per day) 
Category of Reduction 2022 
Imports of Finished Petroleum 
Products 0.823  
Imports of Crude Oil (0.007)  
Total Reduction 0.815  
Percent Reduction 6.15 
 
The NEMS model projects that for the year 2022 all of the reduction in petroleum 
imports comes out of finished petroleum products.  NEMS projects that 91 percent of the 
reductions in 2022 come from reduced net imports of crude oil and finished petroleum products 
(as compared to a 9 percent reduction in domestic U.S. production) . 
 
The results shown in Table 5.2.1-2 below reflect the net lifecycle reductions in U.S. oil 
imports projected by the use of the Regional Gasoline Market approach detailed above.  
 
Table 5.2.1-2. 
Net Reductions in Oil Imports in 2022 
(Using Regional Gasoline Market Approach) 
(millions of barrels per day) 
Category of Reduction 2022 
Imports of Finished Petroleum Products 0.250  
Imports of Crude Oil 0.637  
Total Reduction 0.887  
Percent Reduction 6.17% 
 
619  
The Regional Gasoline Market approach projects that for 2022, 72% of the petroleum 
supply displacement (on a volume basis) comes out of reduced net crude oil imports, and 28% 
out of net imports of finished petroleum products (excluding biofuels).  Using our two 
approaches for projecting total petroleum import reductions (the NEMS and the Regional 
Gasoline Market), we estimate that petroleum product imports will fall by between 0.815 to 
0.887 million barrels per day in 2022 as a result of the RFS2 proposal. 
 
Using the NEMS model, we also calculated the change in expenditures in both U.S. 
petroleum and ethanol imports with the RFS2 proposal and compared these with the U.S. trade 
position measured as U.S. net exports of all goods and services economy-wide.  Changes in fuel 
expenditures were estimated by multiplying the changes in gasoline, diesel, and ethanol net 
imports by the respective AEO 2008 wholesale gasoline and distillate price forecasts, and 
ethanol price forecasts from the Food and Agricultural Policy Research Institute (FAPRI) for the 
specific analysis years.  In Table 5.2.1-3, the net expenditures in reduced petroleum imports and 
increased ethanol imports are compared to the total value of U.S. net exports of goods and 
services for the whole economy for 2022.  The U.S. net exports of goods and services estimates 
are taken from Energy Information Administration’s Annual Energy Outlook 2008.  We project 
that avoided expenditures on imported petroleum products due to this proposal would be roughly 
$16 billion in 2022.  Relative to the 2022 projection, the total avoided expenditures on liquid 
transportation fuels are projected to be $12.4 billion with the RFS2 proposal.   
 
 Table 5.2.1-3. 
Changes in Expenditures on  
Transportation Fuel Net Imports  
(billions of 2006$)  
Category 2022 
AEO Total Net Exports 16 
Expenditures on Net Petroleum 
Imports (15.96) 
Expenditures on Net Ethanol and 
Biodiesel Imports 3.52  
Net Expenditures on 
Transportation Fuel Imports (12.44) 
 
 
5.2.2 Background on U.S. Energy Security 
 
 U.S. energy security is broadly defined as protecting the U.S. economy against 
circumstances that threaten significant short- and long-term increases in energy costs. 
Most discussion of U.S. energy security revolves around the topic of the economic costs of U.S. 
dependence on oil imports.  The problem is that the U.S. relies on sources of imported oil from 
potentially unfriendly and unstable sources.  In addition, oil exporters have the ability to raise the 
price of oil by exerting monopoly power through the formation of a cartel, the Organization of 
Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC).  Finally, these factors contribute to the vulnerability of 
the U.S. economy to episodic oil supply shocks and price spikes.  In 2005, U.S. imports of crude 
oil were $232 billion (see Figure 5.2.2-1). 
620  
 
Figure 5.2.2-1.  U.S. Expenditures on Crude Oil 
 
  
Source:   Annual Energy Review 2006 and International Energy Review 2004. Year 2005 values are preliminary. 
 
One effect of the RFS proposal is that it promotes diversification of transportation fuels 
in the U.S.  The result is that it reduces U.S. oil imports, which reduces both financial and 
strategic risks associated with a potential disruption in supply or a spike in the cost of a particular 
energy source.  This reduction in risks is a measure of improved U.S. energy security.  For the 
RFS2 proposal an “oil premium” approach is utilized to identify those energy-security related 
impacts which are not reflected in the market price of oil, and which are expected to change in 
response to an incremental change in the level of U.S. oil imports.  
 
5.2.3 Methodology Used to Estimate U.S. Energy Security Benefits 
 
 In order to understand the energy security implications of reducing U.S. oil imports, EPA 
has worked with Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL), which has developed approaches for 
evaluating the social costs and energy security implications of oil use.  In a new study entitled 
"The Energy Security Benefits of Reduced Oil Use, 2006-2015," produced for the Renewable 
Fuel Standard (RFS) Rule of 2007, ORNL has updated and applied the method used in the 1997 
report "Oil Imports: An Assessment of Benefits and Costs", by Leiby, Jones, Curlee and 
Lee.239,240   A draft of this updated report was included as part of the record in the final RFS 
                                                 
239
 Leiby, Paul N., Donald W. Jones, T. Randall Curlee, and Russell Lee, Oil Imports: An Assessment of Benefits 
and Costs, ORNL-6851, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, November, 1997. 
240
 The 1997 ORNL paper was cited and its results used  in DOT/NHTSA’s  rules establishing CAFE standards for 
2008 through 2011 model year light trucks.  See DOT/NHTSA, Final Regulatory Impacts Analysis:  Corporate 
Average Fuel Economy and CAFE Reform MY 2008-2011, March 2006. 
621  
rulemaking, and the public was invited to analyze this Report and provide other perspectives for 
best quantifying energy security benefits.  Since promulgation of the RFS rule, EPA has worked 
with ORNL to finalize the report and quantify the energy security benefits associated with a 
reduction in imported oil.  In addition, the Report has been the subject to an external peer review 
by six experts from outside the U.S. government.241  Updating the ORNL methodology to 
incorporate the comments from the Peer Reviewers, ORNL estimates that the total energy 
security benefits associated with a reduction of imported oil is $12.39/barrel, with a range of 
$6.88 - $18.52/barrel of imported oil reduced.  Highlights of the analysis are shown below.  
 
 The approach developed by ORNL estimates the incremental benefits to society, in 
dollars per barrel, of reducing U.S. oil imports, called “oil premium."  Since the 1997 publication 
of this report, changes in oil market conditions, both current and projected, suggest that the 
magnitude of the oil premium has changed.  Significant driving factors that have been revised 
include: projected world oil prices, current and anticipated levels of OPEC production, U.S. 
import levels, the estimated responsiveness of regional oil supplies and demands to price, and the 
likelihood of oil supply disruptions (see Table 5.2.3-1).  For this analysis, oil prices from the 
EIA's AEO 2007 were used.  Using the "oil premium" approach, estimates of benefits of 
improved U.S. energy security from reduced U.S. oil imports due to increased availability and 
use of other transportation fuels are calculated. 
 
Table 5.2.3-1.  Market and Parameter Changes Influencing Premium Estimate 
 
Source:  Leiby, Paul N. "The Energy Security Benefits of Reduced Oil Use, 2006-2015", Oak Ridge 
National Laboratory ORNL/TM-2007/028, July 2007. 
 
 In conducting this analysis, ORNL considered the full economic cost of importing 
petroleum into the U.S.  The full economic cost of importing petroleum into the U.S. is defined 
                                                 
241Leiby, Paul N.  “Estimating the Energy Security Benefits of Reduced U.S. Oil Imports:  Final Report”, 
ORNL/TM-2007/028, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, March 6, 2008. 
622  
for this analysis to include two components in addition to the purchase price of petroleum itself.  
These are: (1) the higher costs for oil imports resulting from the effect of U.S. import demand on 
the world oil price and OPEC market power (i.e., the "demand" or "monoposony" costs); and (2) 
the risk of reductions in U.S. economic output and disruption of the U.S. economy caused by 
sudden disruptions in the supply of imported oil to the U.S. (i.e., macroeconomic 
disruption/adjustment costs).    
 
5.2.3.1 Effect of Oil Use on Long-Run Oil Price, U.S. Import Costs, and Economic Output 
 
 The first component of the full economic costs of importing petroleum into the U.S. 
follows from the effect of U.S. import demand on the world oil price over the long-run.  Because 
the U.S. is a sufficiently large purchaser of foreign oil supplies, its purchases can affect the world 
oil price.  This monopsony power means that increases in U.S. petroleum demand can cause the 
world price of crude oil to rise, and conversely, that reduced U.S. petroleum demand can reduce 
the world price of crude oil.  Thus, one benefit of decreasing U.S. oil purchases, due to the 
increased availability and use of other transportation fuels, is the potential decrease in the crude 
oil price paid for all crude oil purchased. 
 
 The demand or monopsony effect can be readily illustrated with an example.  If the U.S. 
imports 10 million barrels per day at a world oil price of $50 per barrel, its total daily bill for oil 
imports is $500 million.  If a decrease in U.S. imports to 9 million barrels per day causes the 
world oil price to drop to $49 per barrel, the daily U.S. oil import bill drops to $441 million (9 
million barrels times $49 per barrel).  While the world oil price only declines $1, the resulting 
decrease in oil purchase payments of $59 million per day ($500 million minus $441 million) is 
equivalent to an incremental benefit of $59 per barrel of oil imports reduced, or $10 more than 
the newly-decreased world price of $49 per barrel.  This additional $10 per barrel “import cost 
premium” represents the incremental external benefits to U.S. society as a whole for avoided 
import costs beyond the price paid oil purchases.  This additional benefit arises only to the extent 
that reduction in U.S. oil imports affects the world oil price.  ORNL estimates this component of 
the energy security benefit to be $7.65/barrel, with a range of $2.86 – $13.53/barel of imported 
oil reduced. 
 
5.2.3.2 Short-Run Disruption Premium from Expected Costs of Sudden Supply Disruptions 
 
 The second component of the oil import premium, the “disruption premium", arises from 
the effect of oil imports on the expected cost of disruptions. A sudden increase in oil prices 
triggered by a disruption in world oil supplies has two main effects: (1) it increases the costs of 
imports in the short run, further expanding the transfer of U.S. wealth to foreign producers, and 
(2) it can lead to macroeconomic contraction, dislocation and GDP losses.  ORNL estimates the 
composite estimate of these two factors that comprise the “disruption premium” to be 
$4.74/barrel, with a range of $2.17 – $7.64/barrel of imported oil reduced.  
 
5.2.3.2.1 Higher Costs of Oil Imports and Wealth Transfer during Shocks 
 
 During oil price shocks, the higher price of imported oil causes increased payments for 
imports and a transfer of wealth from U.S. society to oil exporters.  This increased claim on U.S. 
623  
economic output is a loss to the U.S. that is separate from and additional to any reduction in 
economic output due to the shock.  The increased wealth transfer during shocks is counted as a 
loss to the degree that the expected price increase is not anticipated and internalized by oil 
consumers. 
 
5.2.3.2.2 Macroeconomic Costs: Potential Output Loss and Dislocation/Adjustment Costs 
 
 Macroeconomic losses during price shocks reflect both aggregate output losses and 
allocative losses.  The former are a reduction in the level of output that the U.S. economy can 
produce fully using its available resources; and the latter stem from temporary dislocation and 
underutilization of available resources due to the shock, such as labor unemployment and idle 
plant capacity.  The aggregate output effect, a reduction in “potential” economic output, will last 
so long as the price is elevated.  It depends on the extent and duration of any disruption in the 
world supply of oil, since these factors determine the magnitude of the resulting increase in 
prices for petroleum products, as well as whether and how rapidly these prices return to their pre-
disruption levels. 
 
 In addition to the aggregate contraction, there are “allocative” or “adjustment” costs 
associated with dislocated energy markets.  Because supply disruptions and resulting price 
increases occur suddenly, empirical evidence shows they also impose additional costs on 
businesses and households which must adjust their use of petroleum and other productive factors 
more rapidly than if the same price increase had occurred gradually.  Dislocational effects 
include the unemployment of workers and other resources during the time needed for their 
intersectoral or interregional reallocation, and pauses in capital investment due to uncertainty.  
These adjustments temporarily reduce the level of economic output that can be achieved even 
below the “potential” output level that would ultimately be reached once the economy’s 
adaptation to higher petroleum prices was complete.  The additional costs imposed on businesses 
and households for making these adjustments reflect their limited ability to adjust prices, output 
levels, and their use of energy, labor and other inputs quickly and smoothly in response to rapid 
changes in prices for petroleum products. 
 
 Since future disruptions in foreign oil supplies are an uncertain prospect, each of the 
disruption cost components must be weighted by the probability that the supply of petroleum to 
the U.S. will actually be disrupted.  Thus, the “expected value” of these costs – the product of the 
probability that a supply disruption will occur and the sum of costs from reduced economic 
output and the economy’s abrupt adjustment to sharply higher petroleum prices – is the relevant 
measure of their magnitude.  Further, when assessing the energy security value of a policy to 
reduce oil use, it is only the change in the expected costs of disruption that results from the 
policy that is relevant.  The expected costs of disruption may change from lowering the normal 
(pre-disruption) level of domestic petroleum use and imports, from any induced alteration in the 
likelihood or size of disruption, or from altering the short-run flexibility (elasticity) of petroleum 
use. 
 
 In summary, the steps needed to calculate the disruption or security premium are first, 
determine the likelihood of an oil supply disruption in the future; second, assess the likely 
impacts of a potential oil supply disruption on the world oil price; third, assess the impact of the 
624  
oil price shock on the U.S. economy (in terms of import costs and macroeconomic losses); and 
fourth, determine how these costs change with oil imports.  The value of price spike costs 
avoided by reducing oil imports becomes the oil security portion of the premium.  ORNL 
estimates the composite value that comprises the “disruption premium” to be $4.74/barrel, with a 
range of $2.17 – $7.64/barrel of imported oil reduced.    
 
5.2.3.3 Costs of Existing U.S. Energy Security Policies 
 
 The last often-identified component of the full economic costs of U.S. oil imports is the 
costs to the U.S. taxpayers of existing U.S. energy security policies.  The two primary examples 
are maintaining a military presence to help secure a stable oil supply from potentially vulnerable 
regions of the world and maintaining the Strategic Petroleum Reserve (SPR).  The SPR is the 
largest stockpile of government-owned emergency crude oil in the world.  Established in the 
aftermath of the 1973-74 oil embargo, the SPR provides the U.S. a response option should a 
disruption in commercial oil supplies threaten the U.S. economy.  It also allows the U.S. to meet 
part of its International Energy Agency obligation to maintain emergency oil stocks, and it 
provides a national defense fuel reserve.  
 
 U.S. military costs are excluded from the analysis performed by ORNL because their 
attribution to particular missions or activities is difficult.  Most military forces serve a broad 
range of security and foreign policy objectives.  Attempts to attribute some share of U.S. military 
costs to oil imports are further challenged by the need to estimate how those costs might vary 
with incremental variations in U.S. oil imports.  Similarly, while the costs for building and 
maintaining the SPR are more clearly related to U.S. oil use and imports, historically these costs 
have not varied in response to changes in U.S. oil import levels.  Thus, while SPR is factored 
into the ORNL analysis, the cost of maintaining the SPR is excluded. 
 
5.2.3.4 Modifications to Analysis Based Upon Peer Reviewer Comments 
 
 The Agency commissioned ORNL to conduct a number of sensitivity analyses to address 
the comments of the Peer Reviewers.  Based upon the Peer Reviewer comments, key parameters 
that influence the “oil import” premium were assessed.  Since not all the comments were in 
agreement with each other, several ranges of different parameters were developed for the 
analyses.  A summary of the results of the analyses are shown in Table 5.2.3-2. 
 
 Three key parameters were varied in order to assess their impacts on the oil import 
premium: (1) the response of OPEC supply, (2) the combined response of non-U.S., non-OPEC 
demand and supply and (3) the GDP response to a change in the world oil as a result of reduced 
U.S. oil imports.  The cases in Table 5.2.3-2 used updated supply/demand elasticities for non-
U.S./non-OPEC region after considering more recent estimates than those used in 1997 study.  
As a result, the total market responsiveness is greater than previous ORNL estimates.  Only 
small changes to the world oil price are anticipated from a substantial reduction in U.S. demand, 
on average, about $0.70/bbl for every million-barrels-per-day reduction in demand. 
 
 In the ORNL framework, OPEC-behavior is treated parametrically, with a wide range of 
possible responses represented by a range of supply elasticities.  Case One in the Table below 
625  
refers to the AEO 2007 estimates of energy market trends and uses the elasticity parameters from 
the original 1997 ORNL study.  In Case Two, the OPEC supply elasticities range for 0.25 to 6 
with a mean elasticity of 1.7.  Case Three alters the distribution of the OPEC supply elasticities 
so that the mean elasticity is 2.2 instead of 1.7.  With the more elastic OPEC oil supply in Case 
Three, the oil premium is lower.  Alternatively, a candidate rule for OPEC strategic response 
behavior, adapted from a lead article on what behavior maximizes OPEC’s long run net revenue 
in a robust way,242 would have OPEC responding to preserve its worldwide oil market share.  
This is presented as Case Seven.  Application of this rule instead of the range of OPEC supply 
responses used leads to an estimate of the oil import premium that is between Case Two and 
Case Three. 
 
 The second key parameter that was varied based upon Peer Reviewer comments was non-
OPEC, non-U.S. demand and supply responsiveness to a change in the U.S. oil import demand 
and, hence, the world oil price.  In Case Four (see Table below), the mean non-U.S./non-OPEC 
demand and supply elasticities are taken to each be 0.3.  When combined together, the net 
elasticity of import demand from this region — the non-U.S./non-OPEC region is — roughly 
1.6.  Case Five takes the Case Three assumptions of a more elastic OPEC supply behavior and 
combines those assumptions with the 1.6 net elasticity of import demand for the non-U.S./non-
OPEC region.  Case Six looks at the consequences of a yet higher net elasticity of import 
demand — 2.28 — for the non-U.S./non-OPEC region.  The impact on the oil import premium is 
relatively modest. 
 
 Cases Eight and Nine consider a reduced GDP elasticity, the parameter which 
summarizes the sensitivity of GDP to oil price shocks.  Several Reviewers suggested a lower 
estimate for this parameter.  In response to their comments, a couple of cases were examined 
where the GDP elasticity was lowered to 0.032 in comparison to the original ORNL estimate of 
0.0495.  As anticipated, this change lowered the oil import premium modestly.  For example, 
compared with Case Four where OPEC supply is more elastic, lowering the GDP elasticity with 
respect to the world oil price reduced the oil import premium by roughly $0.38/barrel.  This is 
because the GDP-dislocation component is only about one-quarter of the total premium, and 
there are offsetting changes in other components.  The last case examined, Case Ten, looks at the 
consequences for the oil import premium with a reduced elasticity of GDP if OPEC attempts to 
maintain its share of the world oil market. 
 
 Clearly there is an unavoidable degree of uncertainty about the magnitude of marginal 
economic costs from the U.S. importation of petroleum, and the size of the oil import premium.  
ORNL sought to reflect this with probabilistic risk analysis over key input factors, guided by the 
available literature and the best judgment of oil market experts.  Cases shown in Table 5.2.3-2 
explore some reasonable variations in the ranges of input assumptions and the mean oil premium 
estimates vary in a fairly moderate range between roughly $11 and $15/barrel of imported oil.  
On balance, Case Eight suggested a reasonable and cautious assessment of the premium value to 
ORNL, and is ORNL’s recommended case.  This is based on a review of important driving 
                                                 
242
 Gately, Dermot 2004.  "OPEC's Incentives for Faster Output Growth," The Energy Journal, 25(2):75-96,  "What 
Oil Export Levels Should We Expect From OPEC?" The Energy Journal, 28(2):151-173, 2007. 
 
 
626  
factors, the numerical evaluations and simulations over major uncertainties, and taking into 
consideration the many comments and suggestion from the Reviewers, the EPA and other 
Agencies.  This recommended case, and the premium range resulting from 90% of the simulated 
outcomes, encompasses a wide array of perspectives and potential market outcomes in response 
to a reduction of U.S. imports.  In this recommended case the mean costs (in 2006$) are: 
 
 Monopsony premium component:         $7.65/bbl, 
  Disruption component (macroeconomic and import costs):  $4.74/bbl, 
  Total midpoint:        $12.39/bbl +/- ~$6/bbl 
 
 This recommended case relies on the most recent available projections of the U.S. and 
world oil market for the next ten years based upon the AEO 2007 Reference Case.  OPEC-
behavior is treated parametrically, with a wide range of possible responses represented by a wide 
range of supply elasticities, from small to quite large.  This recommended case recognizes that 
the OPEC response is the most uncertain single element of this analysis.  It could vary between 
inelastic defense of output levels, or market share, or could be highly elastic in defense of price, 
probably at the expense of longer run cartel power and discounted net profits.  The balance 
between possible elastic and inelastic OPEC response is essentially even over a fairly wide range 
of elasticities.  ORNL concluded that this is the best way to estimate OPEC behavior until 
greater progress can be made in synthesizing what insights are available from the evolving 
strategic game-theoretic and empirical research on OPEC behavior, and advancing that research.  
An alternative would have been to use OPEC strategic response behavior to maximize long-run 
net revenue, which may well correspond to market-share preservation behavior (e.g., Case 
Seven), and a somewhat higher premium value. 
 
 Finally, ORNL’s recommended case uses a GDP elasticity range, the parameter which 
summarizes the sensitivity of GDP to oil price shocks, which is reduced compared to earlier 
estimates, and compared to the full range of historically-based estimates.  This helps address the 
concerns of those who either question the conclusions of past empirical estimates or expect that 
the impacts of oil shocks may well be declining. EPA requests comment on the ORNL oil 
security methodology outline above and the estimates of the recommended “oil premium” 
estimate developed using the ORNL methodology. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
627  
Component Statistic
1) AEO2007 
Base Outlook, 
1997 Study 
Elasticities
2) AEO2007 
Base Outlook, 
Wider range of 
OPEC Supply 
Elasticities
3) AEO2007 
Base Outlook, 
Revised Wider 
range of 
OPEC Supply 
Elasticities
4) AEO2007 
with Wider 
OPEC 
response (b), 
updated 
NonOPEC 
supply/demand 
elasticities
5) AEO2007 
with Revised 
Wider OPEC 
response (b), 
updated 
NonOPEC 
supply/demand 
elasticities
6)  Case (2) 
with wider, 
higher range of 
Non-US/Non-
OPEC 
supply/demand 
elasticities
7) Case 4 With 
Applied 
Strategic 
OPEC 
Behavioral 
Rule: Maintain 
Market Share
9) Case 4 with 
Reduced GDP 
Elasticity
10) Case 7 
with Reduced 
GDP Elasticity
Monopsony Component Mean $5.25 $9.68 $7.70 $7.34 $6.15 $6.08 $8.83 $7.41 $8.89
Range ($3.64 - $7.04) ($3.53 - $17.39) ($3.52 - $14.87) ($3.22 - $11.67) ($3.19 - $10.71) ($2.96 - $9.29) ($6.67 - $11.09) ($3.25 - $12.06) ($6.73 - $11.16)
Disruption Import Costs Mean $2.23 $2.20 $2.21 $1.81 $1.83 $1.82 $1.78 $2.07 $2.04
Range ($0.8 - $3.75) ($0.86 - $3.69) ($0.85 - $3.68) ($0.65 - $3.04) ($0.65 - $3.13) ($0.7 - $2.99) ($0.7 - $3.06) ($0.9 - $3.37) ($0.87 - $3.3)
Disruption Dislocation Costs Mean $3.61 $3.49 $3.55 $3.23 $3.26 $3.29 $3.22 $2.52 $2.49
Range ($1.19 - $5.79) ($1.18 - $5.65) ($1.18 - $5.75) ($1.05 - $5.22) ($1.04 - $5.24) ($1.03 - $5.34) ($1.03 - $5.28) ($1.01 - $4.09) ($0.99 - $3.96)
Economic Disruption/Adjustment CMean $5.84 $5.69 $5.76 $5.04 $5.09 $5.11 $5.00 $4.59 $4.54
Range ($3.38 - $8.51) ($3.26 - $8.49) ($3.34 - $8.47) ($2.77 - $7.43) ($2.85 - $7.6) ($2.82 - $7.59) ($2.81 - $7.53) ($2.56 - $6.74) ($2.59 - $6.74)
Total Mid-Point Mean $11.09 $15.37 $13.47 $12.38 $11.23 $11.19 $13.83 $12.00 $13.43
Range ($8.15 - $14.02) ($8.67 - $23.02) ($8.09 - $20.75) ($7.82 - $16.95) ($7.18 - $16.02) ($7.29 - $15.32) ($11.04 - $16.64) ($7.41 - $16.7) ($10.64 - $16.26)
Total Premium, in $/Gallon Mean $0.26 $0.37 $0.32 $0.29 $0.27 $0.27 $0.33 $0.29 $0.32
Price Reduction ($/MMBD) Mean $0.49 $0.98 $0.76 $0.71 $0.58 $0.57 $0.85 $0.71 $0.85
Variations
Table 5.2.3-2: Summary Results - Oil Import Premium Under Various Cases ($2005/BBL)
5) Revise Case 3, with OPEC behavior distributed over elasticities 0 to 6, so that 25% of response is inelastic (< 1.0), mode elasticity is 2.0 (mean elasticity is 2.2 rather than 1.7)
6)  Alternative to Case 3 with expanded (and higher) range of Non-US Supply/Demand elasticities.  Elasticity Non-US Demand = -0.3 to -0.7, traingular dist with mode -0.4 mean -0.467, 
Elasticity of Non-US Supply = 0.2 to 0.6, mode 0.3 and mean 0.367.  Implying (mode) net elasticity of import demand from NonUS/NonOPEC regions more than doubled to mode -1.92, mean 
7) Revise Case 6, with OPEC behavior distributed over elasticities 0 to 6, so that 25% of response is inelastic (< 1.0), mode elasticity is 2.0 (mean elasticity is 2.2 rather than 1.7)
8) Applied Strategic OPEC Behavioral Rule to (3): Maintain Market Share (Gately 2004 paper best strategy).  This rule implies that OPEC Supply elasticity matches that of all Non-OPEC 
supply.  As a result Non-US Elasticity of Import Demand ranges from 1.38 to 3.52, with mode 1.92.  Total elasticity of Net import supply to US then ranges from 2.96 to 7.78.
9) Variant on version Case 3,  Considered Reduced GDP Elasticity for future disruptions (range -0.01 to -0.054, midcase value -0.032.  Mean value is 0.032, reduced from mean value 
10) Revise Case 8 (which applied Strategic OPEC Behavioral Rule to (3): Maintain Market Share (Gately 2004 paper best strategy)) with Reduced GDP Elasticity for future disruptions (range -
0.01 to -0.054, midcase value -0.032.  Mean value is 0.032, reduced from mean value 0.0495). 
1) Based on AEO2007.  Updated oil market outlook from AEO1994 Base Case to AEO2007 Base Case.  Among other things, this means average crude price rises from $20.33 to $48.34. All 
elasticities match 1997 values.  Non-US Elasticity of Import demand = -0.876, parametric treatment of OPEC response with elasticity 1.0-5.0 (triangular distribution with mode 2.0).
2) AEO2007 Base Outlook, Wider range of OPEC Supply Elasticities, 0.25 to 6.0 (NOTE =RiskCumul(0,6,{0.25,1,4},{0.1,0.5,0.9}))
3)Revise Case 2, with OPEC behavior distributed over elasticities 0 to 6, so that 25% of response is inelastic (< 1.0), mode elasticity is 2.0 (mean elasticity is 2.2 rather than 1.7)
4)  Updated Case 2 Supply/Demand elasticities non NonOPEC region with more recent estimates.  Elasticity mode elasticity of Non-US Demand -0.2 to -0.4, with mean and mode -0.3, Non-
US Supply =  -0.2 to -0.4, with mean and mode 0.3, implying (mode) net elasticity of import demand from NonUS/NonOPEC regions ~doubled to -1.6.
628  
5.2.4 Estimates of per Barrel and Total U.S. Energy Security Benefits 
 
 Table 5.2.4-1 below summarizes ORNL’s estimate of the energy security benefits 
associated with the RFS2 proposal.  The components of the energy security benefit estimate are 
shown as well as the total U.S. energy security benefits associated with U.S. import reductions 
due to this proposed Rule, in Table 5.2.4-2. 
 
Table 5.2.4-1. 
Energy Security Benefits 
($/barrel in 2006$) 
Effect Updated ORNL Study 
Monopsony (best estimate) 
(range) 
$7.65 
$2.86 – $13.53 
Macroeconomic Disruption (best estimate) 
(range) 
$4.74 
$2.17 – $7.64 
Total (best estimate) 
(range) 
$12.39 
$6.88 - $18.52 
 
Total energy security benefits associated with the RFS2 proposal are calculated in Table 
5.2.4-1 for the year 2022.  These benefits are derived from the estimated reductions in imports of 
finished petroleum products and crude oil using an energy security premium price of 
$12.39/barrel. 
 
Table 5.2.4-1. 
Total Energy Security Benefits 
(billions of 2006$) 
Year 2022 
Benefits $10.08 
 
 
 
5.3 Benefits of Reducing GHG Emissions 
  
1. Introduction 
 
 The wider use of renewable fuels from the RFS2 proposal results in reductions in 
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions.  Carbon dioxide (CO2) and other GHGs mix well in the 
atmosphere, regardless of the location of the source, with each unit of emissions affecting global 
regional climates; and therefore, influencing regional biophysical and socioeconomic systems.  
The effects of changes in GHG emissions are felt for decades to centuries given the atmospheric 
lifetimes of GHGs.  This section provides estimates for the marginal and total benefits that could 
be monetized for the projected GHG emissions reductions of this proposal.  EPA requests 
comment on the approach utilized to estimate the GHG benefits associated with the proposal. 
 
2. Marginal GHG Benefits Estimates 
 
629  
 The projected net GHG emissions reductions associated with the proposal reflect an 
incremental change to projected total global emissions.  Therefore, as shown in Section 2.4, the 
projected global climate signal will be small but discernable (i.e., it incrementally shifts the 
distribution of projected global mean surface temperatures to the left with the upper end shifting 
more than the lower end).  Given that the climate response is projected to be marginal relative to 
the baseline climate, it is conceptually appropriate to use an approach that estimates the marginal 
value of changes in climate change impacts over time as an estimate for the monetized marginal 
benefit of the GHG emissions reductions projected for this proposal.  The marginal value of 
carbon is equal to the net present value of climate change impacts over hundreds of years of one 
additional net global metric ton of GHGs emitted to the atmosphere at a particular point in time.  
This marginal value (i.e., cost) of carbon is sometimes referred to as the “social cost of carbon.”   
 
 Based on the global implications of GHGs and the economic principles that follow, EPA 
has developed ranges of global marginal benefits estimates, as well as U.S. marginal estimates 
(Table 5.3-1).243  It is important to note at the outset that the estimates are incomplete since 
current methods are only able to reflect a partial accounting of the climate change impacts 
identified by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC; discussed more below).  
Also, domestic estimates omit impacts on the United States resulting from climate change 
impacts in other countries (e.g., economic or national security impacts).  The global estimates 
were developed from a survey analysis of the peer reviewed literature (i.e., meta analysis).  U.S. 
estimates, and a consistent set of global estimates, were developed from a single model and are 
highly preliminary, under evaluation, and likely to be revised.  The single model used was the 
Climate Framework for Uncertainty, Negotiation, and Distribution (FUND; discussed below).  It 
was necessary to develop the latter set of estimates because the peer reviewed literature does not 
provide regional (i.e., at the U.S. or China level) marginal benefits estimates, and, since the 
regional estimates are not directly comparable to the global meta analysis estimates, it was 
important to have a consistent set of regional and global estimates.  Ranges of estimates are 
provided to capture some of the uncertainties associated with modeling climate change impacts.  
 
The range of estimates is wide due to the uncertainties relating to socio-economic futures, 
climate responsiveness, impacts modeling, as well as the choice of discount rate.244  For instance, 
for 2007 emission reductions and a 2% consumption discount rate the global meta analysis 
estimates range from $-3 to $159/t CO2, while the U.S. estimates range from $0 to $16/t CO2.  
For 2007 emission reductions and a 3% consumption discount rate, the global meta-estimates 
range from $-4 to $106/t CO2, and the U.S. estimates range from $0 to $5/t CO2.245  The global 
meta analysis mean values for 2007 emission reductions are $68 and $40/t CO2 for discount rates 
of 2% and 3% respectively (in 2006 $) while the domestic mean values from a single model are 
                                                 
243
 For background on economic principles and the marginal benefit estimates, see Technical Support Document on 
Benefits of Reducing GHG Emissions, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, June 12, 2008,  www.regulations.gov 
(search phrase “Technical Support Document on Benefits of Reducing GHG Emissions”) 
244
 A discount rate reflects the rate at which people trade-off a dollar received today versus a dollar received a year 
from now.  People generally value benefits received today more than those received tomorrow.  As a result, when 
making decisions today, they tend to discount the benefits they receive in the future.  The actual discount rate 
depends on the decision-maker and the kind of investment.  In this context, the decision-maker is the Federal 
Government and changing GHG emissions is an investment with an extremely long-run annual (non-constant) 
return.  Therefore, social discounting and intergenerational discount rates are appropriate. 
245
 See Table 5.3-1 for global (FUND) estimates consistent with the U.S. estimates. 
630  
$4 and $1/t CO2 for the same discount rates.  The estimates for future year emission changes are 
likely to be higher as future marginal emissions increases are expected to produce larger 
incremental damages as physical and economic systems become more stressed as the magnitude 
of climate change increases.246 
 
 Table 5.3-1. 
Marginal GHG Benefits Estimates for Consumption Discount Rates of  
2%, 3%, and 7% and Year of Emissions Change  
(all values are reported in 2006$/tCO2) 
  
Low Central High Low Central High Low Central High
2007 -3 68 159 -4 40 106 n/a n/a n/a
2017 -2 91 213 -3 53 142 n/a n/a n/a
2022 -2 105 247 -2 62 165 n/a n/a n/a
2030 -1 134 314 -2 78 209 n/a n/a n/a
2040 -1 179 421 -1 105 281 n/a n/a n/a
2007 -6 88 695 -6 17 132 -3 -1 5
2017 -4 118 934 -4 23 178 -2 -1 7
2022 -4 136 1083 -4 26 206 -2 -1 9
2030 -3 173 1372 -3 33 261 -1 0 11
2040 -2 232 1843 -2 44 351 -1 0 15
2007 0 4 16 0 1 5 0 0 0
2017 0* 6 22 0* 1 7 0* 0* 0*
2022 0* 7 26 0* 2 9 0* 0* 0*
2030 0* 9 32 0* 2 11 0* 0* 0*
2040 0* 12 44 0* 3 15 0* 0* 0*
FUND 
domestic
FUND 
global
7%**2% 3%
Meta global
 
* These estimates, if explicitly estimated, may be greater than zero, especially in later years. They are currently reported as zero 
because the explicit estimates for an earlier year were zero and were grown at 3% per year. However, we do not anticipate that 
the explicit estimates for these later years would be significantly above zero given the magnitude of the current central estimates 
for discount rates of 2% and 3% and the effect of the high discount rate in the case of 7%. 
** Except for illustrative purposes, the marginal benefits estimates in the peer reviewed literature do not use consumption 
discount rates as high as 7%. 
 
The meta analysis ranges were developed from the Tol (2008) meta analysis.247  The 
meta analysis range only includes global estimates generated by more recent peer reviewed 
studies (i.e., published after 1995).  In addition, the ranges only consider regional aggregations 
using simple summation and intergenerational consumption discount rates of approximately 2% 
and 3%.  Discount rates of 2% and 3% are consistent with EPA and OMB guidance on 
intergenerational discount rates (EPA, 2000; OMB, 2003).248  The estimated distributions of the 
meta global estimates are right skewed with long right tails, which is consistent with 
characterizations of low probability high impact damages, such as catastrophic events like 
collapse of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet.249 250 251  Figure 5.3-1 provides the estimated 
                                                 
246
 The IPCC suggests an increase of 2-4% per year (IPCC WGII, 2007. Climate Change 2007 - Impacts, Adaptation 
and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the IPCC, 
http://www.ipcc.ch/).  For Table 5.3-1., we assumed the estimates increased at 3% per year.  For the final rule, we 
anticipate that we will explicitly estimate FUND marginal benefits values for each emissions reduction year. 
247
 Tol (2008) is an update of the Tol (2005) meta analysis. Tol (2005) was used in the IPCC Working Group II’s 
Fourth Assessment Report (IPCC WGII, 2007).  
248
 OMB and EPA guidance on inter-generational discounting suggests using a low but positive discount rate if there 
are important intergenerational benefits/costs. Consumption discount rates of 1% to 3% are given by OMB and 0.5% 
to 3% by EPA (OMB Circular A-4, 2003; EPA Guidelines for Preparing Economic Analyses, 2000). 
249
 Webster, M., C. Forest, J.M. Reilly, M.H. Babiker, D.W. Kicklighter, M. Mayer, R.G. Prinn, M. Sarofim, A.P. 
Sokolov, P.H. Stone & C. Wang, 2003. Uncertainty Analysis of Climate Change and Policy Response, Climatic 
Change 61(3): 295-320.  
631  
probability density functions by discount rate.  Following Tol (2008), we fit extreme value 
Fisher-Tippett distributions because they better reflected the right skewness of the data.252  Note 
that the x-axis of Figure 5.3-1 reflects that marginal value for emissions reductions circa 1995.  
As noted above, these values were grown to produce the estimates in Table 5.3-1.  The central 
meta estimates in Table 5.3-1 are means, and the low and high are the 5th and 95th percentiles.  
Means are presented because, as a central statistic, they better represent the skewed shape of 
these distributions compared to medians. 
 
Figure 5.3-1. 
Probability Density Functions for Meta Analysis Global Marginal Benefit Estimates for a 
Marginal Emissions Reduction circa 1995 and Consumption Discount Rates of 2% and 3% 
(Developed from Tol, 2008, Meta Analysis) 
 
 
-36               0               36              72             108            144           180 
2006$/tCO2
~2%
~3%
Pr
o
ba
bi
lit
y 
o
f 
$/t
CO
2
Pr
o
ba
bi
lit
y 
o
f 
$/t
CO
2
 
 
 The consistent domestic and global estimates were developed using the FUND integrated 
assessment model.253  The ranges were generated from sensitivity analysis where assumptions 
were varied with respect to climate sensitivity (1.5 to 6.0 degrees Celsius),254 the socio-economic 
                                                                                                                                                             
250
 Weitzman, M., 2007, “The Stern Review of the Economics of Climate Change,” Journal of Economic Literature.  
251
 Weitzman, M., 2007, “Structural Uncertainty and the Statistical Life in the Economics of Catastrophic Climate 
Change,” Working paper http://econweb.fas.harvard.edu/faculty/weitzman/papers/ValStatLifeClimate.pdf. 
252
 For our meta analysis, the sample sizes were 13 and 10 for consumption discount rates of 2% and 3% 
respectively. A sample size of 10 or greater is considered sufficient for estimating an extreme value distribution 
(Carter, D. J. T. and P. G. Challenor, 1983.  Application of extreme value analysis to Weibull data, Quart. J. R. Met. 
Soc. 109, 429-433). 
253
 FUND is a spatially and temporally consistent framework across regions of the world (e.g., U.S., China), impacts 
sectors, and time. FUND explicitly models impacts sectors in 16 global regions.  FUND is one of the few models in 
the world that explicitly models global and regional marginal benefits estimates.  Numerous applications of FUND 
have been published in the peer reviewed literature dating back to 1997.  See 
http://www.fnu.zmaw.de/FUND.5679.0.html. 
254
 In IPCC reports, equilibrium climate sensitivity refers to the equilibrium change in the annual mean global 
surface temperature following a doubling of the atmospheric equivalent carbon dioxide concentration.  The IPCC 
states that climate sensitivity is “likely” to be in the range of 2°C to 4.5°C and described 3°C as a "best estimate", 
which is the mode (or most likely) value.  The IPCC goes on to note that climate sensitivity is “very unlikely” to be 
less than 1.5°C and “values substantially higher than 4.5°C cannot be excluded.”  IPCC WGI, 2007, Climate Change 
632  
and emissions baseline scenarios (the FUND default baseline and three baselines from the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Special Report on Emissions Scenarios, 
SRES),255 and the consumption discount rates of approximately 2%, 3%, and 7%, where 2% and 
3% are consistent with intergenerational discounting.256  Furthermore, the model was calibrated 
to the EPA value of a statistical life of $7.4 million (2006$).257  The FUND global estimates are 
the sum of the regional estimates within FUND.  The FUND global and domestic central values 
in Table 5.3-1 are weighted averages of the FUND estimates from the sensitivity analysis. The 
low and high values are the low and high estimates across the sensitivity runs.  See Table 5.3-2 
for the global and domestic marginal benefit estimates by baseline, climate sensitivity, and 
discount rate.  The weighted averages were calculated using a climate sensitivity probability 
density function based on IPCC WGI (2007) and equal weights for the alternative socioeconomic 
baselines.258  
 
Table 5.3-2. 
Global and Domestic Marginal Benefit Estimates from FUND Modeling by Baseline, 
Climate Sensitivity (CS), and Discount Rate (DR) for an Additional Unit of Emissions in 
2005 (2006$/t CO2) 
Baseline DR = ~2% ~3% ~7% ~2% ~3% ~7% ~2% ~3% ~7% ~2% ~3% ~7% ~2% ~3% ~7%
FUND -$2 -$5 -$3 $9 -$2 -$3 $43 $9 -$1 $140 $35 $1 $365 $81 $5
A1b -$6 -$5 -$3 $0 -$3 -$2 $16 $3 -$2 $54 $16 $0 $114 $37 $3
A2 -$2 -$6 -$3 $15 -$1 -$3 $68 $13 -$2 $240 $51 $1 $655 $125 $5
B2 -$4 -$5 -$3 $8 -$2 -$3 $43 $8 -$2 $145 $34 $1 $409 $83 $4
FUND $0 $0 $0 $1 $0 $0 $3 $1 $0 $7 $2 $0 $11 $4 $0
A1b $0 $0 $0 $1 $0 $0 $2 $1 $0 $6 $2 $0 $10 $3 $0
A2 $0 $0 $0 $2 $0 $0 $4 $1 $0 $9 $3 $0 $15 $5 $0
B2 $0 $0 $0 $1 $0 $0 $3 $1 $0 $7 $2 $0 $11 $4 $0
G
lo
ba
l
D
om
es
ti
c
CS = 1.5 deg C 2 3 4.5 6
 
 
Figures 5.3-2 through 5.3-5 provide the undiscounted global and domestic annual 
marginal benefits from our FUND modeling for an illustrative set of scenarios from our 
sensitivity analysis for an incremental emissions change in 2005.259  The figures illustrate the 
                                                                                                                                                             
2007 - The Physical Science Basis, Contribution of Working Group I to the Fourth Assessment Report of the IPCC, 
http://www.ipcc.ch/. 
255
 The IMAGE model SRES baseline data were used for the A1b, A2, and B2 scenarios (IPCC, 2000. Special 
Report on Emissions Scenarios.  A special report of Working Group III of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge).  The A1b baseline represents a world focused on global 
economic growth with an increasingly globalized economy, with a balanced energy technology portfolio between 
fossil fuel and non-fossil fuel supply and consumption, and diffusion of technological advances.  The A2 baseline 
represents a world focused on regional economic growth with increasing inequality between regions as developed 
regions grow more quickly than developing regions.  B2 represents a world focused on both global economic growth 
and environmental improvement. 
256
 The EPA guidance on intergenerational discounting states that “[e]conomic analyses should present a sensitivity 
analysis of alternative discount rates, including discounting at two to three percent and seven percent as in the intra-
generational case, as well as scenarios using rates in the interval one-half to three percent as prescribed by optimal 
growth models.” (EPA, 2000) 
257
 This number may be updated to be consistent with recent EPA Office of Air and Radiation regulatory impact 
analyses that has used a value of $6.4 million (in 2006 real dollars). 
258
 The climate sensitivity probability density function was calibrated to the cumulative density functions in Chapter 
10 of IPCC WGI (2007), and the IPCC’s formal definitions for climate sensitivity likelihood.  
259
 Undiscounted annual benefits are not available for the meta analysis estimates.  The FUND default year for our 
runs is 2005. FUND marginal benefit estimates for subsequent years in Table 5.3-1 were computed by growing the 
2005 values at 3%/year as discussed above. 
633  
sensitivity of the global and domestic results to baseline and climate responsiveness.  These 
streams of annual benefits were discounted following the common approach of Ramsey 
discounting, which incorporates changes in economic growth and the marginal utility of 
consumption over time.260  We calibrated our discounting to produce U.S. consumption discount 
rates of approximately 2% and 3% in order to be consistent with OMB and EPA inter-
generational discounting guidance.  The resulting calibration produced 2005 rates of 2.7% to 
2.9% for the U.S., and 1.8% to 5.5% across regions.  The rates vary by region and time period as 
regional annual growth in per capita consumption changes.  
 
Figure 5.3-2. 
Undiscounted Global Annual Marginal Benefits from FUND Modeling for an Emissions 
Reduction in 2005 with the FUND Default Baseline and Climate Sensitivities of  
1.5, 2.0, 3.0, 4.5, and 6.0  
-$2
$0
$2
$4
$6
$8
$10
$12
$14
$16
20
10
20
20
20
30
20
40
20
50
20
60
20
70
20
80
20
90
21
00
21
10
21
20
21
30
21
40
21
50
21
60
21
70
21
80
21
90
22
00
22
10
22
20
22
30
22
40
22
50
22
60
22
70
22
80
22
90
20
06
$/t
CO
2/y
e
a
r
CS6.0 FUND
CS4.5 FUND
CS3.0 FUND
CS2.0 FUND
CS1.5 FUND
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
260
 A constant discount rate implies constant economic growth, which is unrealistic over long time horizons.  Interest 
rates are a function of economic growth; and, increasing (declining) economic growth implies an increasing 
(declining) discount rate.  Furthermore, increasing uncertainty in economic growth implies, among other things, 
increasing uncertainty in interest rates and declining certainty equivalent rates of returns to capital (Hansen, A.C., 
2006. “Do declining discount rates lead to time inconsistent economic advice?” Ecological Economics 60(1), 138-
144.) 
634  
 
 
Figure 5.3-3. 
Undiscounted Global Annual Marginal Benefits from FUND Modeling for an  
Emissions Reduction in 2005 with the SRES A1b, A2, B2, and FUND Default Baselines  
and a Climate Sensitivity of 3.0 
 
-$2
$0
$2
$4
$6
$8
$10
$12
20
10
20
20
20
30
20
40
20
50
20
60
20
70
20
80
20
90
21
00
21
10
21
20
21
30
21
40
21
50
21
60
21
70
21
80
21
90
22
00
22
10
22
20
22
30
22
40
22
50
22
60
22
70
22
80
22
90
20
06
$/t
CO
2
CS3.0 FUND
CS3.0 A1b
CS3.0 A2
CS3.0 B2
 
 
Figure 5.3-4. 
Undiscounted U.S. Annual Marginal Benefits from FUND Modeling for an  
Emissions Reduction in 2005 with the FUND Default Baseline and  
Climate Sensitivities of 1.5, 2.0, 3.0, 4.5, and 6.0  
-$0.05
$0.00
$0.05
$0.10
$0.15
$0.20
$0.25
$0.30
20
10
20
20
20
30
20
40
20
50
20
60
20
70
20
80
20
90
21
00
21
10
21
20
21
30
21
40
21
50
21
60
21
70
21
80
21
90
22
00
22
10
22
20
22
30
22
40
22
50
22
60
22
70
22
80
22
90
20
06
$/t
CO
2
CS6.0 FUND
CS4.5 FUND
CS3.0 FUND
CS2.0 FUND
CS1.5 FUND
 
 
 
 
 
 
635  
 
 
 
Figure 5.3-5. 
Undiscounted U.S. Annual Marginal Benefits from FUND Modeling for an Emissions 
Reduction in 2005 with the SRES A1b, A2, B2, and FUND Default Baselines  
and a Climate Sensitivity of 3.0 
-$0.02
$0.00
$0.02
$0.04
$0.06
$0.08
$0.10
$0.12
$0.14
$0.16
20
10
20
20
20
30
20
40
20
50
20
60
20
70
20
80
20
90
21
00
21
10
21
20
21
30
21
40
21
50
21
60
21
70
21
80
21
90
22
00
22
10
22
20
22
30
22
40
22
50
22
60
22
70
22
80
22
90
20
06
$/t
CO
2
CS3.0 FUND
CS3.0 A1b
CS3.0 A2
CS3.0 B2
 
 
 From Tables 5.3-1 and 5.3-2, we see that the estimates are very sensitive to assumptions.  
The FUND sensitivity analysis shows that higher marginal benefits estimates are associated with 
higher climate sensitivities, lower economic growth per capita globally and regionally, and lower 
discount rates.  In terms of the current monetized benefits, the domestic marginal benefits are a 
fraction of the global marginal benefits.  Given uncertainties and omitted impacts, it is difficult 
to estimate the actual ratio of total domestic benefits to total global benefits.  The estimates 
suggest that an emission reduction will have direct benefits for current and future U.S. 
populations and large benefits for global populations.  The long-run and intergenerational 
impacts due to GHG emissions are evident in the difference in results across discount rates.  In 
the current modeling, there are substantial long-run benefits (beyond the next two decades to 
over 100 years) and some near-term benefits as well as negative effects (e.g., agricultural 
productivity and heating demand).  High discount rates give less weight to the future benefits in 
the net present value calculations, and more weight to near-term effects.  Table 5.3-2 also 
illustrates that an additional unit of emissions is estimated to have a proportionally larger effect 
on the rest of the world compared to the U.S. if the climate and/or economic system turn out to 
be more sensitive (i.e., climate sensitivity of 6 degrees Celsius and A2 baseline respectively) to 
an increasing stock of GHGs in the atmosphere scenarios.  Some of these points are discussed 
more below.  
 
3. Discussion of Marginal GHG Benefits Estimates 
 
 This section briefly discusses important issues relevant to the marginal benefits estimates 
in Table 5.3-1.  Because of the global nature of CO2 and other greenhouse gases, estimating the 
marginal benefits required a global modeling framework with consistent integrated 
636  
socioeconomics, emissions, climate change, and impacts.  Given uncertainties in socio-economic 
futures (e.g., population growth, economic growth, and technology availability and diffusion), 
corresponding GHG emissions, climate responses to emissions changes, and the bio-physical and 
economic impacts associated with changes in climate, the quantified (physical and monetized) 
estimates of climate change are inherently uncertain. 
 
The broad range of estimates in Table 5.3-1 reflects some of the uncertainty associated 
with estimating monetized marginal benefits of climate change.  The meta analysis range reflects 
differences in these assumptions as well as differences in the modeling of changes in climate and 
impacts considered and how they were modeled.  EPA considers the meta analysis results to be 
more robust than the single model estimates in that the meta results reflect uncertainties in both 
models and assumptions.  
 
 The current state-of-the-art for estimating benefits is important to consider when 
evaluating policies.  There are significant partially quantified and omitted impact categories not 
captured in the estimates provided above.  The IPCC Working Group II (IPCC WGII; 2007) 
concluded that current estimates are “very likely” to be underestimated because they do not 
include significant impacts that have yet to be monetized.261  Current estimates do not capture 
many of the main reasons for concern about climate change, including non-market damages 
(e.g., species existence value and the value of having the option for future uses, such as for 
biomedical, tourism, or recreational purposes), the effects of climate variability, risks of potential 
extreme weather (e.g., droughts, heavy rains and wind), socially contingent effects (such as 
violent conflict or humanitarian crisis), and thresholds (or tipping points) associated with species, 
ecosystems, and potential long-term catastrophic events.  Some scientists believe that effects on 
factors such as arctic summer ice, Himalayan-Tibetan Glaciers, and the Greenland ice sheet are 
more sensitive to near-term GHG emissions changes, implying that there are non-linearities in 
the effects attributable to GHG emissions.262  Underestimation is even more likely when one 
considers that the current trajectory for GHG emissions is higher than what is being considered 
in current integrated assessment modeling (such as that reflected in the modeling represented in 
Tol, 2008, and Clarke et al., 2006).  When combined with current regional population and 
income trajectories that are more asymmetric than what is currently modeled, this implies greater 
climate change and vulnerability to climate change.   
 
 In Table 5.3-3, we provide a list of the impacts categories currently modeled in the 
FUND model, and an initial, partial list of categories of impacts that are currently not modeled in 
the FUND model and are thus not reflected in the FUND estimates.  Table 5.3-4 provides an 
initial list of some more specific types of impacts reported on by the IPCC but are not currently 
captured in FUND.263  A key challenge for many impacts sectors is data limitations (primarily 
physical data).  Note that most of the omitted impacts are likely to lead to additional benefits in 
response to reductions in GHG emissions, including international impacts that could affect 
domestic benefits (e.g., potential impact feedbacks to the United States, U.S. concern for 
                                                 
261
 IPCC WGII, 2007. In the IPCC report, “very likely” was defined as a greater than 90% likelihood based on 
expert judgment. 
262
 Ramanathan and Feng, 2008. On avoiding dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system: 
Formidable challenges ahead. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 105:143245-14250. 
263
 IPCC WGII (2007) Summary for Policy Makers and Chapter 14 North America. 
637  
international impacts, and international participation).  EPA is planning to develop a full 
assessment of what is not currently being captured in FUND for the final rule.  In addition, EPA 
plans to quantify omitted impacts and update impacts currently represented to the extent possible 
for the final rule.  
 
Table 5.3-3. 
Lists of Impact Categories Modeled and Omitted from Current FUND Modeling 
(see Table 5.3-4 for specific types of impacts omitted) 
 
 
 
Impacts currently modeled in FUND 
 
 
• Agricultural production 
• Forestry production 
• Water resources 
• Energy consumption for space 
cooling & heating 
• Sea level rise dry land loss, wetland 
loss, and coastal protection costs 
• Forced migration due to dry land 
loss 
• Changes in human health (mortality, 
morbidity) associated with diarrhea 
incidence, vector-borne diseases, 
cardiovascular disorders, and 
respiratory disorders 
• Hurricane damage 
• Loss of ecosystems/biodiversity 
 
Examples of impacts omitted from 
current FUND modeling 
 
• Catastrophic events (e.g., Antarctic 
ice sheet collapse) 
• Risks from extreme weather (e.g., 
death, disease and economic 
damage from droughts, floods, and 
fires) 
• Air quality degradation (e.g., 
increased ozone effects including 
premature mortality, forest damage) 
• Increased infrastructure costs (e.g., 
water management systems, roads, 
bridges) 
• Increased insurance costs 
• Social and political unrest abroad 
that affects U.S. national security 
• Damage to foreign economies that 
affects the U.S. economy 
• Domestic valuation of international 
impacts 
• Costs from uncertainty and changes 
in risk 
• Arctic sea ice melt and global 
transportation & trade 
638  
Table 5.3-4. 
Initial List of Specific Types of Impacts Not Current Captured in FUND 
Reduction in growing season (Sahel/southern Africa)
Increase in growing season in moderate climates
Impact of precipitation changes on agriculture
Impact of weather variability on crop production
Reverse of carbon uptake, amplification of climate change
Earlier timing of spring events/ longer growing season
Poleward and upward shift in habitats/species migraiton
Shifts in ranges of ocean life
Increases in algae and zooplankton
Range changes/earlier migration of fish in rivers
Increase in ocean acidification/ impacts on coral reefs
Ecosystem service disruption (e.g. loss of cold water fish habitat in the U.S.)
Coral bleaching due to ocean warming
Energy production/infrastructure
Water temperature/supply impacts on energy production
Forest changes with longer fire seasons, longer burning fires, and increased burn area
Disappearance of alpine habitat in the United States
Tropical forest dieback in the Amazon
National security/armed conflict
Insurance costs with changes in extreme weather, flooding, and sea level rise
Distributional effects within regions
Societies that are highly dependent on climate-sensitive resources are highly vulnerable
Extreme weather events
Increased deaths, injuries, infectious diseases, stress-related disorders with more frequent 
extreme weather
Increased heavy rainfall increased risks to human health associated with waterborne disease, 
increased baterial counts
Increases in malnutrition
Health impacts due to interactions with air quality
Changes in Arctic/Antarctic ecosystems
Enlargement and increased numbers of glacial lakes/ increased flooding
Snow pack in SE US
Changes in tourism revenues due to changes in ecosystems and weather events (e.g., 
wildfires, droughts, hurricances)
Arctic hunting/travel/mountain sports
River flooding
Infrastructure, water supply
Precipitation changes on water supply
Increasing ground instability and avalanches
Increased/earlier runoff in snow-fed rivers
W
at
er
G
D
P/
ec
on
om
y
H
ea
lth
Sn
ow
/
gl
a
ci
er
To
ur
is
m
Ag
ric
u
ltu
re
Bi
om
es
/e
co
sy
st
em
s
En
er
gy
Fo
re
st
 
 
 The current estimates are also deterministic in that they do not account for the value 
people have for changes in risk associated with the lower likelihood of potential impacts 
associated with reductions in CO2 and other GHG emissions (i.e., a risk premium).  This is an 
issue that has concerned Weitzman and other economists.264  We plan to conduct a formal 
uncertainty analysis for the final rule to attempt to account for, to the extent possible, these and 
other changes in uncertainty.  
 
                                                 
264
 See Webster et al., 2003; Weitzman, M., 2007. 
http://econweb.fas.harvard.edu/faculty/weitzman/papers/ValStatLifeClimate.pdf. 
639  
In part because monetized benefit estimates reflect a subset of climate change impacts, it 
is important in evaluating policies for reducing GHGs to consider the available scientific and 
other qualitative information on climate change impacts as well.  A summary of potential U.S. 
climate change impacts based on the existing literature is provided in a report by the U.S. 
Climate Change Science Program, “Scientific Assessment of the Impacts of Climate Change in 
the United States,” released in May 2008.  A similar scientific overview that discusses 
international as well as domestic impacts is provided in an EPA technical support document that 
underwent interagency review and was finalized in June 2008.265  These reports contain 
information relevant to some of the omitted impacts categories in the tables above (e.g., in the 
EPA document, section 6f discusses abrupt climate change; section 15(a) discusses national 
security), as well as on impacts that are monetized in this analysis. 
 
There are two important points to keep in mind in applying the estimates in Table 5.3-1 
and this kind of modeling.  First, the estimates in Table 5.3-1 are not estimates of economically 
“optimal” marginal benefits (i.e., they are not associated with an emissions reduction level where 
marginal benefits equal marginal costs).  The estimates in Table 5.3-1 are only relevant for 
incremental policies relative to the projected baselines (that do not reflect potential future climate 
policies) and there is substantial uncertainty associated with the estimates themselves both in 
terms of what is being modeled and what is not being modeled, with many uncertainties outside 
of observed variability.266  Furthermore, the estimates only represent the value of a marginal 
emissions change in a specific year, they do not account for potential affects of current 
reductions on the value of reductions in the future.  These points are important for non-marginal 
emissions changes and estimating total benefits.  For example, current estimates of marginal 
emissions changes do not model threshold impacts, variability changes, or changes in the 
likelihood of these impacts.   
 
Second, because current marginal benefits estimates are incomplete and highly uncertain 
(with many uncertainties outside of observed variability), we cannot use them to identify an 
economically optimal (or economically efficient) standard, even for incremental changes in 
global GHG emissions, and it creates issues in applying positive net benefit criteria.  The 
uncertainty shifts attention to consideration of changes in risk and points to the importance of 
considering factors beyond monetized benefits and costs.  In an uncertain situation such as that 
associated with climate, EPA typically recommends that analysis consider a range of benefit and 
cost estimates, and the potential implications of non-monetized and non-quantified benefits. 
 
                                                 
265
 “Technical Support Document for the Endangerment Analysis for Greenhouse Gas Emissions Under the Clean 
Air Act, Sixth Order Draft” Climate Change Division, Office of Atmospheric Programs, U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency, Washington, D.D., June 21, 2008 
266
 With projected increasing changes in climate, some types of potential climate change impacts may occur 
suddenly or begin to increase at a much faster rate, rather than increasing gradually or smoothly.  In this case, there 
are likely to be jumps in the functioning of species and ecosystems, the frequency and intensity of extreme 
conditions (e.g., heavy rains, forest fires), and the occurrence of catastrophic events (e.g., collapse of the West 
Antarctic Ice Sheet).  As a result, different approaches are necessary for quantifying the benefits of “small” 
(incremental) versus “large” (non-incremental) reductions in global GHGs.  Marginal benefits estimates, like those 
presented above, can be useful for estimating benefits for small changes in emissions.  However, for large changes 
in emissions, a more comprehensive assessment of impacts would be needed to capture changes in economic and 
biophysical dynamics and feedbacks in response to the policy.  Even small reductions in global GHG emissions are 
expected to reduce climate change risks, including catastrophic risks.  
640  
Economic principles suggest that global benefits should also be considered when 
evaluating alternative GHG reduction policies.  GHG emissions are different from most air 
pollutants, due to their global and intergenerational externality implications.  A ton of GHG 
emitted from any location or source can result in impacts throughout the globe and across 
multiple generations.  Climate change can therefore be characterized as a global and 
intergenerational public good.  Typically, because the benefits and costs of most environmental 
regulations are predominantly domestic, EPA focuses on benefits that accrue to the U.S. 
population when quantifying the impacts of domestic regulation.  However, OMB’s guidance for 
economic analysis of federal regulations also specifically allows for consideration of 
international effects.267  GHG have global and very long-run implications for climate, a global 
public good, and economic principles suggest that the full costs to society of emissions should be 
considered in order to identify the policy that maximizes the net benefits to society, i.e., achieves 
an efficient outcome (Nordhaus, 2006).268  As such, estimates of global benefits more fully 
capture the value to society than domestic estimates and will result in higher global net benefits 
for GHG reductions when considered.269 
 
Furthermore, international effects of climate change may also affect domestic benefits 
directly and indirectly to the extent that U.S. citizens value international impacts (e.g., for 
tourism reasons, concerns for the existence of ecosystems, and/or concern for others); U.S. 
international interests are affected (e.g., risks to U.S. national security or the U.S. economy from 
potential disruptions in other nations); and/or domestic mitigation decisions affect the level of 
mitigation and emissions changes in general in other countries (i.e., the benefits realized in the 
U.S. will depend on domestic and international emissions changes).  The economics literature 
also suggests that policies based on direct domestic benefits will result in little appreciable 
reduction in global GHGs (e.g., Nordhaus, 1995).270  While these marginal benefits estimates are 
not comprehensive or economically optimal, the global estimates in Table 5.3-1 can help guide 
policies towards more efficient levels of provision of the public good since they internalize a 
larger portion of the full costs to society a unit of emissions — the global and intergenerational 
externalities.  
 
 A key challenge facing EPA is the appropriate discount rate over the longer timeframe 
relevant for GHGs.  When considering climate change investments, they should be compared to 
similar investments (via the discount rate).  EPA typically discounts future costs or benefits back 
to the present using a discount rate, where the discount rate represents how society trades off 
                                                 
267
 OMB (2003), page 15. 
268
 Nordhaus, W., 2006, "Paul Samuelson and Global Public Goods,” in M. Szenberg, L. Ramrattan, and A. 
Gottesman (eds), Samuelsonian Economics, Oxford. 
269
 Both the United Kingdom and the European Commission followed these economic principles in 
consideration of the global social cost of carbon (SCC) for valuing the benefits of GHG emission 
reductions in regulatory impact assessments and cost-benefit analyses (Watkiss et al, 2006).  Recently, the National 
Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) issued the final Environmental Impact Statement for their 
proposed rulemaking for average fuel economy standards for passenger cars and light trucks in which the preferred 
alternative is based on domestic marginal benefit estimates for carbon dioxide reductions. See Average Fuel 
Economy Standards, Passenger Cars and Light Trucks, MY 2011-2015, Final Environmental Impact Statement 
http://www.nhtsa.dot.gov/portal/site/nhtsa/menuitem.43ac99aefa80569eea57529cdba046a0/  
270
 Nordhaus, William D. (1995). “Locational Competition and the Environment: Should Countries 
Harmonize Their Environmental Policies?” in Locational Competition in the World Economy, Symposium 
1994, ed., Horst Siebert, J. C. B. Mohr (Paul Siebeck), Tuebingen, 1995. 
641  
current consumption for future consumption.  With the benefits of GHG emissions reductions 
distributed over a very long time horizon, benefit and cost comparisons are likely to be very 
sensitive to the discount rate.  For policies with relatively short time horizons, up to 30 years or 
so (i.e., that affect the current generation of people), the analytic approach used by EPA is to use 
discount rates of 3% and 7% percent at a minimum.271  A 3% rate is consistent with what a 
typical consumer might expect in the way of a risk free market return.  A 7% rate is an estimate 
of the average before-tax rate of return to private capital in the U.S. economy.  
 
However, what discount rates are appropriate for discounting social benefits and costs 
over the longer timeframe relevant for climate change policies?  Changes in GHG emissions — 
both increases and reductions — are essentially long-run investments in changes in climate and 
the potential impacts from climate change.  Investments in climate change represent longer-term 
investments in infrastructure and technologies associated with mitigation, where there are annual 
returns of avoided impacts over a period of one hundred years and longer that affect multiple 
generations.  Furthermore, there is a potential for significant impacts from climate change, where 
the exact timing and magnitude of these impacts are unknown.  These factors imply an uncertain 
investment environment with uncertain economic growth that varies over time.  
 
When there are important benefits or costs that affect multiple generations of the 
population, EPA and OMB allow for low but positive consumption discount rates (e.g., 0.5% to 
3% noted by the U.S. EPA, 1% to 3% by the OMB).272  In this multi-generation context, a three 
percent discount rate is consistent with observed interest rates from long-term investments 
available to current generations (net of risk premiums) as well as current estimates of the impacts 
of climate change that reflect potential impacts on consumers.  A review of the literature 
indicates that rates of three percent or lower are more consistent with long-run uncertainty in 
economic growth and interest rates, considerations of issues associated with the transfer of 
wealth between generations, and the risk of high impact climate damages (which could reduce or 
reverse economic growth).  Given the uncertain environment, analysis could also consider 
evaluating uncertainty in the discount rate (e.g., Newell and Pizer, 2001, 2003).273 274   
 
For the final rulemaking, we will be developing and updating the FUND model to the 
extent possible based on the latest research and peer reviewing the estimates.  To improve upon 
our estimates, we hope to evaluate several factors not currently captured in the proposed 
estimates due to time constraints.  For example, we will quantify additional impact categories 
where possible and provide a qualitative evaluation of the implications of what is not monetized.  
We also plan to conduct an uncertainty analysis, consider complementary bottom-up analyses, 
                                                 
 
271
 EPA (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency), 2000. Guidelines for Preparing Economic Analyses. EPA 240-R-
00-003.  See also OMB (U.S. Office of Management and Budget), 2003. Circular A-4. September 17, 2003. 
272
 EPA (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency), 2000. Guidelines for Preparing Economic Analyses. EPA 240-R-
00-003.  See also OMB (U.S. Office of Management and Budget), 2003. Circular A-4. September 17, 2003.  These 
documents are the guidance used when preparing economic analyses for all EPA rulemakings. 
273
 Newell, R. and W. Pizer, 2001. Discounting the benefits of climate change mitigation: How much do 
uncertain rates increase valuations? Pew Center on Global Climate Change, Washington, DC.  
274
 Newell, R. and W. Pizer, 2003.  Discounting the distant future: how much do uncertain rates increase valuations? 
Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 46: 52–71. 
642  
and develop estimates of the marginal benefits associated with non-CO2 GHGs relevant to the 
RFS2 proposal (e.g., CH4, N2O, and HFC-134a).275   
 
EPA solicits comment on the appropriateness of using U.S. and global values in 
quantifying the benefits of GHG reductions and the appropriate application of benefits estimates 
given the state of the art and overall uncertainties.  We also seek comment on our estimates of 
the global and U.S. marginal benefits of GHG emissions reductions that EPA has developed, 
including the scientific and economic foundations, the methods employed in developing the 
estimates, the discount rates considered, current and proposed future consideration of uncertainty 
in the estimates, marginal benefits estimates for non-CO2 GHG emissions reductions, and 
potential opportunities for improving the estimates.  We are also interested in comments on 
methods for quantifying benefits for non-incremental reductions in global GHG emissions. 
 
4. Total Monetized GHG Benefits Estimates 
 
As described in Section 2.3, annualized equivalent GHG emissions reductions associated 
with the proposal in 2022 would be 160 million metric tons of CO2 equivalent (MMT CO2eq) in 
with a 2% discount rate, and 155 and 136 MM CO2eq with discount rates of 3% and 7% 
respectively.   
 
This section provides the monetized total GHG benefits estimates associated with the 
proposal in 2022. As discussed above in subsection three, these estimates do not include 
significant impacts that have yet to be monetized. Total monetized benefits in 2022 are 
calculated by multiplying the marginal benefits per metric ton of CO2 in that year by the 
annualized equivalent emissions reductions. For the final rulemaking, we plan to separate the 
emissions reductions by gas and use CO2 and non-CO2 marginal benefits estimates. Non- CO2 
GHGs have different climate and atmospheric implications and therefore different marginal 
climate impacts.  
 
Table 5.3-5 provides the estimated monetized GHG benefits of the proposal for 2022.  
The large range of values in the tables reflects some of the uncertainty captured in the range of 
monetized marginal benefits estimates presented in Table 5.3-1.276 All values in this section are 
presented in 2006 real dollars.   
 
                                                 
275
 Due to differences in atmospheric lifetime and radiative forcing, the marginal benefit values of non- CO2 GHG 
reductions and their growth rates over time will not be the same as the marginal benefits of CO2 emissions 
reductions (IPCC WGII, 2007). 
276
 EPA notes, however, that the Ninth Circuit recently rejected an approach of assigning no monetized value to 
greenhouse gas reductions resulting from vehicular fuel economy.  Center for Biodiversity v. NHTSA, F. 3d, (9th 
Cir. 2007). 
643  
Table 5.3-5. 
Monetized GHG Benefits of the Proposed Rule in 2022 
(2006$) 
2% 3% 7%
Low (319,061,009)$         (309,349,169)$          n/a
Central 16,750,702,953$     9,589,824,244$        n/a
High 39,404,034,565$     25,521,306,456$      n/a
Low (638,122,017)$         (618,698,338)$          (271,603,078)$        
Central 21,696,148,586$     4,021,539,199$        (135,801,539)$        
High 172,771,536,170$   31,862,964,424$      1,222,213,851$      
Low $0 $0 $0
Central 1,116,713,530$       309,349,169$           $0
High 4,147,793,112$       1,392,071,261$        $0
Meta 
global
FUND 
global
FUND 
domestic
Marginal benefit
 
 
 
5.4 Quantified and Monetized Co-pollutant Health and Environmental 
Impacts  
 
This section describes EPA’s analysis of the co-pollutant health and environmental 
impacts that can be expected to occur as a result of this renewable fuels proposal throughout the 
period from initial implementation through 2030.  GHG emissions are predominantly the 
byproduct of fossil fuel combustion processes that also produce criteria and hazardous air 
pollutants.  The fuels that are subject to the proposed standard are also significant sources of 
mobile source air pollution such as direct PM, NOx, VOCs and air toxics.  The proposed 
standard would affect exhaust and evaporative emissions of these pollutants from vehicles and 
equipment.  The proposal would also affect emissions from upstream sources such as fuel 
production, storage, and distribution and agricultural emissions.  Changes in ambient ozone, 
PM2.5, and air toxics that would result from the proposal are expected to affect human health in 
the form of premature deaths and other serious human health effects, as well as other important 
public health and welfare effects.   
 
It is important to quantify the health and environmental impacts associated with the 
proposal because a failure to adequately consider these ancillary impacts could lead to an 
incorrect assessment of their net costs and benefits.  Moreover, these co-pollutant impacts would 
tend to accrue in the near term, while any effects from reduced climate change mostly accrue 
over a time frame of several decades or longer.  In addition, co-pollutant impacts accrue largely 
to those countries undertaking mitigation action (such as the U.S.), in contrast to the benefits of 
reduced climate change risks that accrue at a global level. 
 
EPA typically quantifies and monetizes the PM- and ozone-related health and 
environmental impacts in its regulatory impact analyses (RIAs) when possible.  However, we 
were unable to do so in time for this proposal.  EPA attempts to make emissions and air quality 
modeling decisions early in the analytical process so that we can complete the photochemical air 
quality modeling and use that data to inform the health and environmental impacts analysis.  
Resource and time constraints precluded the Agency from completing this work in time for the 
proposal.  EPA will, however, provide a complete characterization of the health and 
environmental impacts, both in terms of incidence and valuation, for the final rulemaking.   
644  
 
This section explains what PM- and ozone-related health and environmental impacts EPA 
will quantify and monetize in the analysis for the final rules.  EPA will base its analysis on peer-
reviewed studies of air quality and health and welfare effects and peer-reviewed studies of the 
monetary values of public health and welfare improvements, and will be consistent with benefits 
analyses performed for the recent analysis of the proposed Ozone NAAQS and the final PM 
NAAQS analysis.277,278  These methods will be described in detail in the RIA prepared for the 
final rule.   
 
Though EPA is characterizing the changes in emissions associated with toxic pollutants, 
we will not be able to quantify or monetize the human health effects associated with air toxic 
pollutants for either the proposal or the final rule analyses.  Please refer to Chapter 3 of the RIA 
for more information about the air toxics emissions impacts associated with the proposed 
standard. 
 
5.4.1 Human Health and Environmental Impacts  
 
To model the ozone and PM air quality benefits of the final rules, EPA will use the 
Community Multiscale Air Quality (CMAQ) model (see Chapter 3 of the RIA for a description 
of the CMAQ model).  The modeled ambient air quality data will serve as an input to the 
Environmental Benefits Mapping and Analysis Program (BenMAP).279  BenMAP is a computer 
program developed by EPA that integrates a number of the modeling elements used in previous 
RIAs (e.g., interpolation functions, population projections, health impact functions, valuation 
functions, analysis and pooling methods) to translate modeled air concentration estimates into 
health effects incidence estimates and monetized benefits estimates.   
 
Tables 5.4.1-1 and 5.4.1-2 list the co-pollutant health effect exposure-response functions 
(PM2.5 and ozone, respectively) we will use to quantify the co-pollutant incidence impacts 
associated with the final standards. 
 
                                                 
277
 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.  July 2007.  Regulatory Impact Analysis of the Proposed Revisions to the 
National Ambient Air Quality Standards for Ground-Level Ozone.  Prepared by: Office of Air and Radiation.  EPA-
452/R-07-008. 
278
 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.  October 2006.  Final Regulatory Impact Analysis (RIA) for the 
Proposed National Ambient Air Quality Standards for Particulate Matter.  Prepared by: Office of Air and Radiation.   
279
 Information on BenMAP, including downloads of the software, can be found at http://www.epa.gov/ttn/ecas/ 
benmodels.html. 
645  
Table 5.4.1-1. 
Health Impact Functions Used in BenMAP to Estimate Impacts of PM2.5 Reductions 
 
Health Endpoint Study 
Population Used 
in BenMAP 
Premature Mortality – Derived 
from Epidemiological Literature 
  
 (Pope et al., 2002)  >29 years 
 (Laden et al., 2006) >24 years 
 (Woodruff et al., 1997) Infant (<1 year) 
Premature Mortality – Derived 
from Expert Elicitation 
  
 (IEc, 2006) >24 years 
Chronic Illness   
  Chronic Bronchitis (Abbey et al., 1995) >26 years 
  MyoFAPRIial Infarctions, 
Nonfatal 
(Peters et al., 2001) >17 years 
Hospital Admissions   
  Respiratory (Moolgavkar, 2003) (COPD) >64 years 
 (Ito, 2003) (COPD) >64 years 
 (Moolgavkar, 2000a) (COPD, less 
Asthma) 
18-64 years 
 (Ito, 2003) (Pneumonia) >64 years 
 (Sheppard, 2003) (Asthma) <65 years 
  FAPRIiovascular (Moolgavkar, 2000b) (All 
FAPRIiovascular, less MI) 
18-64 years 
 (Moolgavkar, 2003) (All 
FAPRIiovascular, less MI) 
>64 years 
 (Ito, 2003) (Ischemic Heart Disease, 
less MI; Dysrhythmia; Heart 
Failure) 
>64 years 
ER Visits, Asthma (Norris et al., 1999) <18 years 
Other Health Endpoints   
  Acute Bronchitis (Dockery et al., 1996) 8-12 years 
  Upper Respiratory Symptoms (Pope et al., 1991) 9-11 years 
  Lower Respiratory Symptoms (Schwartz and Neas, 2000) 7-14 years 
  Asthma Exacerbation   
 (Ostro et al., 2001) (Wheeze, 
Cough, Shortness of Breath) 
6-18 years 
 (Vedal et al., 1998) (Cough) 6-18 years 
  Work Loss Days (Ostro, 1987) 18-64 years 
  Minor Restricted Activity Days (Ostro and Rothschild, 1989) 18-64 years 
 
 
 
 
 
646  
Table 5.4.1-2. 
Health Impact Functions Used in BenMAP to Estimate Benefits of Ozone Reductions 
 
Health Endpoint Study 
Population Used 
in BenMAP 
Premature mortality (Bell et al., 2004)  
Meta-analyses: 
Bell et al. (2005) 
Ito et al. (2005) 
Levy et al. (2005) 
All ages 
Hospital Admissions   
  Respiratory (Moolgavkar, 1997) (Pneumonia) >64 years 
 (Moolgavkar, 1997) (COPD) >64 years 
 (Schwartz, 1994a) (Pneumonia) >64 years 
 (Schwartz, 1994b) (COPD) >64 years 
 (Schwartz, 1995) >64 years 
 (Burnett et al. 2001) <2 years 
ER Visits, Asthma (Jaffe et al., 2003) 5-34 years 
 (Peel et al., 2005) All ages 
 (Wilson et al., 2005) All ages 
Other Health Endpoints   
  School Absence Days (Chen et al., 2000) 5-17 years 
 (Gilliland et al., 2001) 5-17 years 
  Minor Restricted Activity Days (Ostro and Rothschild, 1989) 18-64 years 
 
 
5.4.2 Monetized Impacts 
  
Table 5.4.2-1 presents the monetary values we will apply to changes in the incidence of 
health and welfare effects associated with the final standards.   
 
647  
Table 5.4.2-1. Valuation Metrics Used in BenMAP to Estimate Monetary Benefits  
 
Endpoint Valuation Method 
Valuation 
(2000$) 
Premature mortality Assumed Mean VSL $5,500,000 
Chronic Illness   
  Chronic Bronchitis WTP: Average Severity  $340,482 
  MyoFAPRIial Infarctions, 
Nonfatal 
Medical Costs Over 5 Years. Varies by 
age and discount rate.  Russell (1998) 
--- 
 Medical Costs Over 5 Years. Varies by 
age and discount rate.  Wittels (1990) 
--- 
Hospital Admissions   
  Respiratory, Age 65+ COI: Medical Costs + Wage Lost $18,353 
  Respiratory, Ages 0-2 COI: Medical Costs  $7,741 
  Chronic Lung Disease (less    
  Asthma) 
COI: Medical Costs + Wage Lost $12,378 
  Pneumonia COI: Medical Costs + Wage Lost $14,693 
  Asthma COI: Medical Costs + Wage Lost $6,634 
  FAPRIiovascular COI: Medical Costs + Wage Lost (20-
64) 
$22,778 
 COI: Medical Costs + Wage Lost (65-
99) 
$21,191 
ER Visits, Asthma COI: Smith et al. (1997) $312 
 COI: Standford et al. (1999) $261 
Other Health Endpoints   
  Acute Bronchitis WTP: 6 Day Illness, CV Studies $356 
  Upper Respiratory Symptoms WTP: 1 Day, CV Studies $25 
  Lower Respiratory Symptoms WTP: 1 Day, CV Studies $16 
  Asthma Exacerbation WTP: Bad Asthma Day, Rowe and 
Chestnut (1986) 
$43 
  Work Loss Days Median Daily Wage, County-Specific --- 
  Minor Restricted Activity Days WTP: 1 Day, CV Studies $51 
  School Absence Days Median Daily Wage, Women 25+ $75 
  Worker Productivity Median Daily Wage, Outdoor 
Workers, County-Specific, Crocker 
and Horst (1981) 
--- 
Environmental Endpoints 
  Recreational Visibility WTP: 86 Class I Areas --- 
Source: Dollar amounts for each valuation method were extracted from BenMAP version 2.4.5.   
 
5.4.3 Other Unquantified Health and Environmental Impacts 
 
In addition to the co-pollutant health and environmental impacts we will quantify for the 
analysis of the final standards (listed in the preceding sections), there are a number of other 
health and human welfare endpoints that we will not be able to quantify because of current 
limitations in the methods or available data.  These impacts are associated with emissions of air 
toxics (including benzene, 1,3-butadiene, formaldehyde, acetaldehyde, acrolein, and ethanol), 
ambient ozone, and ambient PM2.5 exposures.  Table 5.4.3-1 lists these unquantified health and 
environmental impacts. 
 
648  
Table 5.4.3-1.  Unquantified and Non-Monetized Potential Effects 
 
Pollutant/Effects Effects Not Included in Analysis - Changes in: 
Ozone Healtha Chronic respiratory damage 
Premature aging of the lungs 
Non-asthma respiratory emergency room visits 
Exposure to UVb (+/-)d 
Ozone Welfare Yields for  
-commercial forests 
-some fruits and vegetables 
-non-commercial crops 
Damage to urban ornamental plants 
Impacts on recreational demand from damaged forest aesthetics 
Ecosystem functions 
Exposure to UVb (+/-) 
PM Healthb Premature mortality - short term exposuresc 
Low birth weight 
Pulmonary function 
Chronic respiratory diseases other than chronic bronchitis 
Non-asthma respiratory emergency room visits 
Exposure to UVb (+/-) 
PM Welfare Residential and recreational visibility in non-Class I areas 
Soiling and materials damage 
Damage to ecosystem functions 
Exposure to UVb (+/-) 
Nitrogen and Sulfate 
Deposition Welfare 
Commercial forests due to acidic sulfate and nitrate deposition  
Commercial freshwater fishing due to acidic deposition  
Recreation in terrestrial ecosystems due to acidic deposition   
Existence values for currently healthy ecosystems  
Commercial fishing, agriculture, and forests due to nitrogen deposition  
Recreation in estuarine ecosystems due to nitrogen deposition 
Ecosystem functions 
Passive fertilization 
CO Health Behavioral effects 
Hydrocarbon 
(HC)/Toxics Healthe 
Cancer (benzene, 1,3-butadiene, formaldehyde, acetaldehyde, ethanol) 
Anemia (benzene) 
Disruption of production of blood components (benzene) 
Reduction in the number of blood platelets (benzene) 
Excessive bone marrow formation (benzene) 
Depression of lymphocyte counts (benzene) 
Reproductive and developmental effects (1,3-butadiene, ethanol) 
Irritation of eyes and mucus membranes (formaldehyde) 
Respiratory irritation (formaldehyde) 
Asthma attacks in asthmatics (formaldehyde) 
Asthma-like symptoms in non-asthmatics (formaldehyde) 
Irritation of the eyes, skin, and respiratory tract (acetaldehyde) 
Upper respiratory tract irritation and congestion (acrolein) 
HC/Toxics Welfare Direct toxic effects to animals 
Bioaccumulation in the food chain 
Damage to ecosystem function 
Odor 
a
   In addition to primary economic endpoints, there are a number of biological responses that have been associated 
with ozone health effects including increased airway responsiveness to stimuli, inflammation in the lung, acute 
649  
inflammation and respiratory cell damage, and increased susceptibility to respiratory infection.  The public health 
impact of these biological responses may be partly represented by our quantified endpoints. 
b
 In addition to primary economic endpoints, there are a number of biological responses that have been associated 
with PM health effects including morphological changes and altered host defense mechanisms.  The public health 
impact of these biological responses may be partly represented by our quantified endpoints. 
c
 While some of the effects of short-term exposures are likely to be captured in the estimates, there may be 
premature mortality due to short-term exposure to PM not captured in the cohort studies used in this analysis.  
However, the PM mortality results derived from the expert elicitation do take into account premature mortality 
effects of short term exposures. 
d
 May result in benefits or disbenefits. 
e
 Many of the key hydrocarbons related to this rule are also hazardous air pollutants listed in the Clean Air Act. 
 
While there will be impacts associated with air toxic pollutant emission changes that 
result from the final standards, we will not attempt to monetize those impacts.  This is primarily 
because currently available tools and methods to assess air toxics risk from mobile sources at the 
national scale are not adequate for extrapolation to incidence estimations or benefits assessment.  
The best suite of tools and methods currently available for assessment at the national scale are 
those used in the National-Scale Air Toxics Assessment (NATA).  The EPA Science Advisory 
Board specifically commented in their review of the 1996 NATA that these tools were not yet 
ready for use in a national-scale benefits analysis, because they did not consider the full 
distribution of exposure and risk, or address sub-chronic health effects.280  While EPA has since 
improved the tools, there remain critical limitations for estimating incidence and assessing 
benefits of reducing mobile source air toxics.  EPA continues to work to address these 
limitations; however, we do not anticipate having methods and tools available for national-scale 
application in time for the analysis of the final rules.  Please refer to the final Mobile Source Air 
Toxics Rule RIA for more discussion.281 
 
                                                 
280
 Science Advisory Board.  2001.  NATA – Evaluating the National-Scale Air Toxics Assessment for 1996 – an 
SAB Advisory.  http://www.epa.gov/ttn/atw/sab/sabrev.html. 
281
 U.S. EPA. 2007.  Control of Hazardous Air Pollutants from Mobile Sources – Regulatory Impact Analysis.  
Assessment and Standards Division.  Office of Transportation and Air Quality.  EPA420R-07-002.  February. 
650 
Chapter 6:  Impacts on Water 
 
 
6.1 Feedstock Production and Water Quality 
 
 As the production and price of corn and other biofuel feedstocks increase, there may be 
substantial impacts to both water quality and water quantity.  To analyze the impact, EPA 
focused on corn production for several reasons.  Corn acres have increased dramatically, 20 
percent in 2007 from 2006, an increase of over 15 million additional corn acres for a total of 93.6 
million acres.  Over two-thirds of the new corn acres came from soybean production.901  Most of 
the remaining acres came from the conversion to corn from cotton.  Although corn acres declined 
seven percent to 87.3 million acres in 2008 due to strong prices for other commodities including 
soybeans, total corn acres remained the second highest since 1946.902    
 
 There are three major pathways for contaminants to reach water from agricultural lands:  
runoff from the land’s surface, subsurface tile drains, or leaching to ground water.  A variety of 
management factors influence the potential for contaminants such as fertilizers, sediment, and 
pesticides to reach water from agricultural lands.  These factors include nutrient and pesticide 
application rates and application methods, use of conservation practices and crop rotations by 
farmers, and acreage and intensity of tile drained lands.  Additional factors outside an 
agricultural producers control include soil characteristics, climate, and proximity to waterbodies. 
 
6.1.1 Corn Production and Water Quality 
  
 The rapid growth in corn acres may have major implications for water quality.  Unlike 
soybeans and other legumes, corn needs large amounts of fertilizer, especially nitrogen fertilizers 
to produce economic yields.  Of all current and potential feedstocks for biofuels, corn has the 
greatest application rates of both fertilizer and pesticides per acre and accounts for the largest 
share of nitrogen use among all crops.903  If fertilizers are applied at rates or times when the corn 
cannot use them, they are available to runoff or leach to water.  Corn generally utilizes only 40 to 
60 percent of applied nitrogen.  The remaining nitrogen is available to leave the field and runoff 
to surface waters, leach into ground water, or volatilize to the air where it can return to water 
through depositional processes.  Farmers were expected to apply an additional one million tons 
of nitrogen fertilizer to the 2007 corn crop.904     
 
 Historically, corn has been grown in rotation with other crops such as wheat, hay, oats, 
and especially soybeans.  As corn prices increase relative to prices for other crops, farmers chose 
to grow corn every year (continuous corn).  Much of the recent growth in corn acres has come 
from reductions in a corn-soybean rotation to continuous corn.  Although the amount of losses of 
nitrogen fertilizers to ground and surface water vary, continuous corn loses significantly more 
nitrogen annually than a corn-soybean rotation.905  In 2005, the last year for which data is 
available, the U.S. average nitrogen fertilization rate for corn was 138 pounds per acre.  For 
soybeans the average rate was 16 pounds per acre.906  Soybeans fix nitrogen, so they do not 
require as much fertilizer for adequate growth.   
 
651 
 Continuous corn may have additional impacts on the rates of fertilizer and pesticide use.  
Continuous corn has lower yields per acre than corn grown in rotation.  In response, farmers may 
add higher rates of nitrogen fertilizer to try to match yields of corn grown in rotation.  
Alternatively, if farmers maintain fertilization rates with these reduced yields, the amount of 
unused nutrients will increase and eventually be lost to the environment.  Growing continuous 
corn also increases population densities of pests such as corn rootworm.  Farmers may increase 
use of pesticides to control these pests.  Total corn herbicide use may also increase due to the 
additional corn acres, especially for atrazine, the most commonly used herbicide on corn.    
 
There are potential toxicity concerns with volatilization of pesticide active ingredients,907 
in addition to concerns with contamination of foods and drinking water.  Furthermore, raising 
acreage under corn production will increase the quantity of pesticide products in use.  Further 
assessment is necessary to determine whether there is the potential for adverse human health 
effects from any increase in pesticide use associated with increased domestic corn production.   
 
 The most commonly used types of pesticides associated with corn production and storage 
largely belong to two broad use categories, herbicides and insecticides.  The majority of the more 
common corn herbicide products presently on the market contain an organochlorine-type (OC) 
active ingredient (a.i.).  For the most part, OC herbicides inhibit cell division and growth while a 
subgroup of these products, the atrazine-containing OC herbicides, inhibit plant photosynthesis.  
Another type of common corn herbicide, the phosphonoglycene or glyphosate–containing 
organophosphate (OP) herbicides, inhibit protein synthesis in plants.  Several of the common 
corn herbicide compounds, such as acetochlor, carbaryl and alachlor, are classified by EPA as 
known or likely human carcinogens and oral exposure to some of these a.i. compounds at high 
enough levels has resulted in adverse health effects, on organs such as the liver or kidney in 
animals.908, 909, 910 
 
 The majority of common corn insecticides are split fairly evenly between OP- and 
carbamate-type a.i. compounds, with the top selling corn insecticide products, by sales of a.i. by 
weight, generally contain methomyl.  Methomyl is an N-methyl-carbamide compound which 
inhibits the acetylcholinesterase enzyme, causing neurotoxicity in both insects and humans.911  It 
is classified by EPA as an E/unlikely human carcinogen912 and its use is regulated as a compound 
highly toxic to most aquatic and land animals. 
 
 High corn prices may encourage farmers to grow corn on land where row crops are not 
currently grown.  If land is not in row crop production, it generally is an indication that the land 
is marginal for row crop production though the land may still be used for agriculture, such as 
pasture land.  Typically, agricultural producers apply far less fertilizer and pesticide on pasture 
land than land in row crops.  Corn yield on these marginal lands will be lower, limiting nutrient 
uptake and causing a higher percentage of nutrients under standard fertilization rates to be 
underutilized and ultimately lost to the environment.  However since nitrogen fertilizer prices are 
tied to natural gas prices, fertilizer costs have increased significantly.  According to U. S. 
Department of Agriculture (USDA) Economic Research Service, nitrogen fertilizer prices 
increased 44.5 percent from July 2007 to July 2008.913  It is unclear how agricultural producers 
responded to these increases in both corn and fertilizer prices. 
 
652 
 EPA does not have sufficient data to determine the impact of high corn prices on the 
fertilization rates of traditional corn acres or other agricultural land brought into corn production.  
Agricultural producers may increase nitrogen fertilizer application rates on all corn acres to 
increase yields or the higher cost and more efficient of the fertilizer may limit rate increases.  
The USDA National Agricultural Statistics Service has announced that it will discontinue its 
national Agriculture Chemical Use reports, collected since 1990, the only survey of its kind.  
Therefore, it will be very difficult to obtain future information on fertilizer and pesticide 
application rates. 
 
 Tile drains are another important factor in determining the losses of fertilizer from 
cropland.  Tile drainage consists of subsurface tiles, pipes, or drainage ditches that move water 
from wet soils to surface waters quickly so crops can be planted.  Tile drainage has allowed large 
expanses of historic wetland soils to become productive agriculture lands.  However, the tile 
drains also move fertilizers and pesticides more quickly to surface waters without any of the 
attenuation that would occur if these contaminants moved through soils or wetlands.  The highest 
proportion of tile drainage occurs in the Upper Mississippi and the Ohio-Tennessee River 
basins.914  Significantly increased use of conservation practices such as improved drainage 
management and constructed wetlands are necessary to reduce high nitrogen loadings from tile 
drained lands. 
 
6.1.2 Impact on Farm Bill Conservation Programs 
 
 The increase in corn production and prices may also have significant impacts on 
conservation programs funded by the USDA.  USDA funds a variety of voluntary programs to 
help agricultural producers implement conservation practices on their operations.  These 
programs fall into two basic categories:  land retirement and working lands. 
 
 USDA’s largest land retirement program and its largest conservation program is the 
Conservation Reserve Program (CRP).  Under CRP farmers receive annual rental payments 
under 10- to 15- year contracts to take land out of agricultural production and plant grasses or 
trees on those acres.  Generally farmers put land into CRP because it is not as productive and has 
other characteristics that make the cropland more environmentally sensitive, such as high erosion 
rates.  The 2008 Farm Bill (Food, Conservation and Energy Act of 2008) lowered the cap on 
CRP acres from 39.2 million acres to 32 million acres.  Prior to the passage of the new farm bill, 
farmers had already not renewed their contracts on over two million acres of CRP in response to 
higher crop prices.  USDA expects another 4.6 million acres to come out of CRP between 2007 
and 2010, 1.4 million acres in major corn producing states.915 
 
 CRP acres provide valuable environmental benefits both for water quality and for wildlife 
habitat.  CRP is an important component of rare grassland habitats in the Midwest and Great 
Plains.916  CRP payments are based on the average agricultural land rental rates in the area.  As 
land values increase due to increase in crop prices, CRP payments are not keeping up with the 
higher land rental rates.  Farmland in Iowa increased an average of 18 percent in 2007 from 2006 
prices.917  Midwestern states, where much of the nation’s corn is grown, tend to have 
reenrollment rates lower than the national average. 
 
653 
 The largest USDA conservation program on working lands is the Environmental Quality 
Incentives Program (EQIP).  About $1 billion is given to farmers annually to implement 
conservation practices on their farms.  Farmers are paid a percentage of the cost of installing the 
practices, generally ranging from 50 to 90 percent.  Conservation practices encompass a wide 
range that can have a significant impact on pollutants reaching ground or surface water from 
crop production.  EQIP cost-shares with farmers for important practices such as nutrient 
management, cover crops, livestock manure storage, and riparian buffers.  Like CRP, high corn 
prices may have an impact on the willingness of agricultural producers to participate in EQIP.  
Producers may require higher payments to offset potential loss of profits through implementation 
of conservation practices.  
 The effectiveness of agricultural conservation practices in controlling runoff and/or 
leaching of nutrients, sediment, and pesticides at the field level has been established by 
numerous scientific studies across many geographic areas.  However, the usefulness of these 
practices in achieving water quality goals is dependent on their placement within watersheds. To 
most effectively protect water quality, conservation practices should be targeted to the most 
vulnerable areas of watersheds.  Conservation practices designed to meet wildlife goals will need 
different targeting mechanisms to ensure adequate habitat.  USDA through the Conservation 
Effects Assessment Project (CEAP) is trying to evaluate the effectiveness of controlling 
pollution from agricultural lands at the watershed level.VVVVVVVVVVV  In order to ensure that 
Farm Bill conservation programs meet their environmental quality goals, the EPA’s Science 
Advisory Board report to the Gulf of Mexico Task Force (SAB) also recommends implementing 
the practices through competitive bidding to ensure that the highest environmental benefit is 
achieved at the least cost.918  It also warns that voluntary programs without economic incentives 
are unlikely to be effective to control nitrogen and phosphorus, except for a few practices. 
 The most cost-effective practices on working lands include: riparian buffers; crop 
rotation; appropriate rate, timing, and method of nutrient application; cover crops; and, on tile-
drained lands, treatment wetlands and controlled drainage.  These practices have significant 
water pollution reduction benefits that vary based on the site-specific conditions and on the 
implementation and operation and maintenance of the practice.   For example, controlled 
drainage can reduce nitrogen loads by 30 percent; treatment wetlands by 40 percent to 90 
percent; vegetative buffers by 12 percent to 90 percent.    
6.1.3 Other Agricultural Biofuel Feedstocks     
    
 While corn is the most common feedstock for biofuel production by far, under this 
proposal, in later years other agricultural feedstocks will become increasingly important.  These 
feedstocks will have dramatically different impacts on water quality.  Biodiesel feedstocks, 
primarily soybeans, as well as cellulosic feedstock such as switchgrass or popular trees are not 
expected to have significant water quality impacts.  As noted previously, soybeans require little 
to no additional nitrogen fertilizer.  However, soybeans have less residue compared to corn, so 
sediment runoff could be more of a concern, depending on how each crop is managed.  
Switchgrass may be a more favorable biofuels crop for reducing water impacts.  It is a native 
plant which does not require high inputs of fertilizers or pesticides and since it is a perennial 
                                                 
VVVVVVVVVVV
 See http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/technical/nri/ceap/index.html  
654 
crop, there is limited sediment runoff compared to annual crops.  There is very minimal acreage 
of switchgrass grown commercially at the present time, so it is difficult to predict what inputs 
farmers will use to cultivate it.  Some concern has been expressed about farmers increasing 
switchgrass fertilizer application rates to dramatically increase yields.    
 
 Corn stover, at the present time, appears to be one of the most viable feedstock for 
cellulosic ethanol, especially in the Corn Belt states.  Corn stover is the above ground stalks, 
husks, and corn cobs that remain once the corn grain is harvested.  Farmers keep the corn stover 
on their cropland to maintain the productivity of the soil.  Corn stover maintains the soil organic 
carbon which has many benefits as a source of nutrients, preventing erosion by wind and water, 
and increasing soil aeration and water infiltration.  Wilhelm, et al919 looked at the amount of corn 
stover that could be harvested for biofuel production and still maintain soil carbon.  In all the 
soils they evaluated more stover was needed to maintain the soil carbon than for controlling 
erosion.  For a more general discussion of cellulosic ethanol production, see Chapter V, Section 
V.B.2. More research is needed to identify the amount of stover that can be removed and retain 
these important productivity and environmental benefits.    
 
 Different conservation systems and conservation practice standards will need to be 
developed and adopted for cellulosic feedstocks, such as corn stove, switchgrass, and trees for 
biofuels production.  USDA will need to continue to adjust current standards and develop 
additional standards, where needed, to permit cellulosic feedstocks to be produced and utilized in 
a sustainable manner. 
 
 
6.2 Ecological Impacts 
 
6.2.1 Nutrients  
 
 Nitrogen and phosphorus enrichment due to human activities is one of the leading 
problems facing our nation’s lakes, reservoirs, and estuaries.  Nutrient enrichment is also a 
contributing factor to stream degradation.  It has negative impacts on aquatic life in streams; 
adverse health effects on humans and domestic animals; aesthetic and recreational use 
impairment; and excessive nutrient input into downstream waterbodies, such as lakes.  Excess 
nutrients in streams can lead to excessive growth of phytoplankton (free-floating algae) in slow-
moving rivers, periphyton (algae attached to a surface) in shallow streams, and macrophytes 
(aquatic plants large enough to be visible to the naked eye) in all waters.  Unsightly filamentous 
algae can impair the aesthetic enjoyment of streams.  In more extreme situations, excessive 
growth of aquatic plants can slow water flow in flat streams and canals, interfere with 
swimming, and clog the screens on water intakes of water treatment plants and industries. 
 
 Nutrient enrichment in streams has also been demonstrated to affect animal communities 
in these waterbodies.  For example, declines in invertebrate community structure have been 
correlated directly with increases in phosphorus concentration. High concentrations of nitrogen 
in the form of ammonia are known to be toxic to aquatic animals.  Excessive levels of algae have 
also been shown to be damaging to invertebrates. Finally, fish and invertebrates will experience 
growth problems and can even die if either oxygen is depleted or pH increases are severe; both 
655 
of these conditions are symptomatic of eutrophication.  As a biologic system becomes more 
enriched by nutrients, different species of algae may spread and species composition can shift; 
however, unless such species shifts cause clearly demonstrable symptoms of poor water-
quality—such as fish kills, toxic algae, or very long streamers of filamentous algae—the general 
public is unlikely to be aware of this potential ecological concern. 
 Nutrient pollution is widespread.  The most widely known examples of significant 
nutrient impacts include the Gulf of Mexico and the Chesapeake Bay.  For these two areas alone, 
there are 35 states that contribute the nutrient loadings.  There are also known impacts in over 80 
estuaries/bays, and thousands of rivers, streams, and lakes.  The significance of this impact has 
led EPA, States, and the public to come together to place an unprecedented priority on public 
partnerships, collaboration, better science, and improved tools to reduce nutrient pollution. 
 Virtually every state and territory is impacted by nutrient-related degradation of our 
waterways.  All but one state and two territories have waterbodies that are polluted by nutrients.  
States have listed over 10,000 waterbodies that have nutrient and nutrient-related impairments.  
Fifteen states have more than 200 nutrient-related waterbodies each.  Reducing nutrient pollution 
is a priority for EPA. 
 The Wadeable Streams Assessment provided the first statistically defensible summary of 
the condition of the nation’s streams and small rivers.920  To perform the assessment, EPA, 
states, and tribes collected chemical, physical, and biological data at 1,392 perennial stream 
locations to determine the biological condition of these waters and the primary stressors affecting 
their quality.  Research teams collected samples at sites chosen using a statistical design to 
ensure representative results.  The results of the analysis provide a clear assessment of the 
biological quality of wadeable, perennial streams and rivers across the country.    
 
 The Wadeable Streams Assessment found that excess total nitrogen is the most pervasive 
biological stressor for the nation.  Approximately 32 percent of the nation’s stream length shows 
high concentrations of nitrogen compared to reference conditions.  Phosphorus exhibits 
comparable patterns to nitrogen and is the second most-pervasive stressor for the nation’s stream 
length.  Streams with relatively high concentrations of nutrients or excess streambed sediments 
are two to four times more likely to exhibit poor biological conditions. 
 
 The National Water Quality Inventory: Report to Congress, prepared under section 
305(b) of the Clean Water Act, summarizes water quality reports submitted by the states and 
territories to EPA.  Historically, the National Water Quality Inventories have repeatedly shown 
that nutrients are a major cause of ambient water quality use impairments.  In the most recent 
report summarizing the 2002 reports from state, nutrients are identified as the leading cause of 
water pollution in assessed lakes and the second leading cause of pollution in assessed estuaries 
and bays.921  Sediment is the leading cause of pollution in assessed rivers and streams.  
Agriculture is the largest known source of water quality impairment to both assessed rivers and 
streams and lakes and reservoirs. 
 
6.2.2 Air Deposition of Nitrogen to Water 
 
656 
Nitrogen oxide (NOx) emissions from fossil fuel combustion can add to the load of 
nitrogen to waterbodies around the country.  Under the high pressure and temperature conditions 
in a vehicle engine, nitrogen and oxygen in the air react to form NOx.  Depending on climate and 
other variables, the atmospheric NOx falls back to the ground as rain, snow, fog, or dry 
deposition.  NOx is deposited directly on waterbodies or falls on the land and can run off to 
waterbodies.  NOx from both stationary sources and vehicles results in significant loadings of 
nitrogen from air deposition to waterbodies around the country922, including the Chesapeake 
Bay923, Long Island Sound924, and Lake Tahoe925.  Much of the nitrogen deposition from 
vehicles falls on impervious surfaces, such as roads and parking lots where it runs off into 
streams.  Road drainage systems generally channel runoff quickly and accelerate the nitrogen 
loadings downstream.  In the Chesapeake region, vehicle exhaust remains the single largest 
source of fossil-fuel derived nitrogen pollution.926  Air deposition of nitrogen accounts for more 
than half of all nitrogen loadings to Lake Tahoe.927 
 
 
6.3 Gulf of Mexico 
 
 Production of corn for ethanol may exacerbate existing serious water quality problems in 
the Gulf of Mexico.  Nitrogen fertilizer applications to corn are already the major source of total 
nitrogen loadings to the Mississippi River.928  A large area of low oxygen, or hypoxia, forms in 
the Gulf of Mexico every year, often called the “dead zone”.  Hypoxia threatens commercial and 
recreational fisheries in the Gulf because fish and other aquatic species cannot live in the low 
oxygen waters.  The primary cause of the hypoxia is excess nutrients (nitrogen and phosphorus) 
from the Upper Midwest flowing into the Mississippi River to the Gulf.  These nutrients trigger 
excessive algal growth (or eutrophication) resulting in reduced sunlight, loss of aquatic habitat, 
and a decrease in oxygen dissolved in the water.       
 
 The hypoxic zone in 2008 was the second largest since measurements began in 1985 -- 
8,000 square miles, an area larger than the state of Massachusetts, and slightly larger than the 
2007 measurement.929  The average size of the hypoxic zone over the past five years has been 
6,600 square miles. 
 
 The Mississippi River/Gulf of Mexico Watershed Nutrient Task Force’s “Gulf Hypoxia 
Action Plan 2008” lays out two major goals for reducing water quality problems in the 
Mississippi River/Atchafalaya River Basin:  1) reduce the five-year running average areal extent 
of the Gulf of Mexico hypoxic zone to 2,000 square miles by 2015 and 2) implement nutrient 
and sediment reductions to protect public health and aquatic life and reduce negative impacts of 
water pollution.  The Gulf of Mexico Action Plan calls for an acceleration of actions to reduce 
the hypoxia in the Gulf.  In order to meet these goals, the Action Plan calls for a 45 percent 
reduction in both nitrogen and phosphorus reaching the Gulf.930  EPA’s Science Advisory Board 
(SAB) report to the Task Force said that an additional reduction in nitrogen and phosphorus 
reduction will be necessary as a result of increased corn production for ethanol and climate 
change impacts.931  The SAB also found that the Gulf of Mexico ecosystem appeared to have 
undergone a shift so that now the system is more sensitive to nutrient inputs than in the past and 
inducing a larger response in hypoxia.   
 
657 
 Under the Gulf Hypoxia Action Plan, “USDA will encourage the increased use of its 
nutrient management standard to minimize nutrient loss from fields to help alleviate the impact 
of increased biofuels production on nutrient loads to the Gulf”.932  The nutrient management 
standard requires farmers to account for all plant-available nutrient sources immediately 
available or rendered available throughout the crop production cycle.   
 
6.3.1 Nutrient Loads to the Gulf of Mexico 
 
 The U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) has estimated that the spring delivery of nutrients to 
the Gulf of Mexico in 2008 was among the highest since the early 1980s.  Spring nutrient 
delivery is one of the main factors that control the size of the hypoxic zone.  In relation to the 
long-term spring average, total nitrogen was about 35 to 40 percent higher (817,000 tons) and 
total phosphorus was a record 60 to 85 percent higher (83,000 tons).  The large nutrient 
contributions are primarily due to near record-breaking streamflows in spring 2008 in the 
Mississippi River Basin. Streamflows were about 50 percent higher this year compared to the 
long-term spring average flows since about 1980. Nutrient contributions for a given spring vary 
depending on the amount of flow in the Mississippi-Atchafalaya River Basin, as well as average 
stream water nutrient concentrations. 
 
 Alexander, et al. modeled the sources of nutrient loadings to the Gulf of Mexico using the 
USGS SPARROW (spatially referenced regression on watershed attributes) model.933  They 
estimated that agricultural sources contribute more than 70 percent of the delivered nitrogen and 
phosphorus.  Corn and soybean production accounted for 52 percent of nitrogen delivery.  
Atmospheric deposition was the second largest nitrogen source at 16 percent.  Animal manure on 
pasture and rangeland are the main sources of phosphorus loadings, contributing 37 percent.  
Corn and soybean contributed 25 percent of the phosphorus; other crops 18 percent, and urban 
areas, 12 percent.   
  
6.3.2 Recent Analyses of Impact of Corn Ethanol Production on Nutrient Loadings to the 
Gulf 
 
 Since over 80 percent of corn grown in the U.S. is produced in the Gulf of Mexico 
watershed, concern has been expressed about the impact on Gulf hypoxia of increasing corn 
production for ethanol.  Several recent scientific reports have estimated the water quality impact 
of that increase in corn production.    
 
 Donner and Kucharik modeled increases in nitrogen export to the Gulf as a result of corn 
ethanol volumes increasing from 2007 production levels to 15 billion gallons in 2022.934  They 
concluded that the expansion of corn-based ethanol production could make it almost impossible 
to meet the Gulf of Mexico nitrogen reduction goals without “radical shift” in feed production, 
livestock diet, and management of agricultural lands.  The study estimated a mean dissolved 
inorganic nitrogen load increase of 10 to18 percent from 2007 to 2022 to meet the 15 billion 
gallon corn ethanol goal, depending on the rate of corn yield increases and potential efficiency 
increases in the conversion of corn to ethanol. 
 
658 
 EPA’s Science Advisory Board (SAB) report to the Mississippi River/Gulf of Mexico 
Watershed Task Force estimated the additional annual nitrogen loadings to the Gulf due to the 
increase in corn acres from 78.3 million acres in 2006 to 93.7 million acres in 2013.935  The SAB 
estimated that this scenario will result in an additional national annual loading of almost 300 
million pounds of nitrogen.  An estimated 80 percent of that nitrogen loading or 238 million 
pounds will occur in the Mississippi-Atchafalaya River basin and contribute nitrogen to the 
“dead zone” in the Gulf of Mexico.   
 
 USGS is using SPARROW to model water quality impacts in the Upper Mississippi 
River Basin due to increased corn production for ethanol.  EPA intends to compare the results of 
the analysis described in the next section with the SPARROW results for the final rule. 
 
 
6.4 Upper Mississippi River Basin Analysis 
 
 To provide a quantitative estimate of the impact of this proposal and production of corn 
ethanol generally on water quality, EPA conducted an analysis that focused on agricultural 
production in the Upper Mississippi River Basin (UMRB).  The UMRB drains approximately 
189,000 square miles, including large parts of the states of Illinois, Iowa, Minnesota, Missouri, 
and Wisconsin.  Small portions of Indiana, Michigan, and South Dakota are also within the 
basin.  EPA selected the UMRB because it is representative of the many potential issues 
associated with ethanol production, including its connection to major water quality concerns 
such as Gulf of Mexico hypoxia, large corn production, and numerous ethanol production plants. 
 
 In 2005, there were approximately 23.6 million acres of corn in the UMRB.  About 75 
percent of ethanol production is expected to be in the states in the Corn Belt region.936  More 
discussion about corn production can be found in Section 1.5.1.  On average the UMRB 
contributes about 39 percent of the total nitrogen loads and 26 percent of the phosphorus loads to 
the Gulf of Mexico.937  The Ohio/Tennessee River Basin is the highest contributor of nitrogen 
loads to the Gulf at 41 percent.  The high percentage of nitrogen from these two basins is 
primarily due to the large inputs of fertilizer for agriculture and the extensive systems of tile 
drains.  According to USGS, nitrogen loads to the Gulf ranged from 810,000 metric tons to 2.2 
million metric tons between 1985 and 2005.  Phosphorus loads to the Gulf ranged from 80,700 
metric tons to 180,000 metric tons during that same 20- year period.938  Although nitrogen inputs 
to the UMRB in recent years is fairly level, there is a 21 percent decline in loads.  The Science 
Advisory Board report attributes this decline to higher amount of nitrogen removed during 
harvest, due to higher crop yields.939  However, most of the reduction in the spring was from 
nitrogen forms other than nitrate, an important nitrogen form fueling the algal growth which 
leads to hypoxia.940  For the same period phosphorus inputs increased 12 percent. 
 
 In 2005, the U.S. produced approximately 3.9 billion gallons of ethanol, mostly from 
corn kernels.  Corn-based ethanol production is expected to reach at least 15 billion gallons in 
order for industry to comply with the RFS2 standards.  Of the potential crops for biofuels 
production, corn has the highest rates of fertilizer and pesticide application, leading to the 
concern that higher corn production will result in increased loading of nutrients, pesticides, and 
sediment to waterbodies, including major rivers and estuaries.  This analysis examines the 
659 
impact of total production of corn-based ethanol in 2010, 2015, 2020, and 2022 from an ethanol 
production baseline of approximately four billion gallons in 2005.  
 
6.4.1 SWAT Model 
 
 EPA selected the SWAT (Soil and Water Assessment Tool) model to assess nutrient 
loads from changes in agricultural production in the UMRB.  Models are the primary tool that 
can be used to predict future impacts based on alternative scenarios.  SWAT is a physical process 
model developed to quantify the impact of land management practices in large, complex 
watersheds.  SWAT, primarily developed by USDA’s Agricultural Research Service and the 
Texas A & M University Blackland Research and Extension Center, is a public domain model. 
 
 EPA determined that SWAT was the most appropriate model to use for this analysis 
because it has been widely used and validated in watersheds both nationally and 
internationally.941  SWAT has been applied extensively to support water quality and Total 
Maximum Daily Load (TMDL) planning throughout the United States.  SWAT is a basin-scale 
continuous simulation model that operates on a daily time step and is designed to predict the 
nonpoint source loadings and resulting water quality impacts of water, sediment, and agricultural 
chemicals (nutrients and pesticides) from a watershed.  The model can assess a wide variety of 
impacts of alternative management practices and land use changes.  The model is physically 
based, computationally efficient, and capable of continuous simulations over long periods of 
time, ranging from days to years to decades.  Major model components include weather, 
hydrology, erosion/sedimentation, soil temperature, plant growth, nutrients, pesticides, bacteria, 
agricultural management, stream routing and pond/reservoir routing.  
 
 SWAT has several very important strengths that enabled EPA to develop a robust 
representation of the hydrology and water quality of the UMRB: 
 
1) Watersheds can be modeled to evaluate the relative impact of changes in 
management practices, climate, and vegetation on water quality or other variables of 
interest;  
 
2)  SWAT uses readily available inputs commonly available from various 
government agencies;   
 
3)  It can simulate crop and plant communities and provide crop yield and plant 
biomass, essential to estimate past trends and project accurately into the future; 
 
4)  Simulation of very large basins or a variety of management strategies can be 
performed expeditiously; 
 
5) Long-term impacts spanning several decades can be studied. Time- and 
climate-variable pollutant contributions can be simulated along with the impact on 
downstream water bodies spanning several decades; and  
 
660 
6)  The model code has been validated on hundreds of basins throughout the 
United States and abroad. 
 
 In addition, prior applications of SWAT for hydrology and nutrient simulation in the 
UMRB had been completed and were available as a starting foundation for the modeling efforts 
and focus of this study.942 943  Further technical information regarding SWAT can be found at: 
http://www.brc.tamus.edu/swat.  
  
6.4.1.1 Baseline Model Scenario 
 
 In order to assess alternative potential future conditions within the UMRB, such as 
alternative levels of increased corn production, EPA developed a SWAT model of a baseline 
scenario for current conditions to which the results of future condition model runs can be 
compared.  This analysis evaluated the impact of increased corn production for biofuels by 
establishing a baseline prior to the rapid increase in corn acres planted in 2007.  EPA used a 
different baseline for this analysis than the reference case based on the AEO projections used in 
most of the other analyses in this proposal.  EPA intends to conduct additional analyses for the 
final rule that will compare the reference case biofuel volumes to the RFS2 volumes. 
 
 For simplicity’s sake, we refer to the baseline as 2005, but like most water quality 
modeling, we had to use a range of data sets for the baseline scenario inputs.  As noted above 
corn acres did not increase significantly until the 2007 crop year.  In developing the baseline 
scenario, it was necessary to select a target year, or window of years, that represent the 
conditions on the watershed.  For this study the year 2005 was selected as the mid-point of the 
target period for baseline conditions.  As with most models of this scale, it was not possible to 
have all of the data sources come from the exact same time period.  It is a common modeling 
practice to combine the best available data sources for model development in an attempt to 
characterize the baseline condition within a short time window or period.  The majority of the 
data sources were from the years 2000 through 2006.  In addition, selected assumptions about the 
baseline scenario were made using 2005 as the reference year.  In particular, the baseline values 
for average corn yield (150 bushels per acre) and the percentage of corn producing ethanol (12%, 
from the RFS1 preamble of May 2007) were based on the year 2005.  In reality, the baseline 
scenario represents watershed conditions within a two to three year period centered on the target 
year of 2005. 
 
 Since one of the driving forces in the SWAT model is the water balance, climate data is 
key to accurately predicting the movement of nutrients and sediment.  SWAT was applied (i.e. 
calibrated) to the UMRB using weather data from the NRCS climatic data center for a 40-year 
period from 1960 to 2001 and flow and water quality data from 13 USGS gauges on the 
mainstem of the Mississippi River, spatially distributed from the upper reaches in Minnesota and 
Wisconsin to the UMRB outlet below Grafton, Illinois.  In addition, the weather data has been 
spatially interpolated to assign one weather station per subwatershed. 
 
 To establish the land use for the baseline scenario, SWAT was setup on 131 
subwatersheds [8-digit Hydrologic Unit Code (HUC)] for the entire UMRB using the 2001 
National Land Cover Data (NLCD)944 and Cropland Data Layer (CDL)945.  The CDL contains 
661 
crop specific digital data layers, suitable for us in geographic information system applications.  
The CDL program focuses on classifying corn/soybean/rice/cotton agricultural regions in many 
of the Midwestern and Mississippi delta states using remote-sengin imagery and on-the-ground 
monitoring.  The USDA-NRCS STATSGO provided the soils data for the entire analyses.  The 
primary input data is the USDA 1997 National Resource Inventory (NRI), which provided land 
use, soil, and data on management practices on the land.946  1997 is the most current year for 
which this data is available.   
 
  In addition, information from the Conservation Tillage Information Center and USDA-
NASS Census of Agriculture 2002/1997 were used to identify the cropping rotation and 
management practices for the agricultural land areas by these same 131 subwatersheds.  Based 
on the management information at this level, each sub-watershed was assigned appropriate 
management and tillage practices.   
 
 Drainage tiles are one of the critical man-made hydrology structures that changes the 
natural hydrological cycle significantly at both surface and subsurface (lateral flow) levels.  
There are no clear records of where the tiles are within the UMRB, other than a few research 
articles that attempted to estimate the location and extent of the tile drainage coverage.  In this 
study, similar literature values were used to estimate and identify the areas that have the tile 
system to drain the excess water and nutrients in a timely manner.  First, the STATSGO database 
was used to identify the very poorly drained soils, somewhat poorly drained soils, and poorly 
drained soils.  Then, slope and land use maps were overlaid on these poorly drained soils to 
identify the potential tile drainage system.  Only slopes <1% and agricultural land uses were 
identified as areas that may potentially be served with tile drainage system. 
 
 The tillage practice information in the UMRB was obtained at the county level from 
Conservation Technology Information Center947.  There are five major tillage types. Three of 
them (no-tillage, ridge-tillage, and mulch-tillage) belong to conservation tillage, and the other 
two types of tillage (reduced-tillage and intensive-tillage) are non-conservation tillage.  The 
county acreages of this tillage information were overlaid on 8-digit HUCs to estimate the percent 
of each tillage practices by crop within each HUC. 
 
 To estimate nutrient applications on cropland, we started by estimating the livestock and 
the amount of manure produced.  The livestock numbers came from the agricultural statistics for 
each county based on the 2002 Census of Agriculture for each 8-digit HUC.  (Only cattle and 
hogs numbers were used since they are the dominant livestock types in the UMRB.)  Then, the 
manure production of each 8-digit HUC was obtained through multiplying the number of cattle 
and hogs and the manure production rates as outlined in ASABE, 2005.948  If the total amount of 
the manure production exceeded 20 percent of the estimated total fertilizer application in one 
HUC, manure application and chemical fertilizer application was used as SWAT model input to 
simulate in that HUC.  The manure was applied to only those areas that are agricultural land use, 
even during rotation.  For example, only hay, corn, and row crops get manure application, not 
legume crops such as alfalfa or soybean.  So, if an area had a corn and soybean rotation, then 
only during corn growing period the manure was applied.  Even though manure was applied, 
chemical fertilizer was used to supplement the manure application where and when needed.  In 
areas where the manure was not applied, chemical fertilizer was applied to grow the agricultural 
662 
crops.  Chemical nitrogen fertilizer at applied at 1.3 times the amount of nitrogen taken off at 
harvest. 
  
 The 42-year SWAT model runs were performed and the results analyzed to establish 
runoff, sediment, nitrogen, and phosphorous loadings from each of the 131 8-digit HUC 
subwatersheds and the larger 4-digit subbasins, along with the total outflow from the UMRB and 
at the various USGS gage sites distributed along the Mississippi River mainstem.  These results 
provided the Baseline Scenario model values to which the future alternatives are compared. 
 
 The current national average for corn yield of 150 bushels per acre (bu/ac) was used to 
establish baseline yield levels.  The baseline average yield for the UMRB was established at 131 
bushels per acre.  This baseline yield is due to the significant amount of crop area in northern 
states where yield values are lower than the national average. 
 
6.4.1.2 Alternative Scenarios 
 
 SWAT scenario analyses were performed for the years 2010, 2015, and 2022 with corn 
ethanol volumes of 12 billion gallons a year (BGY) for 2010, and 15 BGY for both 2015 and 
2022.  These volumes were adjusted for the UMRB based on a 42.3 percent ratio of ethanol 
production capacity within the UMRB compared to national capacity.  This fraction was 
determined by overlaying a coverage of nationwide ethanol plants with a coverage of the 
UMRB.  Production from ethanol plants within the study area were totaled and then divided by 
the nationwide production.  Both current production and planned expansion were included in the 
totals.  Ethanol location and production information were taken from the Renewable Fuels 
Association table of ethanol refinery locations in April 2008.949  The resulting UMRB ethanol 
production goals were converted into the corresponding required corn production acreage, i.e. 
the extent of corn acreage needed to meet those ethanol production goals.  More discussion about 
corn production can be found in Section 1.5.1 
 
 The SWAT model was run with the available input climate record, 1960-2001, with the 
model run under conditions of the increased corn production and yields noted above.  Separate 
model runs were performed for each of the three projection years, and the model results were 
analyzed to provide loadings for comparison with the baseline loadings. 
 
6.4.1.2.1 Corn  
 
 Increases in corn yield were built into the future scenarios, with an annual increase of 
1.23 percent.  This produced yield increases to 139 bushels per acre (bu/ac) (2010), 148 bu/ac 
(2015) and 162 bu/ac (2022).  Thus, after the 2015 scenario, these yield increases translated into 
less corn acreage being needed to meet the ethanol production goals.  Corn acres in the UMRB 
grew from 23.6 million acres in 2005 to 34.1 million acres in 2010 to 36.3 million acres in 2015, 
an increase of 54 percent.  In 2022, corn dropped to 34.6 million acres.   
 
6.4.1.2.2 Nitrogen 
 
663 
 Total nitrogen loads increased by 5.5 percent from the baseline to the 2010 scenario.  
Scenarios beyond 2010 then showed decreasing total nitrogen loads with the 2022 scenario 
showing less than a one percent increase over the baseline.  It is important to note that these 
results only estimate loadings from the Upper Mississippi River basin, not the entire Mississippi 
River watershed.  As noted earlier, the UMRB contributes about 39 percent of the total nitrogen 
loads and 26 percent of total phosphorus loads to the Gulf of Mexico.  This modeled decrease in 
nitrogen loads is likely attributed to the increased yield production of future scenarios, resulting 
in greater plant uptake of nitrogen.  Additionally, less corn area was needed for the 2020 and 
2022 scenarios due to the increased yield values.   
 
 Approximately 24-25 percent of nitrogen leaving agricultural fields was either taken up 
by aquatic plants or volatilized before reaching the outlet of the UMRB at Grafton, Illinois.  
Even though much of the nitrogen that is volatilized from streams and rivers and near-coastal 
waters is removed from the total loading to water, it is not necessarily eliminated as an 
environmental concern.  Conversion of the nitrate to nitrogen gas through denitrification is 
generally an incomplete chemical process.  Five percent or more of the nitrogen can be converted 
to nitrous gas, a powerful greenhouse gas that is 300 times the climate-warming potential of 
carbon dioxide, the major greenhouse gas of environmental concern.  Thus, a water pollutant 
becomes an air pollutant until it is either captured through biological sequestration or converted 
fully to elemental nitrogen. 
 
6.4.1.2.3 Phosphorus 
 
 The scenarios showed an increase in phosphorous loads at a slightly lower percentage 
than nitrogen 
 
6.4.1.2.4 Sediment 
 
 Total sediment outflow showed very little change (less than one percent) over all 
scenarios.  This is primarily due to the corn being modeled as a well-managed crop in terms of 
sediment loss, primarily due to the corn stover remaining on the fields following harvest. 
 
Table 6.4-1. 
 Changes in nutrient loadings within the Upper Mississippi River Basin 
(from the 2005 Baseline Scenario) 
 2005 
Baseline  
 
2010 
 
2015 
 
2020 
 
2022 
Nitrogen 1897.0 
million lbs 
+ 5.1% + 4.2% + 2.2% +1.6% 
Phosphorus 176.6 
million lbs 
+ 2.3% + 1.1% + 0.6% + 0.4% 
 
 
664 
Table 6.4-2. 
 Changes to the Mississippi River at Grafton, Illinois from the Upper Mississippi River Basin  
(from the 2005 Baseline Scenario) 
 2005 
Baseline  
 
2010 
 
2015 
 
2020 
 
2022 
Average corn 
yield 
(bushels/acre) 
141 150 158 168 171 
Nitrogen 1433.5 
million lbs 
+ 5.5% + 4.7% + 2.5% + 1.8% 
Phosphorus 132.4 million 
lbs 
+ 2.8% + 1.7% + 0.98% + 0.8% 
Sediment 6.4  
million tons 
+ 0.5% + 0.3% + 0.2% + 0.1% 
 
 
6.4.2.3 Potential Future Analysis 
 
 Due to time and resource constraints, other alternative scenarios have not been analyzed.  
After evaluating comments on this proposal, if time and resources permit, EPA may conduct 
additional water quality analyses using the SWAT model in the UMRB.  Potential future 
analyses could include:  1) determination of the most sensitive assumptions in the model, 2)  
water quality impacts from the changes in ethanol volumes relative to other reference cases, 3) 
comparisons between the assumptions and results of the Forest and Agricultural Sector 
Optimization Model (FASOM) used to model the impacts of this proposal on the agriculture 
sector and SWAT, 4) removing higher percentages of corn stover for cellulosic ethanol, 5) a case 
study of a smaller watershed to evaluate local water quality impacts that are impossible to 
ascertain at the scale of the UMRB, and/or 6) changes in loadings of a widely used corn 
herbicide, atrazine. 
 
 
6.5 Climate Change Impacts  
 
 Although climate change is expected to be an important factor in future crop production 
in the Upper Mississippi River Basin, EPA has not modeled the impact of climate change on 
corn yields for a variety of reasons.  Climate change requires a long period of observation.  Over 
the short time frame reflected in this proposal, precipitation and temperature increases will be 
small and indistinguishable from the natural variability of the climate. 
 Crop yield changes resulting from climate change depend on the atmospheric carbon 
dioxide level, the crop, and the base temperature.  Yield also depends on the characteristics of 
the crop relative to the timing of precipitation and of extreme temperature events.  All of these 
variables make an estimation of actual climate-induced yield loss very difficult to develop.  
Farmer adaptation may mitigate the effects of climate change on agriculture to some degree.  
Adaptations are influenced by many unpredictable factors, including government policy, prices, 
research and development, and technical assistance.  Climate model simulations generally 
indicate that most locations in the upper Midwest will warm more than the global average and 
665 
will receive more precipitation than current – though estimates vary considerably depending on 
the model used and initial conditions.   
 
 
6.6 Chesapeake Bay Watershed    
 
 The Chesapeake Bay Commission and others have expressed concerns about the water 
quality impact of increased corn production for ethanol may have on the Chesapeake Bay.950,951  
The Chesapeake Bay watershed stretches across more than 64,000 square miles, encompassing 
parts of six states — Delaware, Maryland, New York, Pennsylvania, Virginia and West Virginia 
— and the entire District of Columbia.  The Chesapeake's land-to-water ratio (14:1) is the largest 
of any coastal water body in the world.  This is why land use and land management have such 
significant influences on the health of the Bay.  In its annual State of the Bay report in 2007, the 
Chesapeake Bay Foundation gave the Bay a score of 28 on a scale where 70 means the Bay is 
“saved” and 100 is pristine.  The Foundation said that “the health of the Chesapeake Bay is 
dangerously out of balance”.952 
 
 Agricultural lands account for nearly a quarter of the watershed, and contribute more 
nutrients to the Bay than any other land use.  Agricultural operations produce about 41 percent of 
the nitrogen and 47 percent of the phosphorus loads going to the Bay.  Agriculture also 
contributes about 63 percent of the Bay’s sediment.  Municipal and industrial wastewater 
treatment plants throughout the watershed are responsible for 21 percent of the total nitrogen 
pollution and 22 percent of the total phosphorus pollution delivered to the Bay. 
 
 In 2000, Chesapeake Bay Program partners (states, federal agencies, universities, non-
governmental agencies) agreed to reduce nitrogen pollution from an estimated 285 million 
pounds per year to no more than 175 million pounds by 2010.  Similarly they pledged to reduce 
phosphorus from about 19 million pounds per year to less than 13 million pounds.  While there 
have been steady declines in nitrogen and phosphorus, they have not been adequate to meet the 
established goals.  The watershed must essentially quadruple the pace of the Bay cleanup to meet 
the 2010 commitment.  To restore water quality in the Bay, all of the basin’s more than 87,000 
farms will need to implement best management practices (BMPs) at levels never before seen in 
this country.  The states have committed to implement close to 30 different agricultural BMPs as 
part of their restoration strategies.  
 
 At least 25 percent and possibly a third of the nitrogen entering the Bay comes from air 
deposition.  The principal sources of emissions are power plants, cars and trucks, agriculture, and 
off-road sources such as construction equipment, lawn mowers and aircraft.  While population 
increased about eight percent during the last decade, vehicle miles traveled rose 26 percent.  
More discussion about nitrogen oxides emission impacts can be found in Chapter 3.2. 
 
 The Bay watershed receives significant levels of nitrogen oxides and other airborne 
pollutants from its large airshed (which is about six and a half times the size of the watershed), as 
far west as Ohio and Indiana.  Air deposition of nitrogen on the land adds to the burden that must 
be dealt with by farmers, local governments and other landowners. 
 
666 
6.6.1 Agricultural Production Effects 
 
 Due to the significant acreage within the Chesapeake Bay watershed that is devoted to 
agricultural production (approximately 22 percent), increases in corn acreage can potentially 
contribute to changes in nutrient loads to the Bay.  High demand for corn reflected in record corn 
prices have played a substantial role in encouraging producers to alter their typical crop 
production rotations and crop acreage, contributing to noteworthy changes in crop acreages 
across the watershed.  A technical review committee convened by the Chesapeake Bay 
Commission estimated that 300,000 new acres of corn could be added in the Bay watershed in 
the coming years.953  This new corn acreage could potentially contribute an additional five 
million pounds of nitrogen to the Bay.  The Bay Program partners are trying to reach a 90 
million pound reduction in nitrogen from all sources.  However, it is estimated that 17 million 
pounds of nitrogen could be offset if all agriculture acres used cover crops as a conservation 
practice after harvest.   
 
 Strong market forces also encourage agricultural operators to increase grain production 
possibly by increasing the conversion of non-row crop acreage (hay, pasture and fallow or idle 
lands) to row crop production.  Grain row crops can add more nutrients per acre to the Bay than 
hay and pasture due to production intensity, management systems, and nutrient efficiency of the 
crop. 
 
6.6.1.1 Base Analysis Assumptions 
 
 The Chesapeake Bay Program Watershed Model Phase 4.3 (CBWM) and Vortex were 
utilized in the analysis of potential shifts in nutrient loading to the Bay based on reported 
changes to agricultural crop production from 2005 to 2008.  These agricultural production 
changes are partially the result of the rapid expansion of biofuel production within the United 
States, supported by market-driven commodity price increases, government policies, or a 
combination of both.  The CBWM is a dynamic watershed model used to characterize nutrient 
and sediment loads, and changes in these loads, due to management actions for decision 
support.WWWWWWWWWWW    
 
 In developing the agricultural production trend analysis within the Chesapeake Bay 
watershed, the USDA’s National Agricultural Statistics Service’s (NASS) 2007 and 2008 
Projected Plantings report on reported crop acreages was modified to target only the Bay 
watershed. 
 
6.6.1.2 Corn Production Analysis 
 
 Analyzing corn production acreage figures for the period from 2005 to 2008 from the 
NASS 2007 and 2008 Projected Planting reports, a measurable upward trend was evident for 
corn acreage plantings across the Bay watershed over the analysis period.  This upward trend 
increased sharply between 2006 and 2007 and decreased for the 2007 and 2008 period.  Despite 
the recent downward trend, total corn acreage increased over the analysis period by almost 
66,000 acres.  
                                                 
WWWWWWWWWWW
 For more information on the CBWM see http://www.chesapeakebay.net/model.htm. 
667 
 
6.6.1.3 Corn Nutrient Load Analysis 
 
Employing a modeled analysis of the USDA-NASS Prospective Plantings report using 
the Chesapeake Bay Watershed Model Version 4.3 and Vortex, considerable increases of 
potential nitrogen loads to the Bay are associated with increased corn acreage.  The decrease of 
corn acreage in the 2007 to 2008 period does not offset the total increase in acreage and nitrogen 
yields between 2005 and 2008.  Total nitrogen loads increased by almost 2.4 million pounds. 
 
6.6.1.4 Land Use Conversion Analysis 
 
The agricultural production trends between 2005 and the present not only indicate an 
overall increase in the number of acres under corn production, but also an increase in the total 
acres of land under row crop production by over 355,000 acres.  Since agricultural land uses 
within the Chesapeake Bay watershed are continuously decreasing due to urban development, 
the increase in row crop acreage may come at the expense of other cropping systems, or 
agricultural land uses such as hay, pasture or idle lands.  
 
6.6.1.5 Land Use Conversion Nitrogen Load Analysis 
 
 The USDA-NASS Prospective Plantings reports and the Chesapeake Bay Program 
Watershed Model indicate a continuous total conversion of non-row crop agricultural lands over 
the period from 2005 to 2008 to more intensive row crop production.  The non-row crop land 
uses typically produce less nitrogen yields to the Bay, thus additional acres converted to grain 
production can also increase nitrogen loads significantly.  This analysis estimates that nitrogen 
loads increase by 8.8 million pounds. 
 
 If time and resources allow, the Chesapeake Bay Program proposes to analyze the 
potential impacts within the Chesapeake Bay watershed of the implementation of the RFS2 for 
the FRM using available systems and models at our disposal.  The models that would potentially 
be used in the analysis would include Phase 5.2 of the Chesapeake Bay Watershed Model 
(CBWM), the Nutrient and Sediment Scenario Builder (NSSB), the Chesapeake Bay Estuarine 
Water Quality Sediment Transport Model (CBEWQSTM) and the Chesapeake Bay Land Change 
Model (CBLCM).  The CBWM is a dynamic watershed model used to characterize nutrient and 
sediment loads, and changes in these loads, due to management actions for decision support.  
The NSSB is being developed to determine nutrient and sediment loads under multiple land uses 
and crop types with variable organic and inorganic nutrient inputs.  The CBEWQSTM 
determines the effects of nutrient and sediment load changes to the attainment of water quality 
standards.  The CBLCM simulates changes in land use as a result of locally projected increases 
in population out to the year 2030. 
 
 The scope of the analysis is proposed to include incremental and delivered nitrogen, 
phosphorus and sediment to the Chesapeake Bay, and the effect of management changes to the 
attainment of water quality standards.   
 
 
668 
6.7 Ethanol Production 
 
 Under the Clean Water Act, all point sources of pollution, including ethanol plants, must 
have a permit to discharge to water bodies or to municipal wastewater treatment plants for both 
industrial process water and stormwater.  The permit regulates the amount of pollutants that can 
be discharged.   There are three principle sources of discharges to water from ethanol plants:  
reject water from water purification, cooling water blowdown, and off-batch ethanol. 
 
6.7.1 Water Discharges 
 
 Water is required at ethanol facilities for processing and for the production of steam that 
is typically used in biomass pretreatment and ethanol distillation processes.  An ethanol plant’s 
wastewater is typically comprised of cooling tower blowdown, boiler blowdown, and water 
softener discharge.  The majority of the process water is lost as steam in the distillation process.  
In addition, stormwater runoff from the facility may be contaminated from precipitation (rain or 
snow) coming in contact with plant operations (industrial plant yards, material and waste 
handling, storage areas, shipping and receiving areas, residuals sites) and requires adequate 
control and management.954     
 
 While some ethanol facilities get their process water from municipal water supplies, most 
use on-site wells to produce the process water for the ethanol process.  Most groundwater 
sources are not suitable for process water because of their mineral content.  Therefore, the water 
must be treated for use in ethanol production.  The most common method of groundwater 
treatment is reverse osmosis.  Reverse osmosis uses specialized filtration and pressure to produce 
pure water while concentrating the groundwater minerals into reject water.  The minerals in the 
reject water are site-specific, but they can include:  calcium carbonate, magnesium carbonate, 
sulfate, iron, and sodium.  For every two gallons of pure water produced, about a gallon of brine 
is discharged as reject water.  Most estimates of water consumption in ethanol production are 
based on the use of clean process water and neglect the water discharged as reject water. 
 
 The largest source of wastewater discharge is reverse osmosis reject water from process 
water purification.  The reverse osmosis process concentrates groundwater minerals to levels 
where they can have water quality impacts.  The concentrated minerals can show toxicity due to 
osmotic concentration and the presence of some ions such as sulfate or copper.  There is really 
no means of “treating” these ions to reduce toxicity, other than further concentration and 
disposal, or use of instream dilution.  Some facilities have had to construct long pipelines to get 
access to dilution so they can meet water quality standards.  
 Ethanol plants also discharge cooling water blowdown, where some cooling water is 
discharged to avoid the buildup of minerals in the cooling system.  These brines are similar to the 
reject water described above.  In addition, if off-batch ethanol product or process water is 
discharged, the waste stream can have high Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) levels.  BOD 
directly affects the amount of dissolved oxygen in rivers and streams.  The greater the BOD, the 
more rapidly oxygen is depleted in the stream. This means less oxygen is available to higher 
forms of aquatic life.  The consequences of high BOD are the same as those for low dissolved 
oxygen: aquatic organisms become stressed, suffocate, and die.  
669 
 Ethanol production facilities are important transportation hubs.  For instance, a facility in 
Iowa produces about 130 million gallons of ethanol in a year.  On an average workday, 175 
tractor-trailers bring in corn, ethanol goes out in 12 rail tankers, and 8 rail cars are filled with 
dried distillers grain to be used as animal feed.  This intensity of vehicle travel can have local 
water impacts from stormwater runoff, spills, etc. similar to any other rail and trucking terminal. 
 
6.7.2 Water Use 
 
 Older generation production facilities used 4-6 gallons of process water to produce a 
gallon of ethanol, but newer facilities use less than 3 gallons of water in the production process.  
Most of this water savings is gained through improved recycling of water and heat in the process: 
the conservation of heat energy and water go hand-in-hand.  This energy savings is a key 
economic advantage for newer plants.  A gallon of ethanol contains about 70,000 Kcal of energy.  
Older plants used 35-40,000 Kcal of energy to produce a gallon of ethanol, but newer facilities 
use only 25-28,000 Kcal per gallon. 
 
 The abundance or lack of water supply is a local issue, and there have been concerns with 
water consumption as new plants go online.  Some facilities are tapping into deeper aquifers as a 
source of water.  These deeper water resources tend to contain higher levels of minerals and this 
can further increase the concentration of minerals in reverse osmosis reject water.     
 
6.7.3 Distillers Grain with Solubles    
 
 One important co-product of ethanol production is distillers grain with solubles (DGS).   
Due to the increase in ethanol production and the price of corn, DGS has become an increasing 
important feed component for confined livestock.  About one-third of the corn processed into 
ethanol is converted into DGS.  Therefore approximately 45 million tons of DGS will be 
produced for the 15 billion gallons of corn ethanol produced by 2015.  Concerns have been 
raised about the relatively higher phosphorus content of DGS compared to traditional feeds. 
 
 Livestock producers may partially replace corn or other feeds with DGS for both 
economic and production reasons.   Different livestock species can tolerate varying amounts of 
DGS in their diets.  The majority of DGS are fed to beef and dairy cows.   Current 
recommendations allow beef and dairy cows diets to include from 15-40 percent DGS.  
Recommendations for poultry and swine diets are generally less than 15 percent DGS.  Although 
specific analysis of DGS can vary between ethanol plants, compared to corn, DGS are higher in 
crude protein (nitrogen) and three to four times higher in phosphorus.955   
 
 The increase in nitrogen and phosphorus from DGS in livestock feed has potential 
implications for water quality.  When nitrogen and phosphorus are fed in excess of the animal’s 
needs, these nutrients are excreted in the manure.  Most livestock manure is applied to crops, 
especially corn, as a source of nutrients.  When manure is applied at rates above the nutrient 
needs of the crop or at times the crop can not use the nutrients, the nitrogen and phosphorus can 
runoff to surface waters or leach or ground waters.  Excess nutrients from manure nutrients have 
the same impact on water quality as excess nutrients from other sources.    
 
670 
 Several recent studies have indicated that DGS may also have an impact on food safety.  
Cattle fed DGS have a higher prevalence of a major food-borne pathogen, E. coli O157, than 
cattle without DGS in their diets.  More research is needed to confirm these studies and devise 
methods to eliminate the potential risks.956  
 
 Livestock producers can limit the potential pollution from manure applications to crops 
through a variety of techniques.  USDA’s Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) has 
developed a standard for a comprehensive nutrient management plan (CNMP) to address the 
issue of proper use of livestock manure.957  Agricultural producers who use manure should test 
the nitrogen and phosphorus content before application of the manure.  Due to the substantially 
higher phosphorus content of manure from livestock fed DGS, producers will potentially need 
significantly more acres to apply the manure so that phosphorus will not be applied at rates 
above the needs of the crops.  This is a particularly important concern in areas where 
concentrated livestock production already produces more phosphorus in the manure than can be 
taken up by crops or pasture land in the vicinity. 
 
6.7.4 Water Quality Impact from Ethanol Leaks and Spills    
  
The potential for exposure to fuel components and/or additives can occur when 
underground fuel storage tanks leak fuel into ground water that is used for drinking water 
supplies or when spills occur that contaminate surface drinking water supplies.  Ethanol 
biodegrades quickly and is not necessarily the pollutant of greatest concern in these occurrences.  
Instead, ethanol’s high biodegradability can cause the plume of BTEX (benzene, toluene, 
ethylbenzene and xylenes) compounds in gasoline to extend farther (by as much as 70 percent958) 
and persist longer in ground water, thereby increasing potential exposures to these compounds.  
Particularly large plumes of benzene can be expected when:  there is a large area of the aquifer 
that is contaminated with liquid phase gasoline; the background concentration of sulfate-
reducing bacteria (which biodegrade ethanol and benzene) in the ground water is low; the rate of 
ethanol biodegradation is low; and the flow velocity of the ground water is high.  More detail on 
ethanol biodegradation and a summary of laboratory and field studies of ethanol spills will be 
forthcoming in the EPAct 2005 Report to Congress on Fuel Additive Replacements for MTBE in 
late 2008.   
 
 With the increasing use of ethanol in the fuel supply nationwide, it is important to 
understand the impact of ethanol on the existing tank infrastructure.  Given the corrosivity and 
different material compatibility requirements of ethanol, there is concern regarding the increased 
potential for leaks from existing gas stations and subsequent impacts on drinking water supplies.  
In 2007, there were 7,500 reported releases from underground storage tanks.  Since 
approximately 50 percent of the gasoline used in the U.S. contains ethanol, approximately 3,750 
of those releases likely contained some amount of ethanol.  Therefore, EPA is undertaking 
analyses designed to assess the potential impacts of ethanol blends on tank infrastructure and 
leak detection systems and determine the resulting water quality impacts. 
 
 An additional hazard from spills from fuels containing ethanol is risk of potential 
explosions.  Laboratory and field studies have found biodegradation of ethanol can produce 
concentrations of methane in excess of the water solubility of methane (i.e., more methane was 
671 
produced than could be dissolved by the available water).  This methane could bubble out of the 
ground water and enter the soil gas at explosive concentrations, although it is not possible to 
quantify the risk at this time.  EPA is beginning development of modeling software for the 
assessment of fuels of varying composition on ground water, with simulation of methane 
production being one component of this work. 
 
 
6.8 Water Use and Wastewater from Biodiesel Plants 
 
 Biodiesel plants use much less water than ethanol plants in production of biofuel.  Water 
is not used in conversion of oil to biodiesel, but is used for washing impurities from the finished 
product.  Water use is variable, but is usually less than one gallon of water for each gallon of 
biodiesel produced.  Larger well-designed plants use water more sparingly, while smaller 
producers and hobbyists use more water. Some facilities recycle washwater, which reduces water 
consumption.   
 
 The strength of process wastewater from biodiesel plants is highly variable.  Most 
production processes produce washwater that has very high BOD levels.  Essentially the strength 
of the wastewater is based on glycerin and methanol content.  Larger facilities are segregating 
glycerin as a side product and have efficient methanol recovery, while smaller plants are more 
likely to dispose of glycerin, excess methanol, and washwater as a single waste stream.   Crude 
glycerin is an important side product from the biodiesel process and has many uses.   It is about 
10 percent of the final product.  The rapid development of the biodiesel industry has caused a 
glut of glycerin production and many facilities dispose of glycerin.   
 
 The high strength of these wastes can overload and disrupt the biological processes in 
municipal treatment plants.  The normal wastewater going into a municipal sewage treatment 
plant has a BOD 200mg/l.  Washwater from the biodiesel process with efficient recovery of 
methanol, containing small amounts of glycerin, can have a BOD of 10,000 – 15,000 mg/L.  
Pure glycerin has a BOD of nearly 1,000,000 mg/L.  There have been several cases of 
wastewater treatment plant upsets due to these shock loadings from releases of glycerin from 
biodiesel production facilities.  Unfortunately, these have been due to slug loadings to small 
wastewater treatment plants.  Other states such as Illinois and Alabama have also had problems 
with discharges from small biodiesel plants.   In addition, there have been incidences of outright 
dumping of glycerin.  One such event resulted in a large fish kill in Missouri. 
  
 Producers that choose to dispose of glycerin can be regulated under several EPA 
programs, depending on the practice.  EPA strongly supports the beneficial use of glycerin as a 
product. 
 
 While the market for refined glycerin is glutted with an excess supply, there are many 
known uses for glycerin feedstock.  As prices for glycerin go down, many of these known 
products will show a better profit margin and demand for glycerin will increase.  Most larger 
facilities are segregating crude glycerin for refining into usable feedstock for other products.  
Refining can range from minimal processing up to creation of a food grade product.  Nationally, 
there is a lot of research on the creation of new value added products (ethanol, propylene glycol, 
672 
etc.) using glycerin as a feedstock.  Most of these projects are in university labs, but a few are up 
to pilot scale.  These new technologies will go online at full scale within the next few years, and 
are an important part of the profit stream for the industry.   
 
 
6.9 Potential Impacts to Drinking Water and Public Health    
 Under the Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA), EPA establishes enforceable safety 
standards for drinking water provided by public water systems (PWS).  For chemicals, the 
standard is typically called a maximum contaminant level (MCL).  A PWS is “a system for the 
provision to the public of water for human consumption through pipes or other constructed 
conveyances, if such system has at least fifteen service connections or regularly serves at least 
twenty-five individuals.”  If the source water for a PWS does not meet the MCL, the PWS must 
take measures to reduce the contamination to safe levels and that may entail installing expensive 
drinking water treatment technology e.g., ion exchange (IE), granulated activated carbon (GAC) 
or reverse osmosis (RO). 
 EPA anticipates that increased corn production for ethanol will increase the occurrence of 
nitrate, nitrite, and atrazine in sources of drinking water.  New corn acreage may result in 
increase in the application of fertilizers and herbicides, especially on marginal lands that are not 
as productive.  The ethanol production process may generate new or increased discharges, 
injection or infiltration of process waste water that could adversely affect the nation’s surface 
water and ground water used for drinking water.  
 In addition to potential additional contamination of sources of drinking water, surface and 
ground water supplies may be strained by increased production of irrigated corn for ethanol and 
the ethanol production process itself in local and regional areas.  Increased pumping from 
agricultural aquifers to support ethanol production may accelerate the long running depletion of 
aquifers which has been documented by the USGS.  According to U. S. Geological Survey 
(USGS) data, more than 72 billion gallons a day are already being pumped from the “thirty 
regional principle aquifers with the greatest amount of ground water use”, with irrigation 
accounting for slightly more than 75 percent of those withdrawals.959   The water table of the 
Ogallala aquifer has declined by over 150 feet in some areas since the 1950s due to increasingly 
large withdrawals.960  Aquifers provide water for domestic and other uses, and contribute to the 
base flow of many streams and lakes that support aquatic habitats and other ecoservices such as 
fishing and swimming.  Lower stream levels combined with the increased pollutant loadings may 
concentrate pollutants.  Higher pollutant concentrations may require increased drinking water 
treatment.  The accelerated depletion of agricultural aquifers and surface water supplies may be 
exacerbated by an increase in the incidence of droughts that are predicted under many climate 
change scenarios. 
6.9.1 Nitrogen 
 The nitrogen fertilizers that are applied to corn and other agricultural crops can end up in 
drinking water sources where they can impact human health.  The two nitrogen compounds of 
concern are nitrate and nitrite.  Nitrate is the most stable form of nitrogen in water.   
673 
 EPA has established the MCL for nitrate-nitrogen at 10 parts per million (ppm) and for 
nitrite at 1 ppm.  Infants below six months who drink water containing nitrate and/or nitrite in 
excess of the MCL could become seriously ill and, if untreated, may die.961  Symptoms include 
shortness of breath and blue baby syndrome.  This health effects language is not intended to 
catalog all possible health effects for nitrate.  Rather, it is intended to inform people of the most 
significant and probable health effects, associated with nitrate and nitrite in drinking water. 
 Most nitrogen in water is converted to nitrates.  Since nitrates are very soluble and do not 
bind to soils, they have a high potential to migrate to ground water.  Because they do not 
evaporate, nitrates and nitrites are likely to remain in water until consumed by plants or other 
organisms.  Primary sources of nitrate which may contaminate drinking water are human 
sewage, livestock manure, and fertilizers. 
 In 2007, there were 562 public water systems, serving 257, 558 people, reporting 
violations of the nitrate MCL.962  If a utility’s routine compliance monitoring indicates that 
nitrate or nitrite concentrations are above the MCL, the water system must implement measures 
such as treatment or blending to reduce the concentration so that it is below the MCL (e.g., find a 
new source of water, adjust existing treatment or install new treatment).  Also, utilities must 
monitor the finished water every quarter and provide notification to consumers of the MCL 
exceedance.   
 Since there is no nationally consistent sampling of ambient water used by public water 
systems, the relative contribution of nitrate detections from the various sources is generally 
unknown. 
6.9.2 Atrazine  
 Atrazine is estimated to be the most widely used herbicide in the United States for control 
of weeds.  Atrazine was the second most frequently detected pesticide in EPA's National Survey 
of Pesticides in Drinking Water Wells.  EPA's Pesticides in Ground Water Database indicates 
numerous detections of atrazine at concentrations above the MCL in ground water in several 
states, including Delaware, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, 
Nebraska and New York.963  In 1993, EPA and the atrazine registrants initiated a monitoring 
program to focus on the most significant exposures associated with agricultural and residential 
uses -- exposures through drinking water.  To this point, levels found in PWS have been low.  
Through the PWS monitoring program, EPA is ensuring that exposures to atrazine in drinking 
water do not reach levels that pose a risk to public health.  
 The MCL for atrazine is three parts per billion (ppb).  MCL violations are not triggered 
by single measurement above the MCL but by the running annual average concentration from 
four quarterly samples in which at least one measurement during that period exceeds 3 ppb.  
Some people who drink water containing atrazine well in excess of the MCL over a period of 
many years could experience problems with their cardiovascular system or reproductive 
difficulties.  This health effects language is not intended to catalog all possible health effects for 
atrazine.  Rather, it is intended to inform people of the most significant and probable health 
effects, associated with atrazine in drinking water. 
674 
 Atrazine may be released to the environment in wastewater from herbicide manufacturing 
facilities and through its use as an herbicide.  Microbial activity and other chemicals may 
breakdown atrazine in soil and water, particularly in alkaline conditions.  Sunlight and 
evaporation do not reduce its presence. It may bind to some soils, but generally tends to leach to 
ground water.  Atrazine is not likely to be taken up in the tissues of plants or animals. 964 
 In A Review of Contaminant Occurrence in Public Water Systems, published in 1999, 
EPA found atrazine in the finished water of 21 percent of the surface water systems.965  Atrazine 
was found at concentrations exceeding the MCL in 10.7 percent of the surface water systems 
and, in 83 percent of those systems, atrazine was found at concentrations that would have been in 
violation of the MCL.  As noted above, MCL violations are not triggered by single excursions 
above the MCL but by the running annual average concentration from four quarterly samples in 
which the measurement of at least one of those samples exceeds three ppb.  However in one of 
the states where atrazine is widely used e.g., for corn production, the percentage of single 
samples exceeding the MCL was as high as 77.8 percent for surface water systems serving less 
than 500 people; see Table 6.1. 
Table 6.9-1. 
 Percentage of Surface Water Systems with Detections of Atrazine 
 for a High Occurrence State, 1999 
 
POPULATION <500 500 – 3,300 3,301 – 10,000 
10,001 – 
50,000 > 50,000 
> MRLa 100% 100% 96.2% 96.3% 55.6% 
> MCLb 77.8% 71.1% 57.7% 18.5% 22.2% 
a 
 The MRL, or minimum reporting level, is the lowest concentration at which the contaminant can be consistently 
and reliably detected.  U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, A Review of Contaminant Occurrence in Public 
Water Systems, EPA 816-R-99-006, 1999, Table V.A.2, page D-2. 
b
  U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, ibid, p. D-3. 
 
 
 In 2003, EPA estimated that single atrazine measurements greater than the MCL would 
be observed in 26 to 57 public water systems serving a range of 24,400 – 260,300 people. 966 
 
Because atrazine is used mostly as a pre-emergent herbicide on corn, the surface water 
concentrations typically spike during growing season then taper off for the rest of the year.  Even 
though many surface water systems encounter concentrations above the MCL during the growing 
season, very few experience MCL violations based on the average concentration over four 
consecutive quarters.  In 2007, only one water system serving 740 people officially reported a 
MCL violation.967   
 From 1992 through 2001, the USGS observed atrazine in 90 percent of the samples it 
took from 83 stream sites in agricultural areas as part of its National Water Quality Assessment 
(NAWQA).  Although it does not target exclusively drinking water intakes or wells, the 
NAWQA program “provides an understanding of water-quality conditions and how those 
675 
conditions may vary locally, regionally, and nationally…”.968  Atrazine was observed in 71 
percent of the samples from 30 urban stream sites during the same period.  For ground water, 
USGS observed atrazine in 42 percent of the samples it took from wells in agricultural areas and 
in 31 percent of the samples from urban wells.   The detection limits for this study were very low 
and 95 percent of the sampling results from streams in agricultural areas, where the highest 
concentrations of atrazine were found, were below 2.4 ppb which is 80 percent of the MCL of 3 
ppb.   
6.9.3 Future availability of more recent occurrence data 
 EPA anticipates releasing the chemical occurrence data covering the years 1999 – 2006 
from states for publication in 2009 as part of the six year review of drinking water standards.  
Once those data sets are publicly available, they will be useful in updating the occurrence data 
published here for nitrate and atrazine. 
 
6.10 Water Quantity Concerns 
  
 Biofuel production based on current and projected approaches and processes, future 
alternative fuel development and production could markedly increase the demand for various 
fresh water resources.  Two potential needs could increase water demand: quantities of water to 
produce biomass as a feedstock, and the additional water demand for refining of bio-ethanol and 
biodiesel fuels (by up to a factor of three relative to traditional refining).  From a regional 
perspective, water demand for crop production would be relatively much larger than biorefinery 
demand; crop production needs would be approximately 200 times the water needed to refine 
biofuels.969. 
 
 With growth of ethanol production, water supply reliability related to crop demand for 
biomass feedstock will remain an issue.  The amount of water needed to grow feedstocks for 
biofuels can be considerable – for example, the ratio of water consumed to produce the corn 
itself for ethanol is nearly one thousand gallons per gallon of corn ethanol.  Large scale 
production of perennial energy crops involving tens of millions of acres, even when rain-fed, can 
have water resource impacts and unintended local consequences due to alterations of hydrologic 
flows.  The timing of the water demand may also be critical; water is often plentiful in one 
season but scarce in another.   
 
 Growing crops for biofuel production is likely to have significant regional and local 
impacts, including the potential to change irrigation water use, and thus local water availability.  
The feasibility and sustainability of water diversions for biomass irrigation will vary depending 
on the region.  Moreover, siting of some ethanol plants is already occurring where the water 
resource is already under duress, for example on the High Plains aquifer. 
 
 Biofuel refineries create additional local scale demand for water withdrawals and 
consumption.  It is difficult to generalize about the impact on local water supplies, however, 
some community supplies have been stressed by the water requirements of ethanol facilities.  
676 
However, from a national and regional perspective, relative to the water incorporated in the 
feedstock, water use in biorefineries is quite small.  A typical corn ethanol plant consumes 
slightly more than four gallons water per gallon of ethanol produced; biodiesel refining even 
less, about one gallon of water per gallon of biodiesel.  (Petroleum refining consumes about 1.5 
gallons water per gallon fuel produced.) Biodiesel refining requires much less water per unit of 
energy produced than bioethanol.  Consumptive use is about one gallon water per gallon, but 
may be up to three gallons per gallons.  However, biofuels crops may be irrigated with 
wastewater that is biologically and chemically unsuitable for use with food crops.  On the other 
hand, cellulosic materials require a different process, and are thought to use 9.5 gallons water per 
gallon fuel produced -- but this would be expected to decline as efficiency increases (currently 
projected to be lowered to two to six gallons per gallon). 
 
 Geographic impacts of biofuel refining vary.  Currently, the Midwest and Southeast have 
most of the production.  In Iowa, water consumption alone from ethanol refining already 
accounts for about seven percent of all industrial water use, and is projected to be 14 percent by 
2012 -- or about 50 million gallons per day.   A typical ethanol plant now producing 50 million 
gallons per year means a minimum of 175 million gallons (nearly 480,000 per day) used in a 
year.  In the Great Lakes-St. Lawrence region, newer facilities under construction will have 
capacities of 100 million gallons per year.970   For a 100 million gallon per year corn ethanol 
plant, water consumption is one million gallons of water/day (equates to daily water 
consumption of a town of 20,000).  
 
 Research is needed to establish water use requirements across the entire biofuel 
production chain.  Information needs related to biomass feedstock production include the 
assessment and quantification of impacts of increased irrigation of energy crops and resulting 
biofuel cost/benefit tradeoffs for both starch/sugar/oil biofuel crops, and the lignocellulosic 
biofuel crops.  An assessment is also needed of the impacts on hydrologic flows of regional 
expansion of perennial energy crop production.  These include the impacts and risks tradeoffs, 
e.g., altered flows due to deep extensive root systems and dense canopies, as well as a need for 
management practices/metrics, e.g. relatively large absolute water consumption, and additional 
irrigation necessary.  Changing climate adds an additional element of uncertainty in making 
assessments of water use. 
 
 Many uncertainties exist regarding estimating water needs for irrigating cellulosic 
feedstocks in particular.  Reasons include: water data is less available for proposed cellusosic 
feedstock than for common crops, evapotranspiration rates of marginal lands used for these crops 
are unknown, and water demand by heretofore unirrigated native grasses is unknown.   
 
 There are some mitigating factors on increased demand for water by biofuels.  Both the 
impacts and regulatory opportunities for mitigation of water impacts are likely to be at the state 
and local levels.  For example, rainfall harvesting, efficient irrigation water transport and use of 
reclaimed water can lead to more efficient agricultural water use for both corn and cellulosic 
ethanol crops.  Also, biorefineries are increasingly incorporating water recycling.  
 
 The economics of the energy-water distribution linkage are important in biofuels 
production.  At a macroscale, the high prices of energy driving the increased production of 
677 
biofuels will likely affect water availability and use, e.g., conveyance costs related to irrigation 
waters will also increase with energy costs, possibly leading to water conservation that may 
counter the expanded water use for crops.  Also, the value of crops relative to their water demand 
matters: water rights can often be bought and sold if the value of the crop is sufficiently high.  
 
 Finally, there is the potential for a low water use alternative biomass feedstock to 
develop:  oil-producing macro-algae.  These algae can be grown without land, using 
nontraditional waters, and CO2 waste streams as a nutrient source.  Such fuels can have 
significantly higher energy density and are potentially more fungible within existing 
transportation fuel infrastructure than ethanol. 
678  
Chapter 7:  Initial Regulatory Flexibility Analysis 
 
 
 This chapter discusses our Initial Regulatory Flexibility Analysis (IRFA) which evaluates 
the potential impacts of the proposed standards on small entities.  The Regulatory Flexibility Act, 
as amended by the Small Business Regulatory Enforcement Fairness Act of 1996 (SBREFA), 
generally requires an agency to prepare a regulatory flexibility analysis of any rule subject to 
notice and comment rulemaking requirements under the Administrative Procedure Act or any 
other statute unless the agency certifies that the rule will not have a significant economic impact 
on a substantial number of small entities.  Pursuant to this requirement, we have prepared an 
IRFA for the proposed rule.  Throughout the process of developing the IRFA, we conducted 
outreach and held meetings with representatives from the various small entities that could be 
affected by the rulemaking to gain feedback, including recommendations, on how to reduce the 
impact of the rule on these entities.  The small business recommendations stated here reflect the 
comments of the small entity representatives (SERs) and members of the Small Business 
Advocacy Review Panel (SBAR Panel, or ‘the Panel’). 
 
 
7.1 Overview of the Regulatory Flexibility Act 
 
 In accordance with section 609(b) of the Regulatory Flexibility Act, we convened an 
SBAR Panel before conducting the IRFA.  A summary of the Panel’s recommendations is 
presented in the preamble of this proposed rulemaking.  Further, a detailed discussion of the 
Panel’s advice and recommendations is found in the Final Panel Report contained in the docket 
for this proposed rulemaking. 
 
 Section 609(b) of the Regulatory Flexibility Act further directs the Panel to report on the 
comments of small entity representatives and make findings on issues related to identified 
elements of the IRFA under section 603 of the Regulatory Flexibility Act.  Key elements of an 
IRFA are: 
 
- a description of and, where feasible, an estimate of the number of small entities to which 
the proposed rule will apply; 
 
- projected reporting, record keeping, and other compliance requirements of the proposed 
rule, including an estimate of the classes of small entities which will be subject to the 
requirements and the type of professional skills necessary for preparation of the report or 
record; 
 
- an identification, to the extent practicable, of all other relevant Federal rules which may 
duplicate, overlap, or conflict with the proposed rule; 
 
- any significant alternatives to the proposed rule which accomplish the stated objectives of 
applicable statutes and which minimize any significant economic impact of the proposed 
rule on small entities. 
 
679  
 The Regulatory Flexibility Act was amended by SBREFA to ensure that concerns 
regarding small entities are adequately considered during the development of new regulations 
that affect those entities. Although we are not required by the Clean Air Act to provide special 
treatment to small businesses, the Regulatory Flexibility Act requires us to carefully consider the 
economic impacts that our rules will have on small entities.  The recommendations made by the 
Panel may serve to help lessen these economic impacts on small entities when consistent with 
Clean Air Act requirements. 
 
 
7.2 Need for the Rulemaking and Rulemaking Objectives  
 
A detailed discussion on the need for and objectives of this proposed rule are located in 
the preamble to the proposed rule.  As previously stated, section 1501 of the Energy Policy Act 
of 2005 (EPAct) amended section 211 of the Clean Air Act (CAA) by adding section 211(o) 
which required the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to promulgate regulations 
implementing a renewable fuel program.  The final Renewable Fuels Standard (RFS1) program, 
which began on September 1, 2007, created a specific annual level for minimum renewable fuel 
use that increases over time — resulting in a requirement that 7.5 billion gallons of renewable 
fuel be blended into gasoline (for highway use only) by 2012. 
 
The Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007 (EISA) amended section 211(o), and 
the RFS program, by requiring higher volumes of renewable fuels, to result in 36 billion gallons 
of renewable fuel by 2022.  EISA also expanded the purview of the RFS1 program by requiring 
that these renewable fuels be blended into diesel fuel (both highway and nonroad) in addition to 
gasoline.  This expanded the pool of regulated entities, so the obligated parties under this RFS2 
NPRM will now include certain refiners, importers, and blenders of these fuels that were not 
previously covered by the RFS1 program.  In addition to the total renewable fuel standard 
required by EPAct, EISA added standards for three additional types of renewable fuels to the 
program (advanced biofuel, cellulosic biofuel, and biomass-based diesel) and requires 
compliance with all four standards. 
 
 
7.3 Definition and Description of Small Entities  
 
 Small entities include small businesses, small organizations, and small governmental 
jurisdictions.  For the purposes of assessing the impacts of the proposed rule on small entities, a 
small entity is defined as: (1) a small business that meets the definition for business based on the 
Small Business Administration’s (SBA) size standards; (2) a small governmental jurisdiction that 
is a government of a city, county, town, school district or special district with a population of less 
than 50,000; and (3) a small organization that is any not-for-profit enterprise which is 
independently owned and operated and is not dominant in its field.   
 
Small businesses (as well as large businesses) would be regulated by this rulemaking, but 
not small governmental jurisdictions or small organizations as described above. As set by SBA, 
the categories of small entities that will potentially be affected by this rulemaking are defined in 
680  
Table 7.3-1 provides an overview of the primary SBA small business categories potentially 
affected by this regulation. 
 
Table 7.3-1.  Small Business Definitions 
 
Industry 
Defined as small entity 
by SBA if less than or 
equal to: 
NAICSa codes 
Gasoline and diesel fuel refiners 1,500 employeesb 324110 
a
 North American Industrial Classification System 
b
 EPA has included in past fuels rulemakings a provision that, in order to qualify for the small refiner 
flexibilities, a refiner must also produce no greater than 155,000 bpcd crude capacity 
 
EPA used a variety of sources to identify which entities are appropriately considered 
“small.”  EPA used the criteria for small entities developed by the Small Business 
Administration under the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) as a guide.  
Information about the characteristics of refiners comes from sources including the Energy 
Information Administration (EIA) within the U.S. Department of Energy, oil industry literature, 
and previous rulemakings that have affected the refining industry.  EPA then found employment 
information for these companies using the business information database Hoover’s Online (a 
subsidiary of Dun and Bradstreet).  These refiners fall under the Petroleum Refineries category, 
324110, as defined by NAICS. 
 
 
7.4 Summary of Small Entities to Which the Rulemaking Will Apply 
 
Small entities that will be subject to the renewable fuel standard include: domestic 
refiners that produce gasoline and/or diesel, and importers of gasoline and/or diesel into the U.S.  
Based on 2007 data, EPA believes that there are about 95 refiners of gasoline and diesel fuel.  Of 
these, EPA believes that there are currently 21 refiners producing gasoline and/or diesel fuel that 
meet the SBA small entity definition of having 1,500 employees or less.  Further, we believe that 
three of these refiners own refineries that do not meet the definition of a “small refinery” that 
Congress specified under section 211(o).  It should be noted that because of the dynamics in the 
refining industry (i.e., mergers and acquisitions), the actual number of refiners that ultimately 
qualify for small refiner status under the RFS2 program could be different from this initial 
estimate. 
 
 
7.5 Related Federal Rules 
 
 The primary federal rules that are related to the proposed RFS2 program are: the Mobile 
Source Air Toxics rule (Federal Register Vol. 72, p. 8428, February 26, 2007), the RFS1 rule 
(Federal Register Vol. 72, p. 23900, May 1, 2007), and the Technical Amendment Direct Final 
Rulemaking for RFS1, which EPA expects to be published by December 2008. 
 
 
681  
7.6 Projected Reporting, Recordkeeping, and Other Compliance 
Requirements 
 
For any fuel control program, EPA must have assurance that any fuel produced meets all 
applicable standards and requirements, and that the fuel continues to meet those standards and 
requirements as it passes downstream through the distribution system to the ultimate end user.  
Registration, reporting, and recordkeeping are necessary to track compliance with the RFS2 
requirements and transactions involving RINs.  As discussed in Sections III.J and IV.E of the 
preamble to this proposed rule, the proposed compliance requirements under the RFS2 program 
are in many ways similar to those required under the RFS1 program, with some modifications to 
account for the new requirements of EISA. 
 
 
7.7 Regulatory Alternatives 
 
 The Panel’s findings and discussions are based on the information that was available 
during the term of the Panel and issues that were raised by the SERs during the outreach 
meetings and in their written comments.  It was agreed that EPA should consider the issues 
raised by the SERs (and issues raised in the course of the Panel) and that EPA should consider 
the comments on flexibility alternatives that would help to mitigate any adverse impacts on small 
businesses.  Alternatives discussed throughout the Panel process include those offered in the 
development of this rule.  A summary of the Panel’s recommendations, along with those 
provisions that are being proposed in this action, are detailed below.  A full discussion of the 
regulatory alternatives and hardship provisions discussed and recommended by the Panel, all 
written comments received from SERs, and summaries of the outreach meetings that were held 
with the SERs can be found in the SBREFA Final Panel Report, located in the rulemaking 
docket.  All of the flexibilities that were proposed in the rulemaking for small businesses are 
described in Section IV.B of the preamble to the proposed rule. 
 
In general, SERs stated that they believed that small refiners would face challenges in 
meeting the new standards.  More specifically, they voiced concerns with respect to the RIN 
program itself, uncertainty (with the required renewable fuel volumes, RIN availability, and 
cost), and the desire for a RIN system review. 
 
One concern that was raised by EPA with regard to provisions for small refiners in the 
RFS2 rule is that this rule presents a very different situation than the small refinery versus small 
refiner concept from RFS1.  This situation deals with whether EPA has the authority to provide 
small refineries that are operated by a small refiner with an extension of time that would be 
different from (and more than) the temporary exemption specified by Congress in section 
211(o)(9) for small refineries.  For those small refiners who are covered by the small refinery 
provisions, Congress has specifically adopted a relief provision aimed at their refineries.  This 
provides a temporary extension through December 31, 2010 and allows for further extensions 
only if certain criteria are met.  EPA believes that providing small refineries (and thus, small 
refiners who own small refineries) with an additional exemption different from that provided by 
section 211(o)(9) raises concerns about inconsistency with the intent of Congress.  Congress 
spoke directly to the relief that EPA may provide for small refineries, including those small 
682  
refineries operated by small refiners, and limited it to a blanket exemption through December 31, 
2010, with additional extensions if the criteria specified by Congress were met.  An additional or 
different extension, relying on a more general provision in section 211(o)(3), would raise 
questions about consistency with the intent of Congress. 
 
It was agreed that EPA should consider the issues raised by the SERs and discussions had 
by the Panel itself, and that EPA should consider comments on flexibility alternatives that would 
help to mitigate negative impacts on small businesses to the extent legally allowable by the 
Clean Air Act.  Alternatives discussed throughout the Panel process included those offered in 
previous EPA rulemakings, as well as alternatives suggested by SERs and Panel members.  A 
summary of these recommendations is detailed below, and a full discussion of the regulatory 
alternatives and hardship provisions discussed and recommended by the Panel can be found in 
the SBREFA Final Panel Report.  A complete discussion of the provisions for which we are 
requesting comment and/or proposing in this action can be found in Section IV.B of this 
preamble.  Also, the Panel Report includes all comments received from SERs (Appendix B of 
the Report) and summaries of the two outreach meetings that were held with the SERs.  In 
accordance with the RFA/SBREFA requirements, the Panel evaluated the aforementioned 
materials and SER comments on issues related to the IRFA.  The Panel’s recommendations from 
the Final Panel Report are discussed below. 
 
7.7.1 Panel Recommendations 
 
7.7.1.1 Panel Process 
 
The purpose of the Panel process is to solicit information as well as suggested flexibility 
options from the SERs, and the Panel recommended that EPA continue to do so during the 
development of the RFS2 rule.  Recognizing the concerns about EPA’s authority to provide 
extensions to a subset of small refineries (i.e., those that are owned by small refiners) different 
from that provided to small refineries in section 211(o)(9), the Panel recommended that EPA 
continue to evaluate this issue, and that EPA request comment on its authority and the 
appropriateness of providing extensions beyond those authorized by section 211(o)(9) for small 
refineries operated by a small refiner.  The Panel also recommended that EPA propose to provide 
the same extension provision of 211(o)(9) to small refiners who do not own small refineries as is 
provided for small refiners who do own small refineries. 
 
7.7.1.2 Delay in Standards 
 
 The RFS1 program regulations provide small refiners who operate small refineries as 
well as small refiners who do not operate small refineries with a temporary exemption from the 
standard through December 31, 2010.  Small refiner SERs suggested that an additional 
temporary exemption for the RFS2 program would be beneficial to them in meeting the 
standards.  EPA evaluated a temporary exemption for at least some of the four required RFS2 
standards for small refiners.  The Panel recommended that EPA propose a delay in the effective 
date of the standards until 2014 for small entities, to the maximum extent allowed by the statute.  
However, the Panel recognized that EPA has serious concerns about its authority to provide an 
extension of the temporary exemption for small refineries that is different from that provided in 
683  
CAA section 211(o)(9), since Congress specifically addressed an extension for small refineries 
in that provision. 
 
The Panel did recommend that EPA propose other avenues through which small 
refineries and small refiners could receive extensions of the temporary exemption.  These 
avenues, as discussed in greater detail in Sections XII.C.6.c.v and vi below, are a possible 
extension of the temporary exemption for an additional two years following a study of small 
refineries by the Department of Energy (DOE) and provisions for case-by-case economic 
hardship relief. 
 
7.7.1.3 Phase-in 
 
Small refiner SERs’ suggested that a phase-in of the obligations applicable to small 
refiners would be beneficial for compliance, such that small refiners would comply by gradually 
meeting the standards on an incremental basis over a period of time, after which point they 
would comply fully with the RFS2 standards, EPA has serious concerns about its authority to 
allow for such a phase-in of the standards.  CAA section 211(o)(3)(B) states that the renewable 
fuel obligation shall “consist of a single applicable percentage that applies to all categories of 
persons specified” as obligated parties.  This kind of phase-in approach would result in different 
applicable percentages being applied to different obligated parties.  Further, as discussed above, 
such a phase-in approach would provide more relief to small refineries operated by small refiners 
than that provided under the small refinery provision.   Thus the Panel recommended that EPA 
should invite comment on a phase-in, but not propose such a provision. 
 
7.7.1.4 RIN-related Flexibilities 
 
The small refiner SERs requested that the proposed rule contain provisions for small 
refiners related to the RIN system, such as flexibilities in the RIN rollover cap percentage and 
allowing all small refiners to use RINs interchangeably.  Currently in the RFS1 program, EPA 
allows for 20 percent of a previous year’s RINs to be “rolled over” and used for compliance in 
the following year.  A provision to allow for flexibilities in the rollover cap could include a 
higher RIN rollover cap for small refiners for some period of time or for at least some of the four 
standards.  Since the concept of a rollover cap was not mandated by section 211(o), EPA 
believes that there may be an opportunity to provide appropriate flexibility in this area to small 
refiners under the RFS2 program but only if it is determined in the DOE small refinery study that 
there is a disproportionate effect warranting relief.  The Panel recommended that EPA request 
comment on increasing the RIN rollover cap percentage for small refiners, and further that EPA 
should request comment on an appropriate level of that percentage. 
 
The Panel recommended that EPA invite comment on allowing RINs to be used 
interchangeably for small refiners, but not propose this concept because under this approach 
small refiners would arguably be subject to a different applicable percentage than other obligated 
parties (similar to the phase-in approach discussed above).  This concept would also fail to 
require the four different standards mandated by Congress (e.g., conventional biofuel could not 
be used instead of cellulosic biofuel or biomass-based diesel). 
 
684  
7.7.1.5 Program Review 
 
With regard to the suggested program review, EPA raised the concern that this could lead 
to some redundancy since EPA is required to publish a notice of the applicable RFS standards in 
the Federal Register annually, and that this annual process will inevitably include an evaluation 
of the projected availability of renewable fuels.  Nevertheless, the SBA and OMB Panel 
members stated that they believe that a program review could be helpful to small entities in 
providing them some insight to the RFS program’s progress and alleviate some uncertainty 
regarding the RIN system.  As EPA will be publishing a Federal Register notice annually, the 
Panel recommended that EPA include an update of RIN system progress (e.g., RIN trading, RIN 
availability, etc.) in this notice and that the results of this evaluation be considered in any request 
for case-by-case hardship relief.  
 
7.7.1.6 Extensions of the Temporary Exemption Based on a Study of Small Refinery 
Impacts 
 
The Panel recommended that EPA propose in the RFS2 program the provision at 40 CFR 
80.1141(e) extending the RFS1 temporary exemption for at least two years for any small refinery 
that DOE determines would be subject to disproportionate economic hardship if required to 
comply with the RFS2 requirements. 
 
Section 211(o)(9)(A)(ii) requires DOE to perform a study of the economic impacts of the 
RFS requirements on small refineries.  The study, which is required to be completed by 
December 31, 2008, must assess and determine whether the RFS requirements would impose a 
disproportionate economic hardship on small refineries.  Small refineries that are found to be in a 
disproportionate economic hardship situation will receive an extension of the temporary 
exemption for at least two years. 
 
The Panel also recommended that EPA work with DOE in the development of the small 
refinery study, specifically to communicate the comments that SERs raised during the Panel 
process. 
 
7.7.1.7 Extensions of the Temporary Exemption Based on Disproportionate Economic 
Hardship 
 
While SERs did not specifically comment on the concept of hardship provisions for the 
upcoming proposal, the Panel noted that under CAA section 211(o)(9)(B) small refineries may 
petition EPA for case-by-case extensions of the small refinery temporary exemption on the basis 
of disproportionate economic hardship.  Refiners may petition EPA for this case-by-case 
hardship relief at any time. 
 
The Panel recommended that EPA propose in the RFS2 program a case-by-case hardship 
provision for small refineries similar to that provided at 40 CFR 80.1141(e)(1).  The Panel also 
recommended that EPA propose a case-by-case hardship provision for small refiners that do not 
operate small refineries that is comparable to that provided for small refineries under section 
211(o)(9)(B), using its discretion under CAA section 211(o)(3)(B).  This would apply if EPA 
685  
does not adopt an automatic extension for small refiners, and would allow those small refiners 
that do not operate small refineries to apply for the same kind of extension as a small refinery.  
The Panel recommended that EPA take into consideration the results of the annual update of RIN 
system progress and the DOE small refinery study in assessing such hardship applications. 
 
7.7.2 Provisions Proposed in the NPRM 
 
 This section describes the provisions being proposed in the preamble to the proposed rule 
related to small refiners. 
 
7.7.2.1 Delay in Standards 
 
As discussed in Section IV.B of the preamble to this proposed rule, the RFS1 program 
regulations provide small refiners who operate small refineries (and any refiner who operates a 
small refinery), as well as those small refiners who do not operate small refineries, with a 
temporary exemption from the standards through December 31, 2010.  EPA has evaluated an 
additional temporary exemption for small refiners for the required RFS2 standards, and this 
exemption has also been evaluated with respect to EPA’s concerns about the authority to provide 
an extension of the temporary exemption for small refineries that is different from that provided 
in CAA section 211(o)(9).  EPA believes that the limitations of the statute do not necessarily 
allow the Agency the discretion to provide an exemption for small refiners only (i.e., small 
refiners but not small refineries) beyond that provided in section 211(o)(9).  Thus, EPA is 
proposing to continue the RFS1 temporary exemption through December 31, 2010 for small 
refineries and all qualified small refiners; further, EPA is proposing provisions that address 
extensions of the small refinery/small refiner temporary exemption, as section 211(o)(9) does 
allow for extensions beyond December 31, 2010.  We are also requesting comment on the 
interpretation of our authority under the CAA and the appropriateness of providing an extension 
to small refiners only beyond that authorized by section 211(o)(9). 
 
7.7.2.2 Phase-in 
 
As discussed above in Section 7.7.1.3, EPA also has concerns that section 211(o) does 
not give the Agency the discretion to allow for a phase-in approach to the standards as it would 
result in different applicable percentages being applied to different obligated parties, provide 
more relief to small refineries operated by small refiners than that provided under the small 
refinery provision.  However, we are inviting comment on the concept of a phase-in provision 
for all small refiners. 
 
7.7.2.3 RIN-related Flexibilities 
 
With regard to the small refiner SERs’ request that the proposed rule contain provisions 
for small refiners related to the RIN system, EPA believes it would be inappropriate to pre-judge 
the outcome of the DOE study, and therefore are not proposing a change to the RIN rollover cap 
for small refiners in this action.  However, we believe that it can and should be considered as part 
of a relief package should it be determined that relief is warranted, therefore we are requesting 
comment on increasing the RIN rollover cap percentage for small refiners.  We also requesting 
686  
comment on an appropriate level of that percentage.  Further, as recommended by the Panel, we 
are not proposing to allow RINs to be used interchangeably for small refiners; however we are 
inviting comment on such an approach. 
 
7.7.2.4 Program Review 
 
As noted above, we have slight concerns that such a review could lead to some 
redundancy since EPA is required to publish a notice of the applicable RFS standards in the 
Federal Register annually, and this annual process will inevitably include an evaluation of the 
projected availability of renewable fuels.  Nevertheless, we agree with the Panel’s 
recommendation on including an update of RIN system progress (e.g., RIN trading, publicly-
available information on RIN availability, etc.) in the annual Federal Register notice.  Thus, we 
are proposing to include elements of RIN system progress—such as RIN trading and 
availability—in the annual Federal Register RFS2 standards notice, and we are requesting 
comment on additional elements to include in this notice. 
 
7.7.2.5 Extensions of the Temporary Exemption Based on a Study of Small Refinery 
Impacts 
 
As previously noted, there are two provisions in section 211(o)(9) that allow for an 
extension of the temporary exemption beyond December 31, 2010.  One involves a study by the 
Department of Energy (DOE) concerning whether compliance with the renewable fuel 
requirements would impose disproportionate economic hardship on small refineries, and would 
grant an extension of at least two years for a small refinery that DOE determines would be 
subject to such disproportionate hardship.  Another provision authorizes EPA to grant an 
extension for a small refinery based upon disproportionate economic hardship, on a case-by-case 
basis. 
 
We believe that these avenues of relief should be utilized by those small refiners who are 
covered by the small refinery provision; and we believe that it is appropriate to consider allowing 
petitions to EPA for an extension of the temporary exemption based on disproportionate 
economic hardship for those small refiners who are not covered by the small refinery provision 
(again, per our discretion under section 211(o)(3)(B)); to ensure that all small refiners have the 
same relief available to them as small refineries do. 
 
Thus, we are proposing hardship provisions for small refineries in the RFS2 program 
similar to those provided at 40 CFR 80.1141(e).  First, we are proposing to extend the temporary 
exemption for at least two years for any small refinery that DOE’s small refinery study 
determines would face disproportionate economic hardship in meeting the requirements of the 
RFS2 program (per CAA section 211(o)(9)(A)(ii)(I)).  Second, we are proposing that any small 
refinery may apply for a case-by-case hardship at any time on the basis of disproportionate 
economic hardship per section 211(o)(9)(B).  The results of the DOE small refinery study, and a 
consideration of EPA’s ongoing review of the functioning of the RIN market, could factor into 
the basis for approval of such a hardship request.  We are also proposing a case-by-case hardship 
provision for those small refiners that do not operate small refineries using our discretion under 
CAA section 211(o)(3)(B).  Such a provision would apply if EPA does not adopt an automatic 
687  
extension for small refiners, and would allow those small refiners that do not operate small 
refineries to apply for the same kind of extension as a small refinery. 
 
 
7.8 Conclusions 
 
 Based on our outreach, fact-finding, and analysis of the potential impacts of our 
regulations on small businesses, the Panel concluded that the proposed provisions for small 
refiners would be beneficial in minimizing the effects of the proposed rule on small refiners. 
 
 Of the 15 small entities with publicly available sales data, we were able to estimate 
annual costs, and thus use this information to complete a preliminary screening analysis.  To 
perform this analysis, we used a cost-to-sales ratio test (a ratio of the estimated annualized 
compliance costs to the value of sales per company).  Costs were analyzed using both a 
“Reference Case” crude oil cost of $53 per barrel and a “High Case” crude oil cost of $92 per 
barrel. 
 
For the 14 small refiners with available data, we found that: 21 percent (3 refiners) of 
small refiners were affected at less than 1 percent of their sales (i.e., the estimated costs of 
compliance with the proposed rule would be less than 1 percent, of their sales) and 79 percent 
(11 refiners) were affected at greater than 3 percent of their sales using the Reference Case costs.  
Using the High Case costs, all small refiners were affected at less than 1 percent of their sales.  
Please note that these costs do not include the available subsidies for the blending of ethanol of 
45 cents per gallon for ethanol and $1.00 per gallon for biodiesel/renewable diesel.  Thus, the 
actual compliance costs will be considerably lower. 
 
 For a complete discussion of the economic impacts of the proposed rulemaking, see 
Chapter 5, the economic impact analysis chapter, of this Draft Regulatory Impact Analysis.
688  
Appendix A:  Biodiesel Effects on Heavy-Duty Highway Engines 
and Vehicles 
 
 
A.1 Executive Summary 
 
 Due to the continuing interest in the use of biodiesel fuels, the Environmental Protection 
Agency has conducted a comprehensive analysis of the emission impacts of biodiesel using 
publicly-available heavy-duty, in-use diesel chassis and engine exhaust emissions data. 
 
 We investigated the emission impacts on NOx, PM, HC, and CO of 20 volume percent 
biodiesel fuels produced from various animal- and plant-based feedstock materials tested under 
several cycles in this analysis.  Average NOx emissions were found to increase 2.2%, while PM, 
HC, and CO were found to decrease 15.6%, 14.1%, and 13.8% respectively, for all test cycles 
run on 20 vol% soybean-based biodiesel fuel at a significance level of P < 0.05 (See Table A.1-
1). 
 
Table A.1-1. 
Emission impacts for all cycles tested on 20 vol% soybean-based  
biodiesel fuel relative to an average base fuel 
Emissions Percent Change in Emissions 
NOx 
PM 
HC 
CO 
+2.2% 
-15.6% 
-14.1% 
-13.8% 
 
 These results are consistent with the exhaust emission impacts for heavy-duty, in-use 
diesel engines found in our 2002 Draft Technical Report, entitled "A Comprehensive Analysis of 
Biodiesel Impacts on Exhaust Emissions."  This report can be found in the docket to this 
rulemaking, EPA-HQ-OAR-2005-0161. 
 
 The current analysis also found that heavy-duty engine dynamometer data was 
statistically indistinguishable from heavy-duty chassis dynamometer data for NOx and HC at a 
significance level of p < 0.05.  Likewise, results for Detroit Diesel Corporation (DDC) engines, 
used in many test programs, were found to be statistically similar to results for other engines for 
NOx, CO, and HC at a significance level of p < 0.05.   
 
 The results of the current analysis also point to a load-dependence of NOx emissions for 
heavy-duty highway engines and chasses.  The difference in NOx emissions between our results 
here and those of various other researchers appears to be attributable to an artifact of the selected 
test cycle profile.  Analyzing the NOx emissions data as a function of load, as we do here -- as 
opposed to a particular test cycle profile -- reconciles the difference and supports the NOx 
emission-load-dependence hypothesis for heavy-duty highway engines and chasses posited by 
Sze et al. and corroborated by Eckerle et al. 
689  
 
 
A.2 Biodiesel Effects on Heavy-Duty Highway Engines and Vehicles 
 
A.2.1 Introduction 
 
 We investigated the emission impacts on NOx, PM, CO, and HC of 20 volume percent 
(vol%) biodiesel fuels produced from various feedstock materials tested under several vehicle 
and engine test cycles.  The data used in this analysis is comprised of data used in EPA's 2002 
Draft Technical Report, entitled "A Comprehensive Analysis of Biodiesel Impacts on Exhaust 
Emissions Draft Technical Report", hereafter referred to as the 2002 Draft Technical Report.  
Data from that report was supplemented with pertinent data sources published in the scientific 
and automotive literature between 2002 and 2007.  The supplemental data was comprised of late 
model year engines, vehicles, and technology groups.  A list of all data sources used in this 
analysis appears in the appendix. 
 
 The focus of the analysis proceeded from general to specific terms, through seven fuel-
cycle combinations, summarized below.  In Case 1, the most-general fuel-cycle combination, we 
examined all heavy-duty engine and chassis cycles run on plant- and animal-based biodiesel 
fuels; in Case 5a, 5b, and 5c, the most-specific fuel-cycle combinations, we examined heavy-
duty engine and chassis data for light-, medium-, and heavy-duty cycles using soybean-based 
biodiesel.  The latter analysis was designed to examine load-dependence of NOx emissions for 
heavy-duty highway engines and chasses first posited by EPA in 2007 (see Sze et al.).  This 
research was further elucidated by Eckerle et al.  While feedstock materials varied for the seven 
fuel-cycle combinations presented here, all analyses were conducted using 20 vol% biodiesel 
fuels. 
 
 A summary of fuel-cycle combinations used in the analysis appears below. 
 
 • Case 1: All cycles tested on plant-based (soybean, rapeseed/canola, and  coconut) and 
animal-based (tallow, lard, and grease) biodiesel fuels,  
 
 • Case 2: All cycles tested on soybean-based biodiesel fuel, 
 
 • Case 3: FTP and UDDS cycles tested on soybean-based biodiesel fuel, 
  
 • Case 4: Detroit Diesel Corporation (DDC) and non-DDC engines tested on 
 soybean-based biodiesel fuel, 
 
• Case 5a: Engines and chasses tested on soybean-based biodiesel fuel run on light-duty 
cycles,   
 
 • Case 5b: Engines and chasses tested on soybean-based biodiesel fuel run on 
 medium-duty cycles, and 
 
690  
• Case 5c: Engines and chasses tested on soybean-based biodiesel fuel run on heavy-duty 
cycles. 
 
 The results of the analysis of the seven fuel-cycle combinations appear in Section 
A.2.3.2.  The results of the analysis of the NOx emissions load-dependence appear in Section 
A.2.3.3 and a discussion of the observed load-dependence impacts in the context of relevant 
literature and the 2002 Draft Technical Report appear in Section A.2.3.4. 
 
 In the 2002 Draft Technical Report, we focused our analysis on data from heavy-duty 
highway engines, since this data was the most abundant in our database and since it was unclear 
to what extent testing on a chassis dynamometer might differ from testing on an engine 
dynamometer.  However, some researchers criticized the conclusions of the report for its 
disproportionate reliance on engine data.  These researchers argued that these engines may not 
behave in a manner indicative of the actual, in-use fleet or that chassis-generated data may be 
better-suited for NOx emissions testing. 
 
 Some researchers also criticized the conclusions of our 2002 Draft Technical Report, 
citing its disproportionate reliance on DDC engine data.  These researchers argued that these 
engines may not behave in a manner indicative of the actual, in-use fleet as a whole.  To help 
address these concerns, we supplemented the database for the 2002 Draft Technical Report with 
non-DDC engine data.  In the current analysis, non-DDC engines represent 59.0% of all engines 
present in the supplemented database. 
 
 To investigate these concerns, we carried out an analysis to determine the compatibility 
of heavy-duty highway engine data with heavy-duty highway chassis data.  Establishing 
compatibility between heavy-duty highway engine data and heavy-duty highway chassis data 
would allow us to make more-complete use of all emissions data in the database.  In turn, this 
would allow us to perform more robust statistical analyses.  The results of this engine and chassis 
data compatibility analysis are presented in Section A.2.3.1.  Section A.2.2 contains a discussion 
of the data screening criteria and methodology used in this analysis. 
 
A.2.2 Data screening and methodology 
 
 The data used in this analysis is comprised of data initially used in our 2002 Draft 
Technical Report, supplemented by pertinent data published between 2002 and 2007.  The 
supplemental data included late model year engines, vehicles, and technology groups.  A list of 
data sources used in this analysis appears in the appendix to this document. 
 
 A criticism raised by the 2002 Draft Technical report was that its analysis relied too 
heavily upon data from early model year engines and that these engines may not behave in a 
manner indicative of the actual, in-use fleet as a whole.  To help address this concern, we 
supplemented the existing database of over 800 observations with approximately 560 additional 
observations comprised of late model year engines, vehicle, and technology groups. 
 
 Candidate data were first screened to verify that they met EPA data QC/QA requirements 
as well as criteria consistent with the goals of the analysis before inclusion into the database (See 
691  
Section II of the 2002 Draft Technical Report for a discussion of EPA data QC/QA 
considerations).  New data meeting these criteria were entered into the database developed for 
the 2002 Draft Technical Report.  These criteria are described in Section A.2.2.1. 
 
A.2.2.1 Criteria for selecting data 
 
 Candidate data were screened to verify that they met criteria consistent with the goals of 
the analysis before inclusion into the database.  For instance, the analysis was limited to No. 1 
and No. 2 diesel fuel and related blends that can be used in typical heavy-duty diesel engines 
without engine modifications.  As a result, all emulsions and non-biodiesel oxygenated blends 
with more than 20 vol% oxygenate were excluded from the final database used in the analysis.  
Also, synthetic fuels, such as those produced using the Fischer-Tropsch process, rather than 
refinery streams, were excluded from the final database. 
 
 We also limited this study to vehicles and engines that had already been sold 
commercially or had a high probability of being sold in the future.  Vehicles and engines with 
experimental technologies that had no immediate plans for commercialization, such as those with 
innovative combustion chamber geometries, were excluded from the database.  Likewise, single-
cylinder research engines were excluded from consideration, even though the associated full-size 
parent engine might have been appropriately included in the database, had it been tested.  Single-
cylinder engines do not appear in heavy-duty applications.  By definition, such engines have 
lower total horsepower and displacement, both of which may influence the way in which 
biodiesel impacts emissions. 
 
 The pairing of diesel and biodiesel fuels used in a particular study also played a role in 
determining if data from that study would be included in our analysis.  For example, we excluded 
data from all studies that did not test at least two different biodiesel concentrations on the same 
engine, one of which could be 0 vol% biodiesel. 
 
 There were a number of instances in which data from one study was repeated in other 
studies.  This might occur if the authors published the same dataset in multiple scientific journals 
to maximize exposure, or if the authors presented a previously-published set of data in a new 
publication for the purposes of comparing the two datasets.  Such duplicative data was also 
excluded from our database. 
 
 Also, each prospective data source was screened to verify that it contained raw, not 
aggregated, data.  In cases where raw data was not published in a study, attempts were made to 
obtain it from the study author(s).  Raw data obtained from author(s) were included in our 
database after successful screening. 
 
A.2.2.2 Criteria for selecting test cycles 
 
 We selected cycles which were representative of actual, in-use operating conditions.  
While the Federal Test Procedure (FTP) transient cycle most-closely reflects actual, in-use 
operating conditions, we included data from a number of other studies that used atypical test 
692  
cycles which were adequately comprehensive in their number, selection of modes, and/or in their 
transient speed-load traces, so that the resulting emission measurements may still be informative. 
 
 Data collected under test cycles that were unique, contained only a single steady-state 
mode, or used two- or three-nonstandard modes for testing, were typically excluded from the 
database.  Non-FTP/UDDS test cycles represented about 24 percent of all data in the database. 
 
 A total of eight different cycles, with two variants, representing a variety of load levels 
were included in our database.  A description of the test cycles included in our analysis appears 
below. 
 
• AVL 8-Mode Test – An eight-mode steady-state engine test procedure, designed to 
correlate with FTP cycle exhaust emission results.  Only NOx emissions data generated 
by the AVL 8-Mode test was included in our database. 
 
• Combined International Local Cycle and Commuter (CILCC) – A transient cycle 
developed by NREL for testing Class 4 to Class 6 vehicles.  It is intended to simulate 
urban delivery driving conditions for heavy-duty vehicles.   
 
• City-Suburban Heavy-Vehicle Cycle (CSHVC) – A transient cycle developed by West 
Virginia University.  It is intended to simulate low-speed urban/ suburban driving 
conditions of heavy-duty vehicles and is punctuated with frequent stops. 
 
• Freeway Cycle – A transient cycle intended to simulate four-lane highway driving 
conditions of heavy-duty vehicles, including entrance and exit ramps.   
 
• Federal Test Procedure (FTP) – The heavy-duty transient cycle currently used by EPA 
for emission, certification, and other testing of heavy-duty on-road engines; the cycle 
most-closely reflects actual, in-use operating conditions and was developed to simulate a 
variety of heavy-duty truck and bus driving conditions in cities and on expressways. 
 
• Highway Cycle (HWY) – A high-speed highway cruise cycle based on the Heavy 
Heavy-Duty Diesel Truck chassis cycle developed by the California Air Resources Board 
and previously used in the Coordinating Research Council E-55 program. 
 
• Rowan University Composite School Bus Cycle (RUCSBC) – A school bus cycle 
developed by Rowan University. 
 
• Urban Dynamometer Driving Schedule (UDDS) – A heavy-duty chassis dynamometer 
test.  Our database includes data from the UDDS cycle and two variants simulating light 
(6,000 lbs) and heavy (28,000 lbs) test weight conditions.  
 
 The summary of the test cycles included in our analysis appears in Table A.2-1.  
 
693  
Table A.2-1. Test cycles included in this analysis 
Test Cycle Description Duration 
AVL 8 Eight-mode steady-
state cycle n/a 
CILCC Heavy-duty urban delivery cycle 
53 min 
12 sec 
CSHVC 
Heavy-duty city-
suburb low-speed 
cycle 
28 min 
20 sec 
Freeway Heavy-duty highway 
cycle 
27 min 
20 sec 
FTP Heavy-duty engine 
certification cycle 20 min 
HWY High-speed cruise 
cycle from CRC E-55 
12 min 
40 sec 
RUCSBC School bus cycle 21 min 50 sec 
UDDS Heavy-duty chassis 
cycle 
17 min 
40 sec 
UDDS 6k UDDS variant based 
on EPA data 
17 min 
40 sec 
UDDS 28k UDDS variant based 
on CRC E-55 data 
17 min 
40 sec 
 
 
A.2.2.3 Criteria for selecting feedstock materials 
 
 Biodiesel fuel can be produced from a wide variety of feedstock materials.  While the 
studies that comprise our database included only a portion of the many feedstock materials 
possible, they do represent the most-common feedstock materials.  The biodiesel feedstock 
materials found in our database and their percentages are listed in Table A.2-2. 
 
694  
Table A.2-2. Biodiesel feedstock materials in the database 
Feedstock 
Materials 
Number of 
Observations 
Percentage of 
Observations 
Soybean 556 77.1% 
Rapeseed/Canola 95 13.2% 
Grease a  42 5.8% 
Tallow 19 2.6% 
Coconut 6 0.8% 
Lard 3 0.4% 
       
a
 Includes high free fatty acid (HFFA) and low free fatty acid (LFFA) 
 
 Given the limited data available for some feedstock materials, we aggregated all biodiesel 
feedstock materials into three general categories: plant-based biodiesel, soybean-based biodiesel 
(a subset of plant-based biodiesel), and animal-based biodiesel (See Table A.2-3 for a listing of 
biodiesel feedstock materials aggregated into the categories used in our database). 
 
Table A.2-3. 
Biodiesel feedstock materials aggregated  
into categories used in the database 
Aggregated Feedstock 
Material Category 
Number of Observations  
in Category 
Plant-based 657 
Soybean-based 556 
Animal-based 64 
 
A.2.2.4 Overview of methodology  
 
 This section summarizes the statistical approach used in this analysis, which employed 
the SAS/STAT software procedure PROC MIXED.  This procedure can treat some variables as 
fixed-effects and others as random-effects.   
 
 For instance, the NOx fixed-effect was expressed as a function of percent biodiesel (0 or 
20 vol%), vehicle class (Class 1-2a or Class 2b-8), the interaction of percent biodiesel and 
vehicle class, test cell type (chassis test cell or engine test cell), and the interaction between test 
cell type and percent biodiesel.  Each fixed-effect term is tested and removed if found not 
695  
significant.  Additional fixed-effect terms were added to the model when examining DDC and 
non-DDC engines.  The random-effects examined were the test cell type and its interaction with 
percent biodiesel, test cycle, and the biodiesel source. 
 
 After creating the initial model, the distribution of mixed-model residuals are examined; 
residuals with absolute values greater than four standard deviations from a mean of 0 are 
considered outliers and removed from further consideration. 
 
 The final model evaluates the statistical significance of the difference between fuels 
containing 20 vol% biodiesel and the base fuel, containing no biodiesel.  A significance criterion 
of p < 0.05 was used for all analysis.  See Section II of the 2002 Draft Technical Report for 
additional discussion and derivations.  
 
A.2.3 Results 
 
 This section contains the results of the biodiesel emissions impact analysis described in 
Section A.2.2.  The results of the analysis of the compatibility of heavy-duty highway chassis 
and engine data appear in Section A.2.3.1.  The results of the analysis of the seven fuel-cycle 
combinations appear in Section A.2.3.2, including the analysis of DDC engines versus non-DDC 
engines.  The results of the analysis of the NOx emissions load-dependence appear in Section 
A.2.3.3 and a discussion of the observed load-dependence impacts placed in the context of 
relevant literature and the 2002 Draft Technical Report appear in Section A.2.3.4. 
 
A.2.3.1 Compatibility of heavy-duty highway chassis and engine data  
  
 The primary objective of the analysis was to quantify the impacts of biodiesel fuels.  One 
aspect of the analysis was to determine if heavy-duty highway emissions engine data in our 
database was comparable to heavy-duty highway chassis data for purposes of our statistical 
analysis.  Much of the database (66%) consisted of heavy-duty highway engine data, with the 
balance of the data comprising heavy-duty highway chassis data.  Establishing compatibility 
between engine and chassis data would allow us to make more complete use of all emissions data 
in the database, which, in turn, would allow us to perform more robust statistical analyses. 
 
 Moreover, some researchers criticized the conclusions of our 2002 Draft Technical 
Report, citing its disproportionate reliance on engine data.  These researchers argued that these 
engines may not behave in a manner indicative of the actual, in-use fleet as a whole or that 
chassis-generated data might be better-suited for purposes of biodiesel emissions testing.  To 
investigate these claims, we undertook an analysis to determine the compatibility of heavy-duty 
highway engine data with heavy-duty highway vehicle data. 
 
 Using a significance level of p < 0.05 for all statistical analysis, engine data was found to 
be statistically comparable to chassis data for NOx and PM emissions.  This finding is supported 
by the research of NREL, whose examination of published data suggests that there exists no 
discrepancy between engine and vehicle testing data (See NREL Milestone 10.4).  See Table 
A.2-4 for a summary of fuel-cycle combinations for which heavy-duty highway engine data was 
statistically comparable to heavy-duty highway chassis data for regulated pollutants. 
696  
 
 Table A.2-4. 
Fuel-cycle combinations for which heavy-duty highway engine 
data was statistically comparable to heavy-duty highway  
chassis data for regulated pollutants 
Regulated Pollutants 
 
NOx PM CO HC 
Case 1 x   X 
Case 2 x   X 
Case 3 x   X 
Case 4 x   X 
Case 5a x   X 
Case 5b x   X 
Fu
el
-C
yc
le
s 
Case 5c x   X 
  x denotes heavy-duty highway engine data that is statistically    
  comparable to heavy-duty highway chassis data. 
  
 Emissions of PM and CO for heavy-duty highway engines and chasses were not found to 
be statistically comparable to each other for any of the seven fuel-cycle combinations.  Based 
upon our experience with chassis test cells, it is difficult to accurately quantify PM exhaust 
emissions, as chassis-based testing is often deficient and non-standardized vis-à-vis 40CFR86-
2007 and 40CFR1065 for test specification and test equipment, respectively.  Deficiencies 
associated with non-standardized chassis test cells may produce high test-to-test variability.  
Likewise, CO emissions are difficult to accurately quantify on both heavy-duty engine and 
chassis test cells and may also produce high test-to-test variability. 
 
 High test-to-test variability curtails the ability to accurately capture and discern small 
differences in exhaust emissions, particularly PM and CO exhaust emissions.  This variability 
may help to explain why engine and chassis data are not comparable in our analysis for CO and 
PM emissions. 
 
 In cases where heavy-duty highway engine data is statistically comparable to heavy-duty 
highway chassis data, engine and chassis data are pooled to produce the appropriate statistic.  In 
other cases, we believe that the use of engine data alone results in a more-representative statistic, 
which we report here.  The results for the following analysis reflect this approach. 
 
A.2.3.2 Fuel-cycle results 
 
 Seven fuel-cycle combinations were identified for our statistical analysis, ranging from a 
general case, combining testing of all test cycles and all cycles and on all biodiesel fuel feedstock 
materials to cycles aggregated into light-, medium-, and heavy-duty test cycle categories, which 
were run exclusively on 20 vol% soybean-based biodiesel fuel.  Heavy-duty highway engine and 
697  
chassis emissions data were statistically comparable for NOx and HC and were subsequently 
pooled for our analysis.  Heavy-duty highway engine and chassis emissions data were not 
statistically comparable for PM and CO, so only engine results are presented here.  The results 
for each of the seven fuel-cycle combinations appears below.  All results presented are 
statistically significant at a significance level of p < 0.05.  
 
 Case 1: All cycles tested on all biodiesel fuels 
 Our first fuel-cycle combination examined data collected on all cycles included in the 
database and from all vehicles and engines tested on both plant-based (soybean, rapeseed/canola 
and coconut) and animal-based (tallow, lard, and grease) biodiesel fuels (See Table A.2-1 for a 
listing of all cycles used in the Case 1, Case 2, and Case 4 analyses).  
 
 For plant-based and animal-based biodiesel fuels, NOx emissions were found to increase 
a statistically-significant 2.0% relative to the base fuel, whereas, PM, CO, and HC emissions 
were found to decrease by 13.6%, 13.5%, and 18.7%, respectively, relative to the base fuel. 
 
 Case 2: All cycles tested on soybean-based biodiesel fuels 
 Our second fuel-cycle combination examined all cycles specified in Case 1, but only 
involved vehicles and engines tested on soybean-based biodiesel fuels. 
 
 For soybean-based biodiesel, NOx emissions were found to increase by 2.2%, whereas 
PM, CO, and HC emissions were found to decrease by 15.6%, 13.8%, and 14.1%%, respectively, 
relative to the base fuel.  Case 1 and Case 2 differ in their fuel composition.  The biodiesel tested 
in Case 1 is composed of 20 vol% animal- and plant-based biodiesel, whereas in Case 2, the fuel 
is composed of 20 vol% soybean-based biodiesel only.  The results suggest that the removal of 
animal-based and/or rapeseed/canola/coconut-based biodiesel fuel feedstock materials may have 
a slight impact on some exhaust emissions.  Increases in emissions of 0.2 %, 2.0%, and 0.3% are 
observed for NOx, PM, and CO, respectively, relative to a soybean-based biodiesel discussed in 
Case 2.  HC emissions decrease by 4.6% relative to a soybean-based biodiesel. 
 
 Several hypotheses have been advanced by researchers in an attempt to help explain the 
differences in exhaust emissions between plant-based and animal-based biodiesel feedstock 
materials; these are, however, outside the scope of the current analysis and are not discussed 
here. 
 
 Case 3: FTP and UDDS cycles tested on soybean-based biodiesel fuels 
 Our third fuel-cycle combination examined only engines and vehicles tested on soybean-
based biodiesel fuel over only the FTP and UDDS cycles.  Together, FTP and UDDS cycles 
comprise 76% of the database observations. 
 
 For soybean-based biodiesel, NOx emissions were found to increase by 3.2%, whereas 
PM, CO, and HC emissions were found to decrease by 15.6%, 15.9%, and 13.7%, respectively, 
relative to the base fuel.   
 
 The results of this analysis suggest that the emission impacts associated with heavy-duty 
highway engines and chasses tested on 20 vol% soybean-based biodiesel and run on FTP/UDDS 
cycles produce an increase in exhaust emissions of 1.0% for NOx and 2.1% for CO, relative to 
698  
all engine and chassis cycles run on the same fuels.  HC emissions decrease by 0.4% relative to 
all engine and chassis cycles and PM emissions appear to be relatively unaffected.  These results 
were statistically significant at a significance level of p < 0.05. 
  
 As the FTP and UDDS cycles may more-closely represent actual, in-use operating 
conditions encountered by heavy-duty highway engines and vehicles, it is possible that the Case 
3 results may be a better indicator of actual, in-use biodiesel emissions impacts. 
 
 Case 4: DDC vs. non-DDC engines tested on soybean-based biodiesel fuels 
 Our fourth fuel-cycle combination separately examined DDC and non-DDC engines 
tested on the cycles specified in Case 1 and Case 2 using soybean-based biodiesel fuel. 
 
 Our analysis found that DDC heavy-duty engine data was statistically comparable to non-
DDC heavy-duty engine data for NOx, CO, and HC emissions at a significance level of p < 0.05.  
DDC heavy-duty engines and non-DDC heavy-duty engines did not behave in a statistically 
similar manner for PM emissions, however.  In this regard, the results of our analysis suggest 
that DDC heavy-duty engines behave in the same manner in which non-DDC heavy-duty 
engines behave in our database for NOx, CO, and HC emissions.  As such, this finding should 
help alleviate earlier concerns that the disproportionate representation of DDC engines may 
produce results which are not indicative of the database as a whole or the in-use fleet. 
 
 Case 5a: Light-duty cycles tested on soybean-based biodiesel fuels 
  Our fifth fuel-cycle combination examined heavy-duty engine and chassis data for light-
duty cycles specified in Table A.2-5 and tested on soybean-based biodiesel fuel. 
 
 For soybean-based biodiesel tested on light-duty cycles, NOx, PM, CO, and HC 
emissions were found to decrease by 1.0%, 19.0%, 9.9%, and 14.2% respectively, relative to the 
base fuel.  
699  
 
Table A.2-5.  Cycle composition by case 
Case Number Case Description Individual Cycles 
Case 5a Light-duty cycles 
CILCC 
CSHVC 
UDDS6k 
Case 5b Medium-duty 
cycles 
AVL8 (NOx) 
Freeway 
FTP 
RUCSBC 
UDDS 
UDDS28k 
Case 5c Heavy-duty cycles HWY55 
 
 
Case 5b: Medium-duty cycles tested on soybean-based biodiesel fuels 
 Our sixth fuel-cycle combination examined heavy-duty engine and chassis data for 
medium-duty cycles specified in Table A.2-5 and tested on soybean-based biodiesel fuel. 
 
 For soybean-based biodiesel tested on medium-duty cycles, NOx emissions were found 
to increase by 2.5%, relative to the base fuel, whereas PM, CO, and HC emissions were found to 
decrease by 19.0%, 14.0%, and 14.2%, and respectively, relative to the base fuel. 
 
 Case 5c: Heavy-duty cycles tested on soybean-based biodiesel fuels 
 Our seventh fuel-cycle combination examined heavy-duty engine and chassis data for 
heavy-duty cycles specified in Table A.2-5 and tested on soybean-based biodiesel fuel. 
 
 For soybean-based biodiesel tested on heavy-duty cycles, NOx emissions were found to 
increase by 5.1%, relative to the base fuel, whereas PM, CO, and HC emissions were found to 
decrease by 32.6%, 22.0%, and 14.2%, respectively, relative to the base fuel.  Unlike Case 5a 
and 5b, the PM emissions results were significant and greater than those of the light-duty and 
medium-duty cases.  A summary of these results appears in Table A.2-6.   
700  
 
Table A.2-6. 
Summary of emissions results for seven fuel-cycle combinations 
for heavy-duty highway engines and chasses 
Regulated Pollutants 
 
NOx PM a  CO a  HC 
Case 1 +2.0% -13.6% -13.5% b  -18.7% 
Case 2 +2.2% -15.6% -13.8% -14.1% 
Case 3 +3.2% -15.6% -15.9% -13.7% 
Case 4 +2.4% -16.9% -13.9% -14.3% 
Case 5a -1.0% -9.9% 
Case 5b +2.5% 
-19.0% 
-14.0% 
Fu
el
-C
yc
le
s 
Case 5c +5.1% -32.6% -22.0% 
-14.2% 
   
a Only engine data.  
   
b
 Not significant. 
 
A.2.3.3 Load-dependant emissions impacts 
 
 We initially identified the load-dependence of NOx emissions in heavy-duty highway 
engines in 2007 (See Sze et al.) and these results were later corroborated by Eckerle et al.  The 
results of Sze et al. and Eckerle et al. were based largely upon new engine and chassis studies (as 
well as modeling efforts), which were aimed specifically at examining the load-dependent NOx 
emissions phenomenon.   
 
 In the current research, however, our work is retrospective insofar as we examined data 
from a broad array of pre-existing studies, none of which were designed to examine the load-
dependant NOx emissions impacts.  As such, this analysis occasionally suffers from the 
experimental design limitations associated with the pre-existing studies.  One such limitation is 
the use of test cycles which do not realistically reflect actual, in-use operating conditions.  Such 
data can skew results and obscure evidence of the load-dependence of NOx emissions.  Such a 
situation is discussed in Case 5a. 
 
 Case 5a, 5b, and 5c: Load-dependant emissions impact on NOx 
 The load-dependence of NOx emissions observed in this analysis is apparent when 
comparing Case 5a (light-load cycles) to Case 5b (medium-load cycles) to Case 5c (heavy-load 
cycles).   However, results for the light-load conditions in Case 5a may not be representative of 
in-use vehicle operation. 
 
 Case 5a: Confounding effects of lightly-loaded conditions 
 The load-dependence of NOx emissions evident in the research of Sze et al. and Eckerle 
et al. was based upon medium- and heavy-duty cycles, not lightly-loaded cycles as in Case 5a.   
 
701  
 We believe that our current findings for NOx emissions under lightly-loaded conditions 
may not be representative of the operating conditions typically encountered in actual, in-use fleet 
operations.  As in-use heavy-duty highway engines and vehicles do not typically operate under 
the lightly-loaded conditions encountered in the cycles which comprise our light-duty category, 
the practical significance of the NOx emissions results for Case 5a is questionable.   
 
 Further, the NOx emissions results for Case 5a are also suspect when compared to Cases 
1-4 and 5b-5c, all of which indicate that there is a statistically-significant increase in NOx 
emissions of between 2.0% and 5.1%.  
 
 As such, we place greater significance on the results obtained under medium- (Case 5b) 
and heavy-load (Case 5c) conditions, since they more-accurately mirror typical, in-use fleet 
operations and, as a result, provide a more realistic representation of operating conditions 
encountered in-use. 
 
 Case 5b vs. Case 5c: Load-dependant NOx emission impacts 
 Since the medium-loading conditions associated with these cycles are typical of actual, 
in-use fleet operations, these cycles provide a more realistic representation of operating 
conditions encountered by actual fleet usage.  As such, we place greater significance on these 
results. 
 
 The difference in NOx emissions between our results here and those of other researchers 
appears to be attributable to an artifact of the selected test cycle profile.  Analyzing the NOx 
emissions data as a function of load, as we do here -- as opposed to a particular test cycle profile 
-- reconciles the difference and supports the NOx emission-load-dependence hypothesis for 
heavy-duty highway engine and chasses posited by Sze et al. and corroborated by Eckerle et al.  
The discussion of load-dependant NOx emission impacts in the context of our research appears 
in Section A.2.3.4. 
 
A.2.3.4 Relevant studies  
   
 We initially identified the load-dependence of NOx emissions in heavy-duty highway 
engines in 2007 (See Sze et al.) and these results were later corroborated by Eckerle et al.  The 
results of Sze et al. and Eckerle et al. were based largely upon new engine and chassis studies (as 
well as modeling efforts), which were aimed specifically at examining the load-dependent NOx 
emissions phenomenon.   
 
 In the current research, however, our work is retrospective insofar as we examined data 
from a broad array of pre-existing studies, none of which were designed to examine the load-
dependant NOx emissions impacts.  As such, this analysis occasionally suffers from the 
experimental design limitations associated with the pre-existing studies.  One such limitation is 
the use of test cycles which do not realistically reflect actual, in-use operating conditions.  Such 
data can skew results and obscure evidence of the load-dependence of NOx emissions.  Such a 
situation is discussed in Case 5a. 
 
 
702  
2002 Draft Technical Report 
  
 In 2002, the EPA conducted a comprehensive analysis of the emission impacts of 
biodiesel using publicly available data.  Entitled "A Comprehensive Analysis of Biodiesel 
Emissions Impacts on Exhaust Emissions," the 2002 Draft Technical Report made use of 
statistical regression analysis to correlate the concentration of biodiesel in conventional diesel 
fuel with changes in regulated and unregulated pollutants for heavy-duty highway engines. 
 
 Figure A.2-1 presents basic emission correlations for NOx, PM, CO, and HC developed 
in the 2002 Draft Technical Report as a function of soybean-based biodiesel concentration.  
Table A.2-7 presents results specifically for 20 vol% soybean-based biodiesel. 
703  
 
Figure A.2-1. 
Emission impacts from the 2002 Draft Technical Report by percent biodiesel content for 
soybean-based biodiesel added to an average base fuel 
0 20 40 60 80 100
Percent biodiesel
-80%
-70%
-60%
-50%
-40%
-30%
-20%
-10%
0%
10%
20%
Pe
rc
en
t c
ha
n
ge
 
in
 
e
m
is
si
o
n
s
NOx
HC
CO
PM
 
 
 
Table A.2-7. 
Emission impacts from the 2002 Draft Technical Report 
for 20 vol% soybean-based biodiesel added to an average base fuel 
Emissions Percent Change in Emissions 
NOx 
PM 
HC 
CO 
+2.0% 
-10.1% 
-21.1% 
-11.0% 
 
 We found that the results of the current analysis, which examined heavy-duty highway 
engine and chassis data, are consistent with the findings of our 2002 Draft Technical Report, 
which examined heavy-duty highway engine data only.  Compared to the 2002 Draft Technical 
Report, NOx emissions were found to increase 2.2% while PM, HC, and CO emissions were 
found to decrease by 15.6%, 14.1%, and 13.8%, respectively, in the current study.  These are 
shown in Figure A.2-2 as points overlaid on the results of the 2002 Draft Technical Report. 
 
704  
Figure A.2-2. 
Emission impacts from the 2002 Draft Technical Report by percent biodiesel content for 
soybean-based biodiesel added to an average base fuel  
with new results overlaid 
 
 
 
SAE paper by Sze et al. 
  
 Sze et al. conducted a series of paired fuel tests comparing certification-grade highway 
diesel fuels with 5 to 50 vol% soybean-based biodiesel blends.  Each fuel pair was tested for up 
to seven transient cycles representing various load conditions, using a 2006 model year Cummins 
ISB compression ignition engine.  
  
 The authors concluded that biodiesel NOx impact on the test engine is directly 
proportional to average cycle power or fuel consumption and biodiesel content (See Figure A.2-
3). 
 
0 20 40 60 80 100
Percent biodiesel
-80%
-70%
-60%
-50%
-40%
-30%
-20%
-10%
0%
10%
20%
Pe
rc
en
t c
ha
n
ge
 
in
 
em
is
si
o
n
s
NOx
HC
CO
PM
705  
Figure A.2-3. 
NOx emissions for 20 vol% and 50 vol% soybean-based biodiesel fuel versus average cycle 
power for various heavy-duty highway engine and chassis cycles  
 
 
 Except for the most lightly-loaded cycle, the results show statistically significant 
differences in NOx emissions for all fuel pairs.  The average NOx emissions due to biodiesel 
were found to increase over each cycle, ranging from 0.9 to 6.6% for 20 vol% and 2.2 to 17.2% 
for 50 vol% biodiesel fuels.  The load-dependence of NOx emissions observed by Sze et al. is 
consistent with the findings presented in this report for Cases 5a, 5b, and 5c as well as those of 
Eckerle et al. 
 
 To further elucidate the load-dependent nature of NOx emissions, Sze et al. reanalyzed 
chassis-generated NOx emissions data from NREL as a function of fuel consumption (a 
surrogate for average cycle power) and found it to be in close agreement with EPA engine test 
data.  This is depicted in Figure A.2-4.  Data from NREL using the same engines tested instead 
on a chassis dynamometer are also shown in the figure and follow the same trend, with an R2 = 
0.99 with and without the inclusion of the NREL dataset. 
 
R2 = 0.99
R2 = 0.99
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160
Average Cycle Power (hp)
N
O
x
 (B
io
di
e
s
e
l B
le
n
d)
 
-
 
N
O
x
 (B
0),
 
(g
/h
r)
B20 HWY
B20 FTP
B20 WHTC
B20 UDDS 28k
B20 UDDS 6k
B20 HWY 172
B20 NRTC
B50 HWY
B50 FTP
B50 UDDS 28k
B50 UDDS 6k
706  
Figure A.2-4. 
NOx emissions for 20 vol% soybean-based biodiesel fuel versus average cycle power for 
various heavy-duty highway engine and chassis cycles,  
including NREL chassis testing data  
 
 
SAE paper by Eckerle et al. 
 
 The load-dependence of NOx emissions was also examined by Eckerle et al., who 
generated engine data using 20 vol% soybean-based biodiesel to calibrate chemical kinetic 
models.  These models were used to examine NOx production during the combustion process.  
The authors concluded that the NOx effect associated with burning biodiesel blends over a duty 
cycle depends, in part, on the duty cycle average power and that higher duty cycle average power 
corresponded to larger increases in NOx emissions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
R2 = 0.99
R2 = 0.996
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
Fuel Consumption (kg/hr)
N
O
x 
(B
io
di
es
el
 B
le
nd
) -
 
N
O
x 
(B
0),
 (g
/h
r)
B20 NREL chassis data
B20 HWY
B20 FTP
B20 WHTC
B20 UDDS 28k
B20 UDDS 6k
B20 HWY 172
B20 NRTC
B50 HWY
B50 FTP
B50 UDDS 28k
B50 UDDS 6k
With NREL chassis data
Without NREL chassis data
R2 = 0.99 
707  
 
Appendix to Biodiesel Effects on Heavy-Duty Highway Engines and Vehicles 
 
Studies included in database 
Aako P. et al., "Emission Performance of Selected Biodiesel Fuels - VTT's Contribution" 
Research Report ENE/33/2000, October 2000 
 
Alam M. et al., "Combustion and Emissions Performance of Low Sulfur, Ultra Low Sulfur and 
Biodiesel Blends in a DI Diesel Engine," SAE paper no. 2004-01-3024 
 
Bouché, T., M. Hinz, R. Pitterman, "Optimising Tractor CI Engines for Biodiesel Operation," 
SAE paper no. 2000-01-1969 
 
Callahan, T.J., C.A. Sharp, "Evaluation of Methyl Soyate/Diesel Fuel Blends as a Fuel for Diesel 
Engines," Southwest Research Institute Final Report to the American Biofuels Association, 
December 1993 
 
Clark N. N. et al., "Class 8 Truck Emission Testing: Effects of Test Cycles and Data on 
Biodiesel Operation," ASAE, 1999, 42(5), 1211-1219 
 
Clark, N.N., C.M. Atkinson, G.J. Thompson, R.D. Nine, "Transient Emissions Comparisons of 
Alternative Compression Ignition Fuels," SAE paper no. 1999-01-1117 
Durbin T. D. et al., "Effects of Biodiesel, Biodiesel Blends, and a Synthetic Diesel on  
 
Emissions from Light Heavy-Duty Diesel Vehicles," Environ. Sci. Technol., 2000, 34, 349-355 
 
Durbin, T.D., et al., "Evaluation of the Effects of Biodiesel and Biodiesel Blends on Exhaust 
Emission Rates and Reactivity - 2", Center for Environmental Research and  
Technology; College of Engineering; University of California, Riverside, August 2001 
 
Durbin, T.D., J.M. Norbeck, “Effects of Biodiesel Blends and Arco EC-Diesel on Emissions 
from Light Heavy-Duty Diesel Vehicles,” Environ. Sci. Technol., 2002, 36, 1686-1691 
 
Durbin, T.D., J.R. Collins, J.M. Norbeck, M.R. Smith, "Evaluation of the Effects of Alternative 
Diesel Fuel Formulations on Exhaust Emissions Rates and Reactivity," Final Report from the 
Center for Environmental Research and Technology, University of California, April 1999 
 
Environment Canada, "Emissions Characterization of a Caterpillar 3126E Equipped with a 
Prototype SCRT System with Ultra Low Sulfur Diesel and a Biodiesel Blend," ERMD Report 
#2005-32, 2005 
 
Fosseen, D., "DDC 6V-71N Emission Testing on Diesel and Biodiesel Blend," Fosseen 
Manufacturing and Development, Ltd., report no. NSDB4F15, July 14, 1994 
Fosseen, D., "DDC 6V-92TA MU1 Coach Upgrade Emission Optimization on 20%/80% 
Soy/Diesel Blend," Fosseen Manufacturing & Development, Ltd., report no. 260-2 and 24 1-1, 
September 30, 1994 
708  
 
Frank B.P. et al., "A Study of the Effects of Fuel Type and Emission Control Systems on 
Regulated Gaseous Emissions from Heavy-Duty Diesel Engines," SAE paper no. 2004-01-1085 
 
Goetz, W., "Evaluation of a Tallow/Diesel Blend in a DDC 6V-92TA Engine," Ortech 
International report no. 93-E14-37, July 21, 1993 
 
Goetz, W., "Evaluation of Methyl Soyate/Diesel Blend in a DDC 6V-92TA Engine: 
Optimization of NOx Emissions," Ortech International, Report No. 93-E14-36, July 20, 1993 
 
Graboski, M.S., J.D. Ross, R.L. McCormick, "Transient Emissions from No. 2 Diesel and 
Biodiesel Blends in a DDC Series 60 Engine," SAE paper no. 961166 
 
Graboski, M.S., R.L. McCormick, T.L. Alleman, A.M. Herring, "The Effect of Biodiesel 
Composition on Engine Emissions from a DDC Series 60 Diesel Engine," Colorado School of 
Mines, Final Report to National Renewable Energy Laboratory, June 8, 2000 
 
Hansen, K.F., M.G. Jensen, "Chemical and Biological Characteristics of Exhaust Emissions from 
a DI Diesel Engine Fuelled with Rapeseed Oil Methyl Ester (RME)," SAE paper no. 971689 
 
Holden, Bruce et al., Final Report: "Effect of Biodiesel on Diesel Engine Nitrogen Oxide and 
Other Regulated Emissions," Naval Facilities Engineering Command (NAVFAC) Technical 
Report TR-2275-ENV, May 2006 
 
Howes, P., G. Rideout, "Evaluation of Biodiesel in an Urban Transit Bus Powered by a 1988 
DDECII6V92 TA Engine," National Biodiesel Board, MSED Report # 96-26743-1, June 1995 
 
Howes, P., G. Rideout, "Evaluation of Biodiesel in an Urban Transit Bus Powered by a 1981 
DDCC8V71 Engine," National Biodiesel Board, MSED Report # 95-26743-2 
 
Liotta, F.J., D.M. Montalvo, "The Effect of Oxygenated Fuels on Emissions from a Modern 
Heavy-Duty Diesel Engine," SAE paper no. 932734 
 
Lyons D. W., "Biodiesel Fuel Comparison Final Data Report for Washington Metropolitan Area 
Transit Authority," West Virginia University, August 2002  
 
Manicom, B., C. Green, W. Goetz, "Methyl Soyate Evaluation of Various Diesel Blends in a 
DDC 6V-92 TA Engine," Ortech International, April 21, 1993 
Marshall, W., L.G. Schumacher, S. Howell, "Engine Exhaust Emissions Evaluation of a 
Cummins L10E When Fueled With a Biodiesel Blend," University of Missouri 
 
McCormick R.L. et al., "Fuel Additive and Blending Approaches to Reducing NOx Emissions 
from Biodiesel," SAE paper no. 2002-01-1658 
 
McCormick R.L. et al., "Regulated Emissions from Biodiesel Tested in Heavy-Duty Engines 
Meeting 2004 Emission Standards," SAE paper no. 2005-01-2200 
709  
 
McCormick, R.L. et al., "Effects of Biodiesel Blends on Vehicle Emissions, FY 2006 Annual 
Operating Plan Milestone 10.4," October 2006 
 
McCormick, R.L., J.D. Ross, M.S. Graboski, "Effect of Several Oxygenates on Regulated 
Emissions from Heavy-Duty Diesel Engines," Environ. Sci. Technol., 1997, 31, 1144-1150 
 
McCormick, R.L., J.R. Alvarez, M.S. Graboski, "NOx Solutions for Biodiesel," Colorado School 
of Mines, August 31, 2001 
 
McDonald, J.F., D.L. Purcell, B.T. McClure, D.B. Kittelson, "Emissions Characteristics of Soy 
Methyl Ester Fuels in an IDI Compression Ignition Engine," SAE paper no. 950400 
 
McGill, R., Storey, J., Wagner, R., Irick, D., Aakko, P., Westerholm, M., Nylund, N., Lappi, M., 
“Emission Performance of Selected Biodiesel Fuels,” SAE paper no. 2003-01-1866 
 
National Institute for Petroleum and Energy Research, "Effects of Methyl Esters of Tallow and 
Grease on Exhaust Emissions and Performance of a Cummins L10 Engine," September 16, 1993 
 
National Resources Canada, "National Resources Canada/Fiba Canning - Biodiesel 
Freightliners," National Resources Canada draft report, October 24, 2006 
 
ORYXE Energy International, Inc., Biodiesel Emissions Test Summary, ORYXE presentation, 
2006 
 
Peterson C. L., et al., "The Effect of Biodiesel Feedstock on Regulated Emissions in Chassis 
Dynamometer Tests of a Pickup Truck," ASAE, 2000, 43 (6), 1371-1381 
 
Peterson, C., D. Reece, J. Thompson, S. Beck, C. Chase, "Development of Biodiesel for Use in 
High Speed Diesel Engines," University of Idaho, presentation at Sixth National Bioenergy 
Conference, Oct. 2-6, 1994 
 
Peterson, C.L., "Truck-In-The-Park Biodiesel Demonstration with Yellowstone National Park," 
University of Idaho, August 1999 
Peterson, C.L., D.L. Reece, "Emissions Testing with Blends of Esters of Rapeseed Oil Fuel With 
and Without a Catalytic Converter," SAE paper no. 961114 
 
Peterson, C.L., D.L. Reece, "Emissions Tests with an On-Road Vehicle Fueled with Methyl and 
Ethyl Esters of Rapeseed Oil," ASAE paper no. 946532 
 
Rantanen, L., S. Mikkonen, L. Nylund, P. Kociba, M. Lappi, N. Nylund, "Effect of Fuel on the 
Regulated, Unregulated and Mutagenic Emissions of DI Diesel Engines," SAE paper no. 932686 
 
Schumacher, L., N.N. Clark, D.W. Lyons, W. Marshall, “Diesel Engine Exhaust Emissions 
Evaluation of Biodiesel Blends Using a Cummins L10E Engine,” ASAE, 44(6), 1461-1464 
 
710  
Schumacher, L., S.C. Borgelt, W.G. Hires, W. Wetherell, A. Nevils, "100,000 Miles of Fueling 
5.9L Cummins Engines with 100% biodiesel," SAE paper no. 962233 
 
Schumacher, L.G., S.C. Borgelt, W.G. Hires, D. Fosseen, W. Goetz, "Fueling Diesel Engines 
with Blends of Methyl Ester Soybean Oil and Diesel Fuel," University of Missouri.  See 
http://web.missouri.edu/~pavt0689/ASAED94.htm. 
 
Sharp, C.A., "Characterization of Biodiesel Exhaust Emissions for EPA 211(b)," Southwest 
Research Institute report no. 08-1039A, January 1998 
 
Sharp, C.A., "Emissions and Lubricity Evaluation of Rapeseed Derived Biodiesel Fuels," 
Southwest Research Institute, Final Report for Montana Department of Environmental Quality, 
November 1996 
 
Sharp, C.A., "Transient Emissions Testing of Biodiesel and Other Additives in a DDC Series 60 
Engine," Southwest Research Institute, Final Report to the National Biodiesel Board, December 
1994 
 
Sharp, C.A., "Transient Emissions Testing of Biodiesel in a DDC 6V-92TA DDEC Engine," 
Southwest Research Institute, Final Report to the National Biodiesel Board, October 1994 
 
Sharp, C.A., S.A. Howell, J. Jobe, "The Effect of Biodiesel Fuels on transient Emissions from 
Modern Diesel Engines, Part I Regulated Emissions and Performance," SAE paper no. 2000-01-
1967 
 
Sirman, M.B., E.C. Owens, K.A. Whitney, "Emissions Comparison of Alternative Fuels in an 
Advanced Automotive Diesel Engine," Southwest Research Institute, AD A353968/PAA, 
November 1998 
 
Smith, J.A., D.L. Endicott, R.R. Graze, "Biodiesel Engine Performance and Emissions Testing," 
Caterpillar Technical Center, May 1998 
Souligny M. et al., "Heavy-Duty Engine Performance and Comparative Emission Measurements 
for Different Biodiesel Blends Used in the Montreal Project," SAE paper no. 2004-01-1861 
 
Spataru, A., C. Romig, "Emissions and Engine Performance from Blends of Soya and Canola 
Methyl Ester with ARB #2 Diesel in a DDC 6V92TA MUI Engine," SAE paper no. 952388 
 
Starr, M.E., "Influence on Transient Emissions at Various Injection Timings, Using Cetane 
Improvers, Bio-Diesel, and Low Aromatic Fuels," SAE paper no. 972904 
 
Stotler, R.W., D.M. Human, "Transient Emission Evaluation of Biodiesel Fuel Blend in a 1987 
Cummins L10 and DDC 6V-92-TA," Engineering Test Services, report no. ETS-95-128, Nov. 
30, 1995 
 
Ullman, T.L., C.T. Hare, T.M. Baines, "Heavy-Duty Diesel Emissions as a Function of Alternate 
Fuels," SAE paper no. 830377 
711  
 
Wang, W.G., D.W. Lyons, N.N. Clark, M. Gautam, "Emissions from Nine Heavy Trucks Fueled 
by Diesel and Biodiesel Blend without Engine Modification," Environ. Sci. Technol., 2000, 34, 
933-939 
 
 
Studies not included because data collected on single cylinder/experimental engine 
Murayama, T., Y. Oh, A. Kido, T. Chikahisa, N. Miyamoto, K. Itow, "Effects of Super Heating 
of Heavy Fuels on Combustion and Performance in DI Diesel Engines," SAE paper no. 860306 
 
Murayama, T., Y. Oh, N. Miyamoto, T. Chikahisa, N. Takagi, K. Itow, "Low Carbon Flower 
Buildup, Low Smoke, and Efficient Diesel Operation with Vegetable Oils by Conversion to 
Mono-Esters and Blending with Diesel Oil or Alcohols," SAE paper no. 841161 
 
Shaheed, A., E. Swain, "Performance and Exhaust Emission Evaluation of a Small Diesel Engine 
Fuelled with Coconut Oil Methyl Esters," SAE paper no. 981156 
 
Suda, K.J., "Vegetable Oil or Diesel Fuel - A Flexible Option," SAE paper no. 840004 
 
Ziejewski, M., H.J. Goettler, "Comparative Analysis of the Exhaust Emissions for Vegetable Oil 
Based Alternative Fuels," SAE paper no. 920195 
 
 
Studies not included because data not readily available 
Alfuso. S., M. Auriemma, G. Police, M.V. Prati, "The Effect of Methyl-Ester of Rapeseed Oil on 
Combustion and Emissions of DI Diesel Engines," SAE paper no. 932801 
Hemmerlain, N., V. Korte, H. Richter, G. Schröder, "Performance, Exhaust Emissions and 
Durability of Modern Diesel Engines Running on Rapeseed Oil," SAE paper no. 910848 
 
Humke, A.L., N.J. Barsic, "Performance and Emissions Characteristics of a Naturally Aspirated 
Diesel Engine with Vegetable Oil Fuels - (Part 2)," SAE paper no. 810955 
 
Knothe, G., C.A. Sharp, T.W Ryan, “Exhaust Emissions of Biodiesel, Petrodiesel, Neat Methly 
Esters, and Alkanes in a New Technology Engine,” Energy and Fuels, 2006, 20, 403-408 
 
Lapuerta, M., Armas, O., Ballesteros, R., Fernandez, J., "Diesel Emissions from Biofuels 
Derived from Spanish Potential Vegetable Oils," Fuel, 2005, 84(6), 773-780 
 
Last, R.J., M. Krüger, M. Dürnholz, "Emissions and Performance Characteristics of a 4-Stroke, 
Direct Injected Diesel Engine Fueled with Blend of Biodiesel and Low Sulfur Diesel Fuel," SAE 
paper no. 950054 
 
Ma, W., L.I. Leviticus, F.G. Ullman, "On-Line Measurement of Formaldehyde in Tailpipe 
Emissions by Tunable Diode Laser Spectroscopy," SAE paper no. 941702 
 
712  
Martin, B., P. Aakko, D. Beckman, N. D. Giacomo, F. Giavazzi, "Influence of Future Fuel 
Formulations on Diesel Engine Emissions - A Joint European Study," SAE paper no. 972966 
 
McDonald, J.F., "Evaluation of a Yellow Grease Methyl Ester and Petroleum Diesel Fuel 
Blend," University of Minnesota Final Report to the Agricultural Utilization Research Institute, 
August 11, 1997 
 
Montagne, X., "Introduction of Rapeseed Methyl Ester in Diesel Fuel - The French National 
Program," SAE paper no. 962065 
 
Reece, D.L., C.L. Peterson, "Biodiesel Testing in Two On-Road Pickups," SAE paper no. 
952757 
 
Staat, F., P. Gateau, "The Effects of Rapeseed Oil Methyl Ester on Diesel Engine Performance, 
Exhaust Emissions and Long-Term Behavior - A Summary of Three Years of Experimentation," 
SAE paper no. 950053 
 
 
Studies not included because test cycle nonstandard/unrepresentative 
Adelman, A.J., "Emission Evaluation Test Report for a Comparative Analysis of Emissions 
Among Petroleum Diesel and Biodiesel Blends fired in a Large Diesel Engine," AirNova, Inc., 
January 1998 
 
Akasaka, Y., T. Suzuki, Y. Sakurai, "Exhaust Emissions of a DI Diesel Engine Fueled with 
Blends of Biodiesel and Low Sulfur Diesel Fuel," SAE paper no. 972998 
 
Bagley, S.T., L.D. Gratz, J.H. Johnson, J.F. McDonald, "Effects of an Oxidation Catalytic 
Converter and a Biodiesel Fuel on the Chemical, Biological, and Particulate Size Characteristics 
of Emissions from an IDI Diesel Engine," Michigan Technological University, December 1995 
 
Chang, D.Y., J.H. Van Gerpen, "Determination of Particulate and Unburned Hydrocarbon 
Emissions from Diesel Engines Fueled with Biodiesel," SAE paper no. 982527 
 
Chang, D.Y.Z., J.H. Van Gerpen, "Fuel Properties and Engine Performance for Biodiesel 
Prepared from Modified Feedstocks," SAE paper no. 971684 
 
Choi, C.Y., G.R. Bower, R.D. Reitz, "Effects of Biodiesel Blended Fuels and Multiple Injections 
on D.I. Diesel Engines," SAE paper no. 970218 
 
Czerwinski, J., "Performance of HD-DI-Diesel Engine with Addition of Ethanol and Rapeseed 
Oil," SAE paper no. 940545 
 
Desantes, J.M., J. Arrègle, S. Ruiz, A. Delage, "Characterization of the Injection-Combustion 
Process in a D.I. Diesel Engine Running with Rape Oil Methyl Ester," SAE paper no. 1999-01-
1497 
 
713  
Fort, E.F., P.N. Blumberg, H.E. Staph, J.J. Staudt, "Evaluation of Cottonseed Oil as Diesel Fuel," 
SAE paper no. 820317 
 
Jacobus, M.J., S.M. Geyer, S.S. Lestz, W.D. Taylor, T.H. Risby, "Single-Cylinder Diesel Engine 
Study of Four Vegetable Oils," SAE paper no. 831743 
 
Masjuki, H., M.Z. Abdulmuin, H.S. Sii, "Investigations on Pre-Heated Palm Oil Methyl Esters in 
the Diesel Engine," IMechE 1996, Part A: Journal of Power and Energy 
 
Needham, J.R., D.M. Doyle, "The Combustion and Ignition Quality of Alternative Fuels in Light 
Duty Diesels," SAE paper no. 852101 
 
Schmidt, K., J. Van Gerpen, "The Effect of Biodiesel Fuel Composition on Diesel Combustion 
and Emissions," SAE paper no. 961086 
 
Scholl, K.W., S.C. Sorenson, "Combustion of Soybean Oil Methyl Ester in a Direct Injection 
Diesel Engine," SAE paper no. 930934 
 
Schramm, J., I. Foldager, N. Olsen, L. Gratz, "Emissions from a Diesel Vehicle Operated on 
Alternative Fuels in Copenhagen," SAE paper no. 1999-01-3603 
Schröder, O., J. Krahl, A. Munack, J. Krahl, J. Bünger, "Environmental and Health Effects 
Caused By the Use of Biodiesel," SAE paper no. 1999-01-3561 
 
Senatore, A., M. Cardone, V. Rocco, M.V. Prati, "A Comparative Analysis of Combustion 
Process in D.I. Diesel Engine Fueled with Biodiesel and Diesel Fuel," SAE paper no. 2000-01-
0691 
 
Uchida, M., Y. Akasaka, "A Comparison of Emissions from Clean Diesel Fuels," SAE paper no. 
1999-01-1121 
 
Zhang, Y., J.H. Van Gerpen, "Combustion Analysis of Esters of Soybean Oil in a Diesel 
Engine," SAE paper no. 960765 
 
 
Studies not included because they lack new emissions data for regulated pollutants 
Culshaw, F.A., "The Potential of 'Biodiesel' from Oilseed Rape," IMechE 1993, Part A: Journal 
of Power and Energy 
 
Durbin, T.D., J.R. Collins, H. Galdamez, J.M. Norbeck, M.R. Smith, R.D. Wilson, T. 
Younglove, "Evaluation of the Effects of Biodiesel Fuel on Emissions from Heavy-Duty Non-
Road Engines," University of California Final Report submitted to South Coast Air Quality 
Management District, May 2000 
 
Peterson, C.L., D.L. Auld, "Technical Overview of Vegetable Oil as a Transportation Fuel," 
University of Idaho, 1991 
 
714  
Sharp, C.A., S.A. Howell, J. Jobe, "The Effect of Biodiesel Fuels on Transient Emissions from 
Modern Diesel Engines, Part II Unregulated Emissions and Chemical Characterization," SAE 
paper no. 2000-01-1968 
 
 
Exclusion of duplicate datasets 
Colorado Institute for Fuels and High Altitude Engine Research, "Emissions from Biodiesel 
Blends and Neat Biodiesel from a 1991 Model Series 60 Engine Operating at High Altitude," 
Final Report to National Renewable Energy Laboratory, September 1994 
 
 Note: CO2 values were not duplicative. 
 
McCormick, R.L., M.S. Graboski, T.L. Alleman, A.M. Herring, "Impact of Biodiesel Source 
Material and Chemical Structure on Emissions of Criteria Pollutants from a Heavy-Duty 
Engine," Environ. Sci. Technol., 2001, 35, 1742-1747 
 
Peterson, C.L., D.L. Reece, "Emissions Testing with Blends of Esters of Rapeseed Oil Fuel With 
and Without a Catalytic Converter," SAE paper no. 961114 
 
 Note: Only Table 6 data is duplicative. 
Taberski, J.S., C.L. Peterson, "Dynamometer Emissions test Comparisons on a 5.9L Direct 
Injected Diesel Powered Pickup," BioEnergy '98: Expanding BioEnergy Partnerships 
 
Taberski, J.S., C.L. Peterson, J. Thompson, H. Haines, "Using Biodiesel in Yellowstone National 
Park - Final Report of the Truck in the Park Project," SAE paper no. 1999-01-2798 
 
 
Studies not included for other reasons 
Durbin T. D. et al., "Evaluation of the Effects of Biodiesel Fuel on Emissions from Heavy-Duty 
Non-Road Vehicles", Final Report for the SCAQMD under contract No. 99132 by the University 
of California, Riverside, May 2000 
 
 Reason: Non-road vehicles not considered here. 
 
Frank B.P. et al., "A Study of the Effects of Fuel Type and Emission Control Systems on 
Regulated Gaseous Emissions from Heavy-Duty Diesel Engines," SAE paper no. 2004-01-1085  
 
 Reason: Effect of oxycat & CRDPF greater than effect of B20.    
   
 
Guerra S. A. et al., "Comparison Study of NOx and CO2 Emissions from an Off-Road Diesel 
Compactor Running on Regular Diesel, Biodiesel and Ultra-Low Sulfur Diesel," University of 
Kansas draft report, March 17, 2006 
 
 Reason: Non-road equipment not considered here. 
 
715  
Watts, W.F., M. Spears, J Johnson, "Evaluation of Biodiesel Fuel and Oxidation Catalyst in an 
Underground Metal Mine," University of Minnesota, September 24, 1998 
 
 Reason: Emission measurements were made in the field with portable emission 
 measurement devices 
 
Yoshimoto, Y., M. Onodera, H. Tamaki, "Reduction of NOx, Smoke, and BSFC in a Diesel 
Engine Fueled by Biodiesel Emulsion with Used Frying Oil," SAE paper no. 1999-01-3598 
 
 Reason: Biodiesel blend included water in an emulsion 
716  
Endnotes 
 
                                                 
1
 See the following documents: Iowa State University Center for Agricultural Research and 
Development, “Emerging Biofuels: Outlook of Effects on U.S. Grain, Oilseed, and Livestock 
Markets,” May 2007; USDA Agricultural Projections to 2016, Report OCE-2007-1, February 
2007; NCGA, “How Much Ethanol Can Come From Corn?” 2006; USDA, “An Analysis of the 
Effects of an Expansion in Biofuel Demand on U.S. Agriculture,” May 2007. 
2
 Western Governors’ Association. (2008). Transportation Fuels for the Future, Biofuels: Part I. 
3
 U.S. Government Accountability Office. (2007). 
http://www.gao.gov/highlights/d07713high.pdf 
4
 USDA/NASS. “Corn: Yield by year, US” Accessed at: 
http://www.nass.usda.gov/Charts_and_Maps/Field_Crops/cornyld.asp 
5
 USDA Agricultural Projections to 2016, Report OCE-2007-1, February 2007, p.39 
6
 Ibid. 
7
 USDA Agricultural Projections to 2016, Report OCE-2007-1, February 2007, p.22 
8
 Shapouri, H., Gallagher, P., USDA’s 2002 Ethanol Cost-of-Production Survey, published July 
2005, p.11 
9
 USDA. July 2006. The Economic Feasibility of Ethanol Production from Sugar in the United 
States. 
10
 Ibid. 
11
 Personal communication with Nathalie Hoffman, Managing Member of California Renewable 
Energies, LLC, August 27, 2008 
12
 (2006) F.O. Licht World Ethanol Markets: The Outlook to 2015. 
13
 “Sugarcane Industry in Brazil: Ethanol, Sugar, Bioelectricity” brochure from UNICA 
14
 FAO Statistics. Sugarcane selected as Commodity. 
http://www.fao.org/es/ess/top/commodity.html?lang=en&item=156&year=2005 
15
 Agra FNP. 2007. Sugar and Ethanol in Brazil: A Study of the Brazilian Sugar Cane, Sugar and 
Ethanol Industries. 
16
 “Sugarcane Industry in Brazil: Ethanol, Sugar, Bioelectricity” brochure from UNICA 
17
 Scaramucci, Jose & Cunha, Marcelo.  Bioethanol as Basis for Regional Development in 
Brazil: An Input-Output Model with Mixed Technologies. 
18
 CGEE, ABDI, Unicamp, and NIPE, Scaling Up the Ethanol Program in Brazil, n.d. as quoted 
in Rothkopf, Garten. (2006) A Blueprint for Green Energy in America 
19
 USDA (July 2006) The Economic Feasibility of Ethanol Production in the United States. 
20
 Kline, K. et. al. Biofuel Feedstock Assessment for Selected Countries. Oak Ridge National 
Laboratory. February 2008. 
21
 Elbehri, Aziz.  USDA, ERS. An Evaluation of the Economics of Biomass Feedstocks: A 
Synthesis of the Literature. Prepared for the Biomass Research and Development Board. (2007) 
22
 Milbrandt, A. (2005). “Geographic Perspective on the Current Biomass Resource Availability 
in the United States.” 70 pp.; NREL Report No. TP-560-39181 
23
 Gallagher, P. et. al.  Supply and Social Cost Estimates for Biomass from Crop Residues in the 
United States. Environmental and Resource Economics 24: 335-358, 2003. 
24
 Walsh, Marie. (2008) U.S. Cellulosic Biomass Feedstock Supplies and Distribution. 
Unpublished Manuscript. 
717  
                                                                                                                                                             
25
 Graham, R.L. Current and Potential U.S. Corn Stover Supplies. American Society of 
Agronomy 99:1-11 (2007) 
26
 W. W. Wilhelm, USDA-ARS, Univ. of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE 68583-0934, J. M. F. Johnson, 
USDA-ARS, Morris, MN 56267-1065, J. L. Hatfield, 108 Natl. Soil Tilth Lab., Ames, IA 50011-
3120, W. B. Voorhees, USDA-ARS (retired), Morris, MN 56267-1065, and D. R. Linden,  
USDA-ARS (retired), St. Paul, MN 55108-0000, Crop and Soil Productivity Response to Corn 
Residue Removal A Literature Review; FORUM, © American Society of Agronomy, Madison, 
WI 53711 USA, Published in Agron. J. 96:1-17 (2004) 
27
 Predicting Soil Erosion by Water. A Guide to Conservation Planning with the Revised 
Universal Soil Loss Equation (RUSLE). United States Department of Agriculture, Agricultural 
Research Service, Agricultural Handbook Number 703, 1997. 
28
 Richard G. Nelson,  Enersol Resources, Manhattan, KS 66502, USA, Resource Assessment 
and Removal Analysis for Corn Stover and Wheat Straw in the Eastern and Midwestern United 
States—Rainfall and Wind-induced Soil Erosion Methodology, Biomass and Bioenergy 22 
(2002) 349 – 363, Published by Elsevier Science Ltd 
29
 Linda Mann, Virginia Tolbert, Janet Cushman,  Environmental Sciences Division, Oak Ridge 
National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN 37831-6038, Potential Environmental Effects of Corn 
Stover Removal With Emphasis on Soil Organic Matter and Erosion,  Agriculture, Ecosystems 
and Environment 89: 149-166, ISSN 0167-8809   Elsevier Science, Amsterdam. June 2002. 
30
 http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/technical/Standards/nhcp.html 
31
 Richard G. Nelson,  Enersol Resources, Manhattan, KS 66502, USA, Resource Assessment 
and Removal Analysis for Corn Stover and Wheat Straw in the Eastern and Midwestern United 
States—Rainfall and Wind-induced Soil Erosion Methodology, Biomass and Bioenergy 22 
(2002) 349 – 363, Published by Elsevier Science Ltd. 
32
 W.W. Wilhelm, USDA-ARS; J.M.F. Johnson, USDA-ARS; D.L. Karlen, USDA-ARS;  D.T. 
Lightle, National Soil Survey; Corn Stover to Sustain Soil Organic Carbon Further Constrains 
Biomass Supply, Published in Agron. J. 99:1665–1667 (2007); American Society of Agronomy, 
Madison, WI 53711.  
33
 Susan S. Andrews, Ph.D., Leader, Soil Quality National Technology Development Team  
USDA-Natural Resource Conservation Service Crop,  White Paper: Residue Removal for 
Biomass Energy Production: Effects on Soils and Recommendations, Updated February 22, 2006 
34
 Walsh, M.E. (2007) Sungrant Bioweb. Forest Resources.  
http://bioweb.sungrant.org/Technical/Biomass+Resources/Forest+Resources/Default.htm 
35
 Ibid. 
36
 QUANTIFYING THE FLOW:  TAKING INVENTORYOF WOODY RESIDUALS, David 
McKeever, Research Forester, USDA Forest Service's Forest Products Laboratory, Madison, 
Wisconsin. Published in Biocycle, July 2003, pp. 31-35. 
37
 Perlack, R.D., Wright, L.L., Turhollow, A.F, Graham, R.L., Environmental Sciences Division, 
Oak Ridge National Laboratory; Stokes, B.J., Forest Service, USDA.; Erbach, D.C., Agricultural 
Research Service, USDA, “Biomass as Feedstock for a Bioenergy & Bioproducts Industry: The 
Technical Feasibility of a Billion-Ton Annual Supply (A Joint Study Sponsored by DOE and 
USDA, Prepared by Oak Ridge National Laboratory),” 2005. 
38
 Ibid. 
39
 Kerstetter, J. and Lyons, J., (2001) Logging and Agricultural Residue Supply Curves for the 
Pacific Northwest.  Washington State University Energy Program for U.S. DOE. 
718  
                                                                                                                                                             
40
 Rummer, B.; Len, D.; and O’Brien, O. (2004). Forest Residues Bundling Project-New 
Technology for Residue Removal. USDA Forest Service, Southern Research Station 
41
 Ibid. 
42
 Rawlings, C., et. al. (2004). A Study of How to Decrease the Costs of Collecting, Processing 
and Transporting Slash. USDA Forest Service. 
43
 Dickerson, K., et. al. (revised November 2007). Biomass and Biofuels in Maine: Estimating 
Supplies for Expanding the Forest Products Industry.  Margaret Chase Smith Policy Center. 
44
 Puttock, G.D. (1995). Estimating cost for integrated harvesting and related forest management 
activities. Biomass and Bioenergy 8(2), 73-79. 
45
 Perlack, R.D., Wright, L.L., Turhollow, A.F, Graham, R.L., Environmental Sciences Division, 
Oak Ridge National Laboratory; Stokes, B.J., Forest Service, USDA.; Erbach, D.C., Agricultural 
Research Service, USDA, “Biomass as Feedstock for a Bioenergy & Bioproducts Industry: The 
Technical Feasibility of a Billion-Ton Annual Supply (A Joint Study Sponsored by DOE and 
USDA, Prepared by Oak Ridge National Laboratory),” 2005. 
46
 Dickerson, K., et. al. (revised November 2007). Biomass and Biofuels in Maine: Estimating 
Supplies for Expanding the Forest Products Industry.  Margaret Chase Smith Policy Center. 
47
 Ibid. 
48
 Timko, B., 2003. USDA, Forest Service, personal communication as noted in the “Billion-ton 
Study” by Perlack, R.D., et. al. 
49
 F. Bohlin and A. Roos, Wood fuel supply as a function of forest owner preferences and 
management styles, Biomass & Bioenergy 22 (2002), pp. 237–249. 
50
 Jonsell, M. 2007. Effects on Biodiversity of Forest Fuel Extraction, Governed by Processes 
Working on a Large Scale. Biomass and Bioenergy, Iussue 31 pg. 726-732. 
51
 Kozlowski, T.T., 1999. Soil Compaction and Growth of Woody Plants. Scandinavian Journal 
of Forest Research, Volume 14, Number 6. Taylor and Francis Ltd. 
52
 Rummer, B.; Len, D.; and O’Brien, O. (2004). Forest Residues Bundling Project-New 
Technology for Residue Removal. USDA Forest Service, Southern Research Station 
53
  Perlack, Robert D.; Biomass as Feedstocks for a Bioenergy and Bioproducts Industry:  The 
Technical Feasibility of a Billion Ton Annual Supply; Sponsored by the U.S. Department of 
Energy and the U.S. Department of Agriculture; April 2005.  
54
  Walsh, Marie E., U.S. Cellulosic Biomass Feedstock Supplies and Distribution; January 10, 
2008. 
55
  Data provided by e-mail by Perlack, Robert D., May 2008.  
56
 EPA. Municipal Solid Waste Generation, Recycling, and Disposal in the United States: Facts 
and figures for 2006. 
57
 USEPA. November 2007.  Methodology for Estimating Municipal Solid Waste Recycling 
Benefits. 
58
 Biocycle (2006). The State of Garbage in America. Vol. 47, No. 4, p.26. 
59
 Midwest Assistance Program, Inc. October, 2007. The 2006-2007 Missouri Municipal Solid 
Waste Composition Study. 
60
 R. W. Beck. June 2005. Georgia Statewide Characterization Study. 
61
 Engineering Solutions and Design, Inc. April 2004. State of Ohio Waste Characterization 
Study. 
62
 NYC Department of Sanitation. 2004-2005. NYC Waste Characterization Study.  
63
 R.W. Beck. 2000. Statewide MSW Composition Study: A Study of Discards in the State of 
Minnesota. 
719  
                                                                                                                                                             
64
 R.W. Beck. April 2003. Statewide Waste Composition Study: Pennsylvania State-wide Waste 
Composition. 
65
 DSM Environmental Services, Inc. June 2002. Vermont Waste Composition Study. 
66
 R.W. Beck. 1992 Washington State Waste Characterization Study. 
67
 R.W. Beck. May 2003. Wisconsin Statewide Waste Characterization Study. 
68
 Department of Environmental Quality. 2002. Oregon 2002 Waste Composition Study. 
69
 California Energy Commission. December 2007. California Biomass and Biofuels Production 
Potential. 
70
 Ibid. 
71
 Walsh, Marie. (2008) U.S. Cellulosic Biomass Feedstock Supplies and Distribution. 
Unpublished Manuscript. 
72
 NEOS Corporation. (1994). Urban tree residues: Results of the first national inventory.  (Final 
Report). International Society of Arboriculture Research Trust.  Allegheny Power Service 
Corporation and National Arborist Foundation. 
73
 USEPA, Construction and Demolition (C&D) Materials. http://www.epa.gov/epaoswer/non-
hw/debris-new/index.htm Accessed August 10, 2008.   
74
 Fehrs, J. (1999), “Secondary Mill Residues and Urban Wood Waste Quantities in the United 
States-Final Report,” Northeast Regional Biomass Program Washington, D.C.; December 1999. 
75
 Wiltsee, G. Urban Wood Waste Resource Assessment, Appel Consultant, Inc. Valencia, CA. 
November, 1998. 
76
 U.S Department of Energy. Breaking the Biological Barriers to Cellulosic Ethanol: A Joint 
Research Agenda. (2006). 
77
 Kumar, A., & Sokhansanj, S. Switchgrass (Panicum vigratum, L.) delivery to a biorefinergy 
using integrated biomass supply analysis and logistics (IBSAL) model. Bioresource Technology. 
(2006). 
78
 McLaughlin, S.B. & Adams Kszos, L. Development of switchgrass (Panicum virgatum) as a 
bioenergy feedstock in the United States. Biomass and Bioenergy. (2005). 28: 515-535. 
79
 Kumar, A., & Sokhansanj, S. Switchgrass (Panicum vigratum, L.) delivery to a biorefinergy 
using integrated biomass supply analysis and logistics (IBSAL) model. Bioresource Technology. 
(2006). 
80
  McLaughlin, S.B. & Adams Kszos, L. Development of switchgrass (Panicum virgatum) as a 
bioenergy feedstock in the United States. Biomass and Bioenergy. (2005). 28: 515-535. 
81
 Assuming 16 Bgal cellulosic biofuel total, 2.2 Bgal from urban waste, and 3.8 Bgal from 
forestry biomass; 10 Bgal of cellulosic biofuel for ag residues and/or energy crops would be 
needed. 
82
 Lewandowski, I., Clifton-Brown, J.C., Scurlock, J.M.O., & Huisman, W. Miscanthus: 
European experience with a novel energy crop. Biomass and Bioenergy. (2000). 19: 209-227.  
83
 Pyter, R., Voigt, T., Heaton, H., Dohleman, F., & Long, S. Growing giant miscanthus in 
Illinois. University of Illinois. (2006). 
84
 Ibid. 
85
 Ibid. 
86
 Lewandowski, I., Clifton-Brown, J.C., Scurlock, J.M.O., & Huisman, W. Miscanthus: 
European experience with a novel energy crop. Biomass and Bioenergy. (2000). 19: 209-227.  
87
 Pyter, R., Voigt, T., Heaton, H., Dohleman, F., & Long, S. Growing giant miscanthus in 
Illinois. University of Illinois. (2006). 
720  
                                                                                                                                                             
88
 Ibid. 
89
 Lewandowski, I., Clifton-Brown, J.C., Scurlock, J.M.O., & Huisman, W. Miscanthus: 
European experience with a novel energy crop. Biomass and Bioenergy. (2000). 19: 209-227.  
90
 Pyter, R., Voigt, T., Heaton, H., Dohleman, F., & Long, S. Growing giant miscanthus in 
Illinois. University of Illinois. (2006). 
91
 U.S Department of Energy. Breaking the Biological Barriers to Cellulosic Ethanol: A Joint 
Research Agenda. (2006). 
92
 Ibid. 
93
 Ibid. 
94
 Campbell, J.E. at al. The global potential of bioenergy on abandoned agriculture lands. 
Environ. Sci. Technology. (2008). 
95
 Ibid.  
96
 Adapted from additional information received from J. Elliot Campbell. The global potential of 
bioenergy on abandoned agriculture lands. Environ. Sci. Technology. (2008). 
97
 USDA. Farm Services Agency. Conservation Reserve Program Summary and Enrollment 
Statistics. FY 2007. 
98
 USDA Farm Services Agency. Conservation Reserve Program Statistics: Monthly Summary 
July 2008.  
75
 United States Deparment of Energy and United States Department of Agriculture. Biomass as 
Feedstock for a Bioenergy and Bioproducts Industry:  The Technical Feasibility of a Billion Ton 
Supply. April 2005. 
99
 Pyter, R., Voigt, T., Heaton, H., Dohleman, F., & Long, S. Growing giant miscanthus in 
Illinois. University of Illinois. (2006). 
100
 Based on plant capacities reported by the National Biodiesel Board, and data reported by F.O. 
Licht. 
101
 Mueller, Steffen.  An analysis of the projected energy use of future dry mill corn ethanol 
plants (2010-2030).  October 10, 2007.  Available at 
http://www.chpcentermw.org/pdfs/2007CornEethanolEnergySys.pdf 
102
 “Essential Rendering”, published by the National Renderer’s Association, edited by David 
Meeker.  2006.  Available at http://nationalrenderers.org/assets/essential_rendering_book.pdf 
103
 “Statewide Feasibility Study for a Potential New York State Biodiesel Industry”, prepared by LECG, LLC.  
Report number 04-02, April 2004.  Available at http://www.nyserda.org/publications/biodieselreport.pdf 
104
 A copy of this letter is available in the docket. 
105
 Jongschaap, R.E.E, W.J. Corre, P.S Bindraban, and W.A. Brandenburg. Claims and Facts on 
Jatropha curcas L. Plant Research International. Vers. Report 158. Oct. 2007. 
106
 Euler, Hartlieb, and David Gorriz. Case Study "Jatropha Curcas" Rep.No. Global Facilitation 
Unit for Underutilized Species. Frankfurt, 2004. 
107
 Kumar, Sujeet. "Jatropha harmful for kids, soil and aquatic life: scientist." India eNews 8 
May 2008. 
108
 Jongschaap, R.E.E, W.J. Corre, P.S Bindraban, and W.A. Brandenburg. Claims and Facts on 
Jatropha curcas L. Plant Research International. Vers. Report 158. Oct. 2007. 
109
 Ibid. 
110
 Fairless, Daemon. "The little shrub that could - maybe." Nature 499 (2007): 652-55. 
721  
                                                                                                                                                             
111
 Francis, G., R. Edinger, and K. Becker. "A concept for simultaneous wasteland reclamation, 
fuel production, and socio-economic development in degraded areas in India: need, potential and 
perspectives of Jatropha plantations." Natural Resources Forum 29 (2005): 12-24. 
112
 Woltjer, Lyanne. Size does matter. Expertise Centrum voor Duurzame Ontwikkeling 
(ECDO). Dec. 2006. 
113
 Jongschaap, R.E.E, W.J. Corre, P.S Bindraban, and W.A. Brandenburg. Claims and Facts on 
Jatropha curcas L. Plant Research International. Vers. Report 158. Oct. 2007. 
114
 Li Guo, T. "The photosynthesis and water use efficiency of eight garden tree species." Forest 
Research 15 (2002): 291-96. 
115
 Jongschaap, R.E.E, W.J. Corre, P.S Bindraban, and W.A. Brandenburg. Claims and Facts on 
Jatropha curcas L. Plant Research International. Vers. Report 158. Oct. 2007. 
116
 Fairless, Daemon. "The little shrub that could - maybe." Nature 499 (2007): 652-55. 
117
 Jongschaap, R.E.E, W.J. Corre, P.S Bindraban, and W.A. Brandenburg. Claims and Facts on 
Jatropha curcas L. Plant Research International. Vers. Report 158. Oct. 2007. 
118
 Ghosh, A., J.S. Patolia, D.R. Chaudharry, J. Chikara, S.N. Rao D. Kumar, G.N. Boricha, and 
A. Zala. Response of Jatropha curcas under different spacing to Jatropha de-oiled cake. 
Discipline of Phytosalinity, Central Salt and Marine Chemicals Research Institute. 2007. 
119
 Jongschaap, R.E.E, W.J. Corre, P.S Bindraban, and W.A. Brandenburg. Claims and Facts on 
Jatropha curcas L. Plant Research International. Vers. Report 158. Oct. 2007. 
120
 Ibid. 
121
 Chaudharry, D.R., J.S. Patolia, A. Ghosh, J. Chikara, G.N. Boricha, and A. Zala. Changes in 
soil characteristics and foliage nutrient content in Jatropha curcas plantations in relation to stand 
density in Indian wasteland. Expert seminar on Jatropha curcas L. Agronomy and Genetics. Mar. 
2007. 
122
 Jongschaap, R.E.E, W.J. Corre, P.S Bindraban, and W.A. Brandenburg. Claims and Facts on 
Jatropha curcas L. Plant Research International. Vers. Report 158. Oct. 2007. 
123
 Ibid. 
124
 Francis, G., R. Edinger, and K. Becker. "A concept for simultaneous wasteland reclamation, 
fuel production, and socio-economic development in degraded areas in India: need, potential and 
perspectives of Jatropha plantations." Natural Resources Forum 29 (2005): 12-24. 
125
 Jongschaap, R.E.E, W.J. Corre, P.S Bindraban, and W.A. Brandenburg. Claims and Facts on 
Jatropha curcas L. Plant Research International. Vers. Report 158. Oct. 2007. 
126
 Ibid. 
127
 Kumar, Sujeet. "Jatropha harmful for kids, soil and aquatic life: scientist." India eNews 8 
May 2008. 
128
 Jongschaap, R.E.E, W.J. Corre, P.S Bindraban, and W.A. Brandenburg. Claims and Facts on 
Jatropha curcas L. Plant Research International. Vers. Report 158. Oct. 2007. 
129
 Sharma, N., and A. Sarraf. Plantation management: activities/labour costs. Expert seminar on 
Jatropha curcas L. Agronomy and Genetics. Mar. 2007. 
130
 Jongschaap, R.E.E, W.J. Corre, P.S Bindraban, and W.A. Brandenburg. Claims and Facts on 
Jatropha curcas L. Plant Research International. Vers. Report 158. Oct. 2007. 
722  
                                                                                                                                                             
131
 Fairless, Daemon. "The little shrub that could - maybe." Nature 499 (2007): 652-55. 
132
 Francis, G., R. Edinger, and K. Becker. "A concept for simultaneous wasteland reclamation, 
fuel production, and socio-economic development in degraded areas in India: need, potential and 
perspectives of Jatropha plantations." Natural Resources Forum 29 (2005): 12-24. 
133
 Jongschaap, R.E.E, W.J. Corre, P.S Bindraban, and W.A. Brandenburg. Claims and Facts on 
Jatropha curcas L. Plant Research International. Vers. Report 158. Oct. 2007. 
134
 Euler, Hartlieb, and David Gorriz. Case Study "Jatropha Curcas" Rep.No. Global Facilitation 
Unit for Underutilized Species. Frankfurt, 2004. 
135
 Woltjer, Lyanne. Size does matter. Expertise Centrum voor Duurzame Ontwikkeling 
(ECDO). Dec. 2006. 
136
 Jongschaap, R.E.E, W.J. Corre, P.S Bindraban, and W.A. Brandenburg. Claims and Facts on 
Jatropha curcas L. Plant Research International. Vers. Report 158. Oct. 2007. 
137
 Euler, Hartlieb, and David Gorriz. Case Study "Jatropha Curcas" Rep.No. Global Facilitation 
Unit for Underutilized Species. Frankfurt, 2004. 
138
 Jongschaap, R.E.E, W.J. Corre, P.S Bindraban, and W.A. Brandenburg. Claims and Facts on 
Jatropha curcas L. Plant Research International. Vers. Report 158. Oct. 2007. 
139
 Francis, G., R. Edinger, and K. Becker. "A concept for simultaneous wasteland reclamation, 
fuel production, and socio-economic development in degraded areas in India: need, potential and 
perspectives of Jatropha plantations." Natural Resources Forum 29 (2005): 12-24. 
140
 Ibid. 
141
 Pant, K.S., V. Khosla, D. Kumar, and S. Gairola. "Seed oil content variation in Jatropha 
curcas Linn. in different altitudinal ranges and site conditions in H.P. India." Lyonia 11 (2006): 
31-34. 
142
 Pant, K.S., V. Khosla, D. Kumar, and S. Gairola. "Seed oil content variation in Jatropha 
curcas Linn. in different altitudinal ranges and site conditions in H.P. India." Lyonia 11 (2006): 
31-34. 
143
 Jongschaap, R.E.E, W.J. Corre, P.S Bindraban, and W.A. Brandenburg. Claims and Facts on 
Jatropha curcas L. Plant Research International. Vers. Report 158. Oct. 2007. 
144
 Ibid. 
145
 Woltjer, Lyanne. Size does matter. Expertise Centrum voor Duurzame Ontwikkeling 
(ECDO). Dec. 2006. 
146
 Achten, W., E. Mathijs, L. Verchot, V.P. Singh, and B. Muys. Bio-diesel from Jatropha: the 
life-cycle perspective. Expert seminar on Jatropha curcas L. Agronomy and Genetics. Mar. 2007. 
147
 Muys, B., W. Achten, E. Mathijs, V.P. Singh, and L. Verchot. Life cycle inventory of 
biodiesel production from Jatropha. Expert seminar on Jatropha curcas L. Agronomy and 
Genetics. Mar. 2007. 
148
 Jongschaap, R.E.E, W.J. Corre, P.S Bindraban, and W.A. Brandenburg. Claims and Facts on 
Jatropha curcas L. Plant Research International. Vers. Report 158. Oct. 2007. 
149
 Fairless, Daemon. "The little shrub that could - maybe." Nature 499 (2007): 652-55. 
723  
                                                                                                                                                             
150
 Francis, G., R. Edinger, and K. Becker. "A concept for simultaneous wasteland reclamation, 
fuel production, and socio-economic development in degraded areas in India: need, potential and 
perspectives of Jatropha plantations." Natural Resources Forum 29 (2005): 12-24. 
151
 "PLANTS Profile for Jatropha curcas L." USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service. 
<http://plants.usda.gov/java/profile?symbol=jacu2>. 
152
 Jongschaap, R.E.E, W.J. Corre, P.S Bindraban, and W.A. Brandenburg. Claims and Facts on 
Jatropha curcas L. Plant Research International. Vers. Report 158. Oct. 2007. 
153
 "Oregon Climate Service." 2008. <http://www.ocs.oregonstate.edu>. 
154
 Carney, Dan. "Second-generation biodiesel." Automotive Engineering May 2008: 20-22. 
155
 Francis, G., R. Edinger, and K. Becker. "A concept for simultaneous wasteland reclamation, 
fuel production, and socio-economic development in degraded areas in India: need, potential and 
perspectives of Jatropha plantations." Natural Resources Forum 29 (2005): 12-24. 
156
 Euler, Hartlieb, and David Gorriz. Case Study "Jatropha Curcas" Rep.No. Global Facilitation 
Unit for Underutilized Species. Frankfurt, 2004. 
157
 Sheehan, John, Terri Dunahay, John Benemann, and Paul Roessler. A Look Back at the U.S. 
Department of Energy’s Aquatic Species Program—Biodiesel from Algae. National Renewable 
Energy Laboratory. Office of Fuels Development. Golden, Colorado, 1998. 
158
 Ibid. 
159
 Wagner, Leonard. Biodiesel from Algae Oil. Mora Associates. July 2007. 
160
 National Renewable Energy Laboratory. "Chevron and NREL to Collaborate on Research to 
Produce Transportation Fuels using Algae." Press release. 31 Oct. 2007. 
161
 Christi, Yusuf. "Biodiesel from Microalgae." Biotechnology Advances 25 (2007): 294-306. 
162
 Schenider, David. "Grow Your Own?" American Scientist Sept.-Oct. 2006. 
163
 Campbell, Matthew N. "Biodiesel: Algae as a Renewable Source for Liquid Fuel." Guelph 
Engineering Journal 1 (2008): 2-7. 
164
 Christi, Yusuf. "Biodiesel from Microalgae." Biotechnology Advances 25 (2007): 294-306. 
165
 Pienkos, Philip T. "The Potential for Biofuels from Algae." Algae Biomass Summit. San 
Francisco, CA. 15 Nov. 2007. 
166
 Campbell, Matthew N. "Biodiesel: Algae as a Renewable Source for Liquid Fuel." Guelph 
Engineering Journal 1 (2008): 2-7. 
167
 Pienkos, Philip T. "The Potential for Biofuels from Algae." Algae Biomass Summit. San 
Francisco, CA. 15 Nov. 2007. 
168
 Campbell, Matthew N. "Biodiesel: Algae as a Renewable Source for Liquid Fuel." Guelph 
Engineering Journal 1 (2008): 2-7. 
169
 Sheehan, John, Terri Dunahay, John Benemann, and Paul Roessler. A Look Back at the U.S. 
Department of Energy’s Aquatic Species Program—Biodiesel from Algae. National Renewable 
Energy Laboratory. Office of Fuels Development. Golden, Colorado, 1998. 
170
 Pienkos, Philip T. "The Potential for Biofuels from Algae." Algae Biomass Summit. San 
Francisco, CA. 15 Nov. 2007. 
724  
                                                                                                                                                             
171
 Campbell, Matthew N. "Biodiesel: Algae as a Renewable Source for Liquid Fuel." Guelph 
Engineering Journal 1 (2008): 2-7. 
172
 Putt, Ron. Algae as a Biodiesel Feedsock. 20 Nov. 2007. 
173
 Sheehan, John, Terri Dunahay, John Benemann, and Paul Roessler. A Look Back at the U.S. 
Department of Energy’s Aquatic Species Program—Biodiesel from Algae. National Renewable 
Energy Laboratory. Office of Fuels Development. Golden, Colorado, 1998. 
174
 "Algae Bloom Again." Nature 447 (2007): 520-21. 
175
 Deshayes, Pierre-Henry. "As planet swelters, are algae unlikely saviour?" AFP 10 July 2008. 
176
 Sheehan, John, Terri Dunahay, John Benemann, and Paul Roessler. A Look Back at the U.S. 
Department of Energy’s Aquatic Species Program—Biodiesel from Algae. National Renewable 
Energy Laboratory. Office of Fuels Development. Golden, Colorado, 1998. 
177
 Bullock, Cary. "Algae Corrals Carbon Dioxide." EnergyBiz Magazine Mar.-Apr. 2007: 68-
70. 
178
 Christi, Yusuf. "Biodiesel from Microalgae." Biotechnology Advances 25 (2007): 294-306. 
179
 Sheehan, John, Terri Dunahay, John Benemann, and Paul Roessler. A Look Back at the U.S. 
Department of Energy’s Aquatic Species Program—Biodiesel from Algae. National Renewable 
Energy Laboratory. Office of Fuels Development. Golden, Colorado, 1998. 
180
 Christi, Yusuf. "Biodiesel from Microalgae." Biotechnology Advances 25 (2007): 294-306. 
181
 Schenider, David. "Grow Your Own?" American Scientist Sept.-Oct. 2006. 
182
 Campbell, Matthew N. "Biodiesel: Algae as a Renewable Source for Liquid Fuel." Guelph 
Engineering Journal 1 (2008): 2-7. 
183
 Pienkos, Philip T. "The Potential for Biofuels from Algae." Algae Biomass Summit. San 
Francisco, CA. 15 Nov. 2007. 
184
 Putt, Ron. Algae as a Biodiesel Feedsock. 20 Nov. 2007. 
185
 Christi, Yusuf. "Biodiesel from Microalgae." Biotechnology Advances 25 (2007): 294-306. 
186
 Campbell, Matthew N. "Biodiesel: Algae as a Renewable Source for Liquid Fuel." Guelph 
Engineering Journal 1 (2008): 2-7. 
187
 Christi, Yusuf. "Biodiesel from Microalgae." Biotechnology Advances 25 (2007): 294-306. 
188
 Ibid. 
189
 Campbell, Matthew N. "Biodiesel: Algae as a Renewable Source for Liquid Fuel." Guelph 
Engineering Journal 1 (2008): 2-7. 
190
 Pienkos, Philip T. "The Potential for Biofuels from Algae." Algae Biomass Summit. San 
Francisco, CA. 15 Nov. 2007. 
191
 Christi, Yusuf. "Biodiesel from Microalgae." Biotechnology Advances 25 (2007): 294-306. 
192
 Wagner, Leonard. Biodiesel from Algae Oil. Mora Associates. July 2007. 
193
 "AlgaeLink." 2008. <http://www.algaelink.com>. 
194
 Ibid. 
195
 "Low Cost Algae Production System Introduced." Energy-Arizona. 28 Aug. 2007. 
<http://www.energy-arizona.org>. 
725  
                                                                                                                                                             
196
 Christi, Yusuf. "Biodiesel from Microalgae." Biotechnology Advances 25 (2007): 294-306. 
197
 "Low Cost Algae Production System Introduced." Energy-Arizona. 28 Aug. 2007. 
<http://www.energy-arizona.org>. 
198
 Christi, Yusuf. "Biodiesel from Microalgae." Biotechnology Advances 25 (2007): 294-306. 
199
 Pienkos, Philip T. "The Potential for Biofuels from Algae." Algae Biomass Summit. San 
Francisco, CA. 15 Nov. 2007. 
200
 PV Solar Radiation. Digital image. National Renewable Energy Laboratory. May 2004. 
201
 Bullock, Cary. "Algae Corrals Carbon Dioxide." EnergyBiz Magazine Mar.-Apr. 2007: 68-
70. 
202
 Christi, Yusuf. "Biodiesel from Microalgae." Biotechnology Advances 25 (2007): 294-306. 
203
 Schenider, David. "Grow Your Own?" American Scientist Sept.-Oct. 2006. 
204
 Campbell, Matthew N. "Biodiesel: Algae as a Renewable Source for Liquid Fuel." Guelph 
Engineering Journal 1 (2008): 2-7. 
205
 Pienkos, Philip T. "The Potential for Biofuels from Algae." Algae Biomass Summit. San 
Francisco, CA. 15 Nov. 2007. 
206
 Wagner, Leonard. Biodiesel from Algae Oil. Mora Associates. July 2007. 
207
 Christi, Yusuf. "Biodiesel from Microalgae." Biotechnology Advances 25 (2007): 294-306. 
208
 Pienkos, Philip T. "The Potential for Biofuels from Algae." Algae Biomass Summit. San 
Francisco, CA. 15 Nov. 2007. 
209
 F.O. Licht’s World Ethanol and Biofuels Report. Vol 6, No 11, p.203.  Feb 15, 2008. 
210
 Ibid. 
211
 DTN Ethanol Center.  October 11, 2007.  EU Biodiesel Feedstock Challenge. 
http://www.dtnethanolcenter.com/index.cfm?show=10&mid=66&pid=27 
212
 World Biofuels: FAPRI 2007 Agricultural Outlook. 
213
 Biofuels Barometer- May 2007 EurObserv'ER, website: 
http://www.eufores.org/index.php?id=29 
214
 EUROPA Press Release: 1/31/07, “Stricter fuel standards to combat climate change and 
reduce air pollution” 
215
 EU (2007), Press Release: 2782nd Council Meeting on Transport, Telecommunications, and 
Energy, February 15th, 2007, Brussels, Council of the European Union, 
http://www.consilium.europa.eu/Newsroom. 
216
 Ministry of Mines and Energy. 6/1/2007 Presentation by Ricardo de Gusmao Dornelles. The 
Brazilian Experience with Biofuels. 
217
 EPE (2007) Plano National de Energia 2030 Presentation from Mauricio Tolmasquim 
218
 Asian Palm Oil for Euro Biodiesel, 2005 as quoted in Ohga K. & Tatsuji K. Biofuels Policies 
in Asia: Trade effects on World Agricultural and Biofuels Trade. Presentation to USDA 
Agricultural Outlook Forum, March 2, 2007. 
219
 Ohga K. & Tatsuji K. Biofuels Policies in Asia: Trade effects on World Agricultural and 
Biofuels Trade. Presentation to USDA Agricultural Outlook Forum, March 2, 2007. 
220
 USDA FAS Gain Report. Indonesia Bio-Fuels Biofuels Annual 2007. June 13, 2007. 
221
 USDA FAS. Palm oil continues to dominate global consumption in 2006/2007. 
http://www.fas.usda.gov/oilseeds/circular/2006/06-06/Junecov.pdf 
726  
                                                                                                                                                             
222
 Dato’ Dr. Mohd. Basri Wahid. Malaysian Palm Oil Board. Presentation: Technological 
Progress and Commercialization of Biodiesel in Malaysia. 
223
 USDA FAS. Gain Report. India Bio-fuels Annual 2007. June 1, 2007.  
224
 Fairless, D. The little shrub that could – maybe. Nature Vol. 449. October 11, 2007. 
225
 Wright, M. and Brown, R. Comparative Economics of Biorefineries Based on the 
Biochemical and Thermochemical Platforms. Biofuels, Bioprod. Bioref. 1:49-56 (2007) 
226
 Kline, K. et. al. Biofuel Feedstock Assessment for Selected Countries. Oak Ridge National 
Laboratory. February 2008. 
227
 National Renewable Energy Laboratory estimate based on biomass portion available at $45-
$55/dry ton.. Using POLYSYS Policy Analysis System, Agricultural Policy Analysis Center, 
University of Tennessee. http://www.agpolicy.org/polysys.html. Accessed May 2008. 
228
 Milbrandt, A. (2005). “Geographic Perspective on the Current Biomass Resource Availability 
in the United States.” 70 pp.; NREL Report No. TP-560-39181 
229
 D. Montross, Associate Professor, Scott A. Shearer, Professor, Timothy S. Stombaugh, 
Associate Extension Professor, Stephen F. Higgins, Research Specialist, and Samuel G. McNeill, 
Associate Extension Professor, Department of Biosystems and Agricultural Engineering, 
University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky; and Shahab Sokhansanj, Professor, Oak Ridge 
National Laboratory, Environmental Sciences Division, Oak Ridge, Tennessee, Corn Stover 
Availability and Collection Efficiency Using Typical Hay Equipment, This article is published 
with the approval of the Director of the Kentucky Agricultural Experiment Station and 
designated Paper No. 04-05-066.  Transactions of the ASABE, Vol. 50(3): 705−711 – 2007 
American Society of Agricultural and Biological Engineers, ISSN 0001−2351. 
230
 S. Sokhansanj1, A. Turhollow, and R. Perlack, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Tennessee, 
USA 37830, Stochastic Modeling of Costs of Corn Stover Costs Delivered to an Intermediate 
Storage Facility, Paper Number: 024190, Presented at: 2002 ASAE Annual International 
Meeting / CIGR XVth World Congress, Sponsored by ASAE and CIGR, Hyatt Regency 
Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA, July 28-July 31, 2002 
231
 Kevin J. Shinners, Professor of Agricultural Engineering, Garrit C. Boettcher, Graduate 
Research Assistant, Jesse T. Munk, Graduate Research Assistant, Matthew F. Digman, Graduate 
Research Assistant, Department of Biological Systems Engineering, University of Wisconsin, 
Richard E. Muck, Research Engineer, Paul. J. Weimer, Research Scientist, US Dairy Forage 
Research Center, USDA-ARS, Madison, WI; Single-Pass, Split-Stream of Corn Grain and 
Stover: Characteristic Performance of Three Harvester Configurations, Paper Number: 061015, 
2006 ASABE Annual International Meeting, Oregon Convention Center, Portland, Oregon, 9 – 
12 July 2006 
232
 Kevin J. Shinners – Professor of Agricultural Engineering, Ben N. Binversie – Graduate 
Research Assistant, Department of Biological Systems Engineering, University of  Wisconsin, 
Madison, WI, Philippe Savoie – Research Scientist, Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, Quebec, 
Canada, Whole-Plant Corn Harvesting for Biomass: Comparison of Single-Pass and Multiple-
Pass Harvest Systems, Paper Number: 036089 2003 ASAE Annual International Meeting, 
Sponsored by ASAE, Riviera Hotel and Convention Center, Las Vegas, Nevada, USA, 27- 30 
July 2003 
234
 Kevin J. Shinners, Professor of Agricultural Engineering, Ben N. Binversie, Graduate 
Research Assistant, Department of Biological Systems Engineering, University of Wisconsin, 
Madison, WI, Philippe Savoie, Research Scientist, Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, Quebec, 
727  
                                                                                                                                                             
Canada;  Harvest and Storage Of Wet and Dry Corn Stover As A Biomass Feedstock, Paper 
Number: 036088, 2003 ASAE Annual International Meeting  
Riviera Hotel and Convention Center, Las Vegas, Nevada, USA, 27- 30 July 2003 
235
 ICM website (http://www.icminc.com/ethanol/production_process/) 
236
 Renewable Fuels Association Website (http://www.ethanolrfa.org/resource/made/) 
237
 POET website (http://www.poetenergy.com/learn/bpx.asp) 
238
 Ethanol Producer Magazine, Poet, ISU partner for BPX research, March 2008 
(http://www.ethanol-producer.com/article.jsp?article_id=3770) 
239
 Renewable Fuels Association, Annual Energy Outlook 2006 
(http://www.ethanolrfa.org/objects/pdf/outlook/outlook_2006.pdf) 
240
 EPA’s Combined Heat & Power Partnership (http://www.epa.gov/chp/basic/index.html) 
241
 Smeets, Edward, et. al. “Sustainability of Brazilian bio-ethanol”. August 2006 
242
 Saeman, J.F., Kinetics of Wood Saccharification: Hydrolysis of Cellulose and Decomposition 
of Sugars in dilute Acid at High Temperature, Industrial and Engineering Chemistry, 37(1): 43–
52 (1945).  
http://pubs3.acs.org/acs/journals/toc.page?incoden=iechad&indecade=3&involume=37&inissue=
1] 
243
 Harris, E.E., Beglinger, E., Hajny, G.J., and Sherrard, E.C., , Industrial and Engineering 
Chemistry, 37(1): 12–23 (1945) 
http://pubs3.acs.org/acs/journals/toc.page?incoden=iechad&indecade=3&involume=37&inissue=
1] 
244
 DOE National Laboratories.  “30x30 A Scenario for Supplying 30% of 2004 Motor Gasoline 
with Ethanol by 2030: A Production Scenario for Cellulosic Ethanol from Corn Stover,” June 23, 
2006. 
245
 LaMonica, Martin. “Investor Vinod Khosla: Advanced biofuels are closer than you think”. 
Accessed at: http://www.news.com/8301-11128_3-9811702-54.html 
246
 DOE. “Biomass Program: ABC’s of Biofuels”. Accessed at:  
http://www1.eere.energy.gov/biomass/abcs_biofuels.html#content 
247
 Starch Hydrolysis; http://www.bio-link.org/pdf/starch.pdf 
248
 Glossary of Biomass Terms, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, CO. 
 http://www.nrel.gov/biomass/glossary.html 
249
 Glossary of Biomass Terms, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, CO. 
 http://www.nrel.gov/biomass/glossary.html 
250
 Condensation and Hydrolysis; http://www.biotopics.co.uk/as/disaccharideformation.html 
251
 BlueFire Ethanol. “Review of Competing Processes,” May 2006.  Accessed at: 
http://www.bluefireethanol.com/images/Technology_Comparison_051206.ppt#295,1, 31 Musick 
Irvine, California  92618. 
252
 Stephanopoulos, Gregory, et. al. “Challenges in Engineering Microbes for Biofuels 
Production,” Science, February 9, 2007. 
253
 Dipardo, Joseph, EIA. “Outlook for Biomass Ethanol Production and Demand,” 2002. 
Accessed at: http://www.ethanol-gec.org/information/briefing/6.pdf 
255A. Aden, M. Ruth, K. Ibsen, J. Jechura, K. Neeves, J. Sheehan, and B. Wallace  
National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL); L. Montague, A. Slayton, and J. Lukas Harris 
Group, Seattle, Washington, Ethanol Process Design and Economics Utilizing Co-Current Dilute 
728  
                                                                                                                                                             
Acid Prehydrolysis and Enzymatic Hydrolysis for Corn Stover; June 2002;NREL is a U.S. 
Department of Energy Laboratory Operated by Midwest Research Institute • Battelle • Bechtel; 
Contract No. DE-AC36-99-GO10337  
256
 Kim S, Holtzapple MT: Effect of Structural Features on Enzyme Digestibility of Corn Stover. 
Bioresource Technology 2006, 97: 583-591 
258
 A. Aden, M. Ruth, K. Ibsen, J. Jechura, K. Neeves, J. Sheehan, and B. Wallace  
National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL); L. Montague, A. Slayton, and J. Lukas Harris 
Group, Seattle, Washington, Ethanol Process Design and Economics Utilizing Co-Current Dilute 
Acid Prehydrolysis and Enzymatic Hydrolysis for Corn Stover; June 2002;NREL is a U.S. 
Department of Energy Laboratory Operated by Midwest Research Institute • Battelle • Bechtel; 
Contract No. DE-AC36-99-GO10337 
259
 Bryan & Bryan Inc and Oregon Office of Energy.  (2000) Oregon Cellulose-Ethanol Study.  
An evaluation of the potential for ethanol production in Oregon using cellulose-based feedstocks. 
260
 Tim Eggeman,  Neoterics International, Lakewood, CO 80228, USA, Richard T. Elander, 
National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, CO 80401, USA, Process and economic 
analysis of pretreatment technologies, Bioresource Technology 96 (2005) 2019–2025 
261
 Gray, K. et. al.  2006.  Bioethanol.  Current Opinion in Chemical Biology, 10:141-146. 
262
 Bryan & Bryan Inc and Oregon Office of Energy.  (2000) Oregon Cellulose-Ethanol Study.  
An evaluation of the potential for ethanol production in Oregon using cellulose-based feedstocks. 
263
 A. Aden, M. Ruth, K. Ibsen, J. Jechura, K. Neeves, J. Sheehan, and B. Wallace  
National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL); L. Montague, A. Slayton, and J. Lukas Harris Group, Seattle, 
Washington, Ethanol Process Design and Economics Utilizing Co-Current Dilute Acid Prehydrolysis and Enzymatic 
Hydrolysis for Corn Stover; June 2002;NREL is a U.S. Department of Energy Laboratory Operated by Midwest 
Research Institute • Battelle • Bechtel; Contract No. DE-AC36-99-GO10337 
 
264
 DOE, “From Biomass to Biofuels: A Roadmap to the Energy Future.” based on a workshop 
held in Rockville, MD, on December 7-9, 2005. 
265
 Presentations of K.C. McFarland (Novozymes) and G. Anderl (Genencor International) at the 
World Congress on Industrial Biotechnology and Bioprocessing, Orlando, FL, July 2006 
266
 Genencor Launches First Ever Commercial Enzyme Product for Cellulosic Ethanol, 
Rochester, NY, World-Wire, October 22, 2007 Copyright © 2007,. All rights reserved.  World-
Wire is a resource provided by Environment News Service.  http://world-
wire.com/news/0710220001.html 
267
 Purdue yeast makes ethanol from agricultural waste more effectively, Purdue News, June 28, 
2004 
http://www.purdue.edu/UNS/html4ever/2004/040628.Ho.ethanol.html 
268
 Stephanopoulos, Gregory, et. al. “Challenges in Engineering Microbes for Biofuels 
Production,” Science, February 9, 2007. 
269
 DOE National Laboratories.  “30x30 A Scenario for Supplying 30% of 2004 Motor Gasoline 
with Ethanol by 2030: A Production Scenario for Cellulosic Ethanol from Corn Stover,” June 23, 
2006. 
270
 DOE EERE Website. “Technologies: Pyrolysis and Other Thermal Processing.” Accessed at: 
http://www1.eere.energy.gov/biomass/pyrolysis.html. 
271
 Biomass Magazine. “Thermochemical Versus Biochemical”. June 2007. 
272
 EERE, DOE, Thermochemical Conversion, & Biochemical Conversion, Biomass Program 
Thermochemical R&D .  
729  
                                                                                                                                                             
http://www1.eere.energy.gov/biomass/thermochemical_conversion.html 
http://www1.eere.energy.gov/biomass/biochemical_conversion.html 
273
 Lin Wei, Graduate Research Assistant, Lester O. Pordesimo, Assistant Professor 
Willam D. Batchelor, Professor, Department of Agricultural and Biological Engineering,  
Mississippi State University, MS 39762, USA, Ethanol Production from Wood: Comparison of 
Hydrolysis Fermentation and Gasification Biosynthesis, Paper Number: 076036, Written for 
presentation at the 2007 ASABE Annual International Meeting. Minneapolis Convention Center, 
Minneapolis, MN, 17 - 20 June 2007 
274
 S. Phillips, A. Aden, J. Jechura, and D. Dayton, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, 
Golden, Colorado 80401-3393, T. Eggeman, Neoterics International, Inc., Thermochemical 
Ethanol via Indirect Gasification and Mixed Alcohol Synthesis of Lignocellulosic Biomass, 
Technical Report, NREL/TP-510-41168, April 2007 
275
 BRI Energy Website. “Bri Energy Process: Technology Summary.” Accessed at:  
http://www.brienergy.com/pages/process01.html 
276
 DOE EERE. “Biomass Program: Thermochemical Conversion of Corn Stover,” April 2006.  
Accessed at: http://www1.eere.energy.gov/biomass/pdfs/thermochemical_stover.pdf. 
277
 S. Phillips, A. Aden, J. Jechura, and D. Dayton, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, 
Golden, Colorado 80401-3393, T. Eggeman, Neoterics International, Inc., Thermochemical 
Ethanol via Indirect Gasification and Mixed Alcohol Synthesis of Lignocellulosic Biomass, 
Technical Report, NREL/TP-510-41168, April 2007 
278
 Information derived from staff-level communication with National Biodiesel Board 
personnel. 
279
 “Tyson ConocoPhillips Venture in Jeopardy.”  The Morning News, article dated 9/26/08.   
http://www.nwaonline.net/articles/2008/09/26/business/092708fuelcredits.txt   
280
 October 6, 2008 article on Trading Markets website, “Groundbreaking Initiated for Unique 
Renewable Fuels Plant in Louisiana.”  Accessed October 6, 2008.  
http://www.tradingmarkets.com/.site/news/Stock%20News/1923604/ 
281
 “Tyson's Fats to Fuel Plant on Schedule.”  The Morning News, article dated 10/6/08.  
http://www.nwaonline.net/articles/2008/10/06/business/100708tysonfuelplant.txt 
282
 Neste Oil website, accessed 10/10/2008.  
http://www.nesteoil.com/default.asp?path=1,41,539,7516,7522 
283
 Renewable Fuels Association (http://www.ethanolrfa.org/industry/statistics/#A) 
284
 Renewable Fuels Association (http://www.ethanolrfa.org/industry/statistics/#A) 
285
 Renewable Fuels Association (RFA), Ethanol Biorefinery Locations (updated April 4, 2008). 
286
  (2006) F.O. Licht World Ethanol Markets: The Outlook to 2015. 
287
 Agra FNP. 2007. Sugar and Ethanol in Brazil: A Study of the Brazilian Sugar Cane, Sugar 
and Ethanol Industries. 
288
 Ministry of Mines and Energy. Presentation from Ricardo de Gusmao Dornelles, Director of 
Renewable Fuels Department. “The Brazilian Experience with Biofuels”. Panama, 06.01.2007. 
289
 Agra FNP. 2007. Sugar and Ethanol in Brazil: A Study of the Brazilian Sugar Cane, Sugar 
and Ethanol Industries. 
290
 Ministry of Mines and Energy. Presentation from Ricardo de Gusmao Dornelles, Director of 
Renewable Fuels Department. “The Brazilian Experience with Biofuels”. Panama, 06.01.2007. 
291
 MAPA. 2007. http://www.agricultura.gov.br/ 
292
 EPM. Pipeline Projects on Hold. July 2008 Issue 
730  
                                                                                                                                                             
293
 Rothkopf, Garten. 2006.  A Blueprint for Green Energy in the Americas. 
294
 Ibid.  
295
 World Biofuels: FAPRI 2007 Agricultural Outlook; OECD-FAO Agricultural Outlook 2007-
2016 (note: this was interpreted from a graph); Bioenergia (March 2007), Liquid Biofuels; 
Rothkopf, Garten. (2006) A Blueprint for Green Energy in America (note: years 2007-2019 were 
interpreted from a graph); EPE (2007) Plano National de Energia 2030 Presentation from 
Mauricio Tolmasquim (note: years were interpreted from a graph); “Sugarcane Industry in 
Brazil: Ethanol, Sugar, Bioelectricity” brochure from UNICA 
296
 Agra FNP. 2007. Sugar and Ethanol in Brazil: A Study of the Brazilian Sugar Cane, Sugar 
and Ethanol Industries. 
297
 Bloomberg. Sugar Gains Capped by Brazil Ethanol Expansion, Czarnikow Says. June 19, 
2008. 
298
 F.O. Licht World Ethanol & Biofuels Report Vol. 5 No. 22 July 23, 2007 
299
 AFP. Brazil says biofuel production not to blame for food crisis. June 1, 2008. 
300
 Business News Americas. Odebrecht to invest US$2.6 bn to Lead Ethanol Sector – Brazil. 
June 26, 2007. 
301
 The Wall Street Journal. ADM Plans Entry Into Sugar-Cane Ethanol in Brazil.  June 22, 2007. 
302
 Agra FNP. 2007. Sugar and Ethanol in Brazil: A Study of the Brazilian Sugar Cane, Sugar 
and Ethanol Industries. 
303
 Petrobras Magazine No. 122. Ethanol: From Brazil to the World 
304
 Ibid. 
305
 World Energy: Global New Summary. Published June 13, 2008, http://www.worldenergy.net 
306
 EPM. Pipeline Projects on Hold. July 2008 Issue 
307
 Rothkopf, Garten. (2006) A Blueprint for Green Energy in America 
308
 Ibid. 
309
 F.O. Licht World Ethanol & Biofuels Report Vol. 5 No. 21 July 9, 2007 
310
 Petrobras Magazine No. 122. Ethanol: From Brazil to the World 
311
 Agra FNP. 2007. Sugar and Ethanol in Brazil: A Study of the Brazilian Sugar Cane, Sugar 
and Ethanol Industries. 
312
 Carvalho in F.O. Licht World Ethanol & Biofuels Report, Vol. 5 No. 20 June 19, 2007 (note: 
only 2006, 2015 & 2025 values were reported, other values are interpolated); World Biofuels: 
FAPRI 2007 Agricultural Outlook; EPE (2007) Plano National de Energia 2030 Presentation 
from Mauricio Tolmasquim (note: years were interpreted from a graph); “Sugarcane Industry in 
Brazil: Ethanol, Sugar, Bioelectricity” brochure from UNICA  
313
 EPM. Pipeline Projects on Hold. July 2008 Issue 
314
 Walter, A. Perspectives on fuel ethanol consumption and trade. Biomass and Bioenergy 
(2008), doi:10.106/j.biombioe.2008.01.026 
315
 AFP. 2008. EU Deputies Seek to Limit Use of Biofuels. 
316
 International Energy Outlook 2007. Reference Case Projections by End-Use Sector and 
Region Data Table F6. <http://www.eia.doe.gov/oiaf/ieo/ieonuclear.html> 
317
 BP Statistical Review of World Energy 2007. Historical Data. 
<http://www.bp.com/statisticalreview> 
318
 (2006) F.O. Licht World Ethanol Markets: The Outlook to 2015. 
319
 Walter, A. Perspectives on fuel ethanol consumption and trade. Biomass and Bioenergy 
(2008), doi:10.106/j.biombioe.2008.01.026 
731  
                                                                                                                                                             
320
 Ayoub PM. Biofuels for Shell-biomass based blending components for transport fuels 
(gasoline and diesel). In: World biofuels symposium-China, Beijing; 2006. 
321
 Frost & Sullivan Market Insight. The New European Challenge for Brazilian Ethanol Exports. 
February 7, 2008. 
322
 European Bioethanol Fuel Association (EBIO). Production Data. 
http://www.ebio.org/statistics_production_data.php 
323
 Ibid. 
324
 F.O. Licht World Ethanol & Biofuels Report, Vol. 5 No. 20 June 19, 2007 
325
 “Japan Bio-fuels Production Report” (2006) 
http://www.fas.usda.gov/gainfiles/200605/146197881.pdf  
326
 Rothkopf, Garten. (2006). A Blueprint for Green Energy in America 
327
 “Japan Bio-fuels Production Report” (2006) 
http://www.fas.usda.gov/gainfiles/200605/146197881.pdf  
328
 Ibid. 
329
 Rothkopf, Garten. (2006). A Blueprint for Green Energy in America 
330
 Jolly, Lindsay. July 2007. World Fuel Ethanol Outlook: Can ethanol be traded globally in a 
large proportion? International Sugar Organization 
331
 Rothkopf, Garten. (2006). A Blueprint for Green Energy in America 
332
 Ibid. 
333
 The Japan Times. Brazil priming ethanol initiative to supply fuel-thirsty Japan.  August 22, 
2007. http://search.japantimes.co.jp/print/nb20070822a3.html 
334
 EPM. Pipeline Projects on Hold. July 2008 Issue 
335
 “Japan Bio-fuels Production Report” (2006) 
http://www.fas.usda.gov/gainfiles/200605/146197881.pdf 
336
 Rothkopf, Garten. (2006). A Blueprint for Green Energy in America 
337
 Ibid. 
338
 F.O. Licht World Ethanol & Biofuels Report, Vol. 5 No. 20 June 19, 2007 
339
 Wall Street Journal. Ethanol Giants Struggle to Crack Brazil Market. September 10, 2007. 
340
 Ibid. 
341RFA.  Annual World Ethanol Production by Country.  
http://www.ethanolrfa.org/industry/statistics/ 
342
 Ohga K. & Tatsuji K. Biofuels Policies in Asia: Trade effects on World Agricultural and 
Biofuels Trade. Presentation to USDA Agricultural Outlook Forum, March 2, 2007. 
343
 “Biofuel increasing China’s corn imports” 
http://www.interfax.cn/displayarticle.asp?aid=19396&slug=CORN%C2%A0%C2%A0%C2%A
0%C2%A0  
344
 OECD-FAO Agricultural Outlook 2007-2016 (note: this was interpreted from a graph) 
345
 Ohga K. & Tatsuji K. Biofuels Policies in Asia: Trade effects on World Agricultural and 
Biofuels Trade. Presentation to USDA Agricultural Outlook Forum, March 2, 2007. 
346
 F.O. Licht World Ethanol & Biofuels Report, Vol. 5 No. 20 July 23, 2007 
347
 “A Blueprint for Green Energy in the Americas: Strategic Analysis of Opportunities for 
Brazil and the Hemisphere” (2006) 
348
 Forbes.  China to freeze approvals for corn processing projects for 3 years. September 21, 
2007. http://www.forbes.com/markets/feeds/afx/2007/09/21/afx4142281.html 
349
 F.O. Licht World Ethanol & Biofuels Report, Vol. 5 No. 20 July 23, 2007 
732  
                                                                                                                                                             
350
 “A Blueprint for Green Energy in the Americas: Strategic Analysis of Opportunities for 
Brazil and the Hemisphere” (2006) 
351
 Ohga K. & Tatsuji K. Biofuels Policies in Asia: Trade effects on World Agricultural and 
Biofuels Trade. Presentation to USDA Agricultural Outlook Forum, March 2, 2007. Note: Metric 
Tonnes are assumed to be of ethanol and values are converted to ethanol volumes based on the 
density of ethanol and other conversion factors. 
352
 “A Blueprint for Green Energy in the Americas: Strategic Analysis of Opportunities for 
Brazil and the Hemisphere” (2006) 
353
 Ibid. 
354
 “A Blueprint for Green Energy in the Americas: Strategic Analysis of Opportunities for 
Brazil and the Hemisphere” (2006) 
355
 F.O. Licht World Ethanol & Biofuels Report, Vol. 5 No. 20 July 23, 2007 
356
 “A Blueprint for Green Energy in the Americas: Strategic Analysis of Opportunities for 
Brazil and the Hemisphere” (2006) 
357EIA. 
http://tonto.eia.doe.gov/dnav/pet/pet_move_impcus_a2_nus_EPOOXE_im0_mbbl_m.htm 
358
 Joseph, K. Argentina Bio-Fuels Argentine Bio-Fuels Report 2007. USDA FAS GAIN Report 
359
 CSIRO Australian Government Rural Industries Research and Development Corporation. May 
2007.  Biofuels in Australia - issues and prospects. 
360
 Roberts, Greg. Sept. 2008. The Australian. Rees scraps biofuel mandates. 
Http://www.theaustralian.new.com.au/story/0,251973888-5013945,00.html.  Accessed Oct. 3, 
2008. 
361
 EPM. August 2008. Canadian government passess renewable fuels standard 
362
 Pinzon, L. 2007. Colombia Biofuels Annual 2007. USDA FAS GAIN Report 
363
 Chavez, L. 2007. Mexico Biofuels Annual Report. USDA FAS GAIN Report 
364
 (2006) F.O. Licht World Ethanol Markets: The Outlook to 2015. 
365
 USTR. Caribbean Basin Initiative 
http://www.ustr.gov/Trade_Development/Preference_Programs/CBI/Section_Index.html 
366
 Ethanol Producer Magazine. Entering Tariff-Free. January 2004 Issue. 
367
 USTR. Ethanol Provisions in the CAFTA-DR. 
368
 Ethanol Producer Magazine. Entering Tariff-Free. January 2004 Issue. 
369
 INO. Tax Loophole Helps US Import Ethanol ‘Duty Free’- ED&F. 2008. 
http://news.ino.com/ 
370
 Peter Rhode, “Senate Finance May Take Up Drawback Loophole As Part of Energy Bill,” 
EnergyWashington Week, April 18, 2007. 
371
 DesMoinesRegister. BRAZIL: Loophole Hurt U.S. Ethanol Prices. October 18, 2007. 
372
 Public Law Version 6124 of the Farm Bill. 2008.  
http://www.usda.gov/documents/Bill_6124.pdf. 
373
 California Energy Commission. Ethanol Supply Outlook for California. October 2003. 
http://www.energy.ca.gov/2005publications/CEC-600-2005-037/CEC-600-2005-037.PDF 
374
 Official Opening of Petrojam Ethanol Limited. http://www.pcj.com/petrojam/whats_new.htm 
375Petrojam Limited.  http://www.petrojambunkering.com/petrojam_aboutb.htm 
376
 F.O. Licht World Ethanol & Biofuels Report Vol. 5 No. 22 July 23, 2007 
377
 Email Correspondence with Jeffrey Tuite, ED&F Man 
378
 Yacobucci, Brent. Ethanol Imports and the Caribbean Basin Initiative. 
733  
                                                                                                                                                             
379
 Email Correspondence with Jeffrey Tuite, ED&F Man 
380
 Ethanol Producer Magazine. Ethanol dehydration facility to be built in Trinidad. December 
2006 Issue. 
381
 The Wall Street Journal.  Ethanol Tariff Loophole Sparks a Boom in Caribbean Islands Build 
Plants To Process Brazil’s Fuel; Farm Belt Cries Foul. March 9, 2007. 
382
 Petroleum World.  Another Energy Sector Stimulus. 
http://www.petroleumworldtrinidad.com/storytrini06112606.htm 
383
 The Wall Street Journal.  Ethanol Tariff Loophole Sparks a Boom in Caribbean Islands Build 
Plants To Process Brazil’s Fuel; Farm Belt Cries Foul. March 9, 2007. 
384
 The Trinidad Guardian.  Angostura launches US$11m ethanol plant. 
http://www.guardian.co.tt/archives/2004-08-06/business1.html 
385
 Email Correspondence with Jeffrey Tuite, ED&F Man 
386
 Caribbean Net News. (2008). Barbados to build $72 million ethanol dehydration plant. 
387
 Jamaica Gleaner News.  (August 2008). US$36m ethanol plant for Barbados.  
http://www.jamaica-gleaner.com 
388
 Email Correspondence with Jeffrey Tuite, ED&F Man 
389
 Ethanol Producer Magazine. Entering Tariff-Free. January 2004 Issue. 
390
 The Wall Street Journal.  Ethanol Tariff Loophole Sparks a Boom in Caribbean Islands Build 
Plants To Process Brazil’s Fuel; Farm Belt Cries Foul. March 9, 2007. 
391
 Ibid. 
392
 Email Correspondence with Jeffrey Tuite, ED&F Man 
393
 The Wall Street Journal.  Ethanol Tariff Loophole Sparks a Boom in Caribbean Islands Build 
Plants To Process Brazil’s Fuel; Farm Belt Cries Foul. March 9, 2007. 
394
 International Trade Commission 2005-2007 historical ethanol import data as reported by the 
Renewable Fuels Association, http://www.ethanolrfa.org/industry/statistics/ 
395
 Communication from Douglas Newman, International Trade Commission to Doris Wu, EPA, 
May 20, 2008. 
396
 Energy Information Administration historical gasoline and ethanol import data: 
http://www.eia.doe.gov/oil_gas/petroleum/data_publications/company_level_imports/cli_historic
al.html 
3974/16/07 ADM Press Release. 
http://www.admworld.com/naen/pressroom/newspopup.asp?id=454&name=Joint_Cellulosic_Et
hanol_Project 
398
 8/26/08 ADM Press Release. 
http://www.admworld.com/naen/pressroom/newspopup.asp?id=517  
399
 Elbehri, Aziz.  USDA, ERS. An Evaluation of the Economics of Biomass Feedstocks: A 
Synthesis of the Literature. Prepared for the Biomass Research and Development Board. (2007) 
400
 Graham, R.L. Current and Potential U.S. Corn Stover Supplies. American Society of 
Agronomy 99:1-11 (2007) 
401
 Wilhelm, W.W. et. al. Corn Stover to Sustain Soil Organic Carbon Further Constrains 
Biomass Supply. Agron. J. 99:1665-1667 (2007). 
402
 NASS database. http://www.nass.usda.gov/ 
403
 Smith, W. Brad et. al. (2004) Forest Resources of the United States, 2002 General Technical 
Report NC-241. St. Paul, MN: U.S. Dept. of Agriculture, Forest Service, North Central Research 
Station. 
734  
                                                                                                                                                             
404
 USDA-Forest Service. 2004a. “Timber Products Output Mapmaker Version 1.0.” 
405
 NASS database. http://www.nass.usda.gov/ 
406
 USDA WGA Bioenergy Strategic Assessment project findings upcoming as noted in report 
WGA. (2008) Transportation Fuels for the Future Biofuels: Part I. 
407
 Industry data for 2008 taken from National Biodiesel Board fact sheets at 
http://www.biodiesel.org/buyingbiodiesel/producers_marketers/Producers%20Map-
Existing091708.pdf, accessed 10/17/08.  
408
 “Tyson ConocoPhillips Venture in Jeopardy.”  The Morning News, article dated 9/26/08.   
http://www.nwaonline.net/articles/2008/09/26/business/092708fuelcredits.txt   
409
 October 6, 2008 article on Trading Markets website, “Groundbreaking Initiated for Unique 
Renewable Fuels Plant in Louisiana.”  Accessed October 6, 2008.  
http://www.tradingmarkets.com/.site/news/Stock%20News/1923604/ 
410
 “Tyson's Fats to Fuel Plant on Schedule.”  The Morning News, article dated 10/6/08.  
http://www.nwaonline.net/articles/2008/10/06/business/100708tysonfuelplant.txt 
411
 Syntroleum Investor Presentation, March 2008.  Accessed October 6, 2008.  
http://www.syntroleum.com/pdf/InvestorPresentation.pdf 
 
412
 A discussion of the projected locations of ethanol production facilities can be found in chapter 
1.5 of this DRIA. 
 
413
 “Ethanol Transportation Backgrounder, Expansion of U.S. Corn-based Ethanol from the 
Agricultural Transportation Perspective”, USDA, September 2007, 
http://www.ams.usda.gov/tmd/TSB/EthanolTransportationBackgrounder09-17-07.pdf 
 
414
 Association of Oil Pipelines: http://aopl.org/go/searchresults/888/?q=ethanol&sd=&ed=.  
“Hazardous Liquid Pipelines Transporting Ethanol, Ethanol Blends, and Other Biofuels”, Notice 
of policy statement and request for comment, Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety 
Administration, Department of Transportation, August 10, 2007, 72 FR 45002. 
 
415
 Article on Kinder Morgan investigations re the shipment of ethanol by pipeline: 
http://www.kindermorgan.com/news/0328BizJournal.pdf 
 
416
 Magellan and Buckeye joint assessment of dedicated ethanol pipeline: 
http://www.buckeye.com/LinkClick.aspx?link=News+Releases%2F2008%2F08-05+BPL-
MMP+Ethanol+Pipeline+Assessment.pdf&tabid=36&mid=540 
 
417
 “Ethanol Transportation Backgrounder”, U.S. Department of Agriculture , September 2007, 
http://www.ams.usda.gov/AMSv1.0/getfile?dDocName=STELPRDC5063605&acct=atpub  
 
418
 “Ethanol Transportation Backgrounder”, U.S. Department of Agriculture , September 2007, 
http://www.ams.usda.gov/AMSv1.0/getfile?dDocName=STELPRDC5063605&acct=atpub 
 
419
 A discussion of the projected locations of ethanol production facilities can be found in chapter 
1.5 of this DRIA.  
 
735  
                                                                                                                                                             
420
 Information on the Biomass Research Board can be found at: 
http://www.brdisolutions.com/initiative/pages/Board.aspx 
 
421
 “The Importance of Adequate Rail Investment”, Association of American Railroads, 
http://www.aar.org/GetFile.asp?File_ID=150 
 
422
 American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) Freight-
Rail Bottom-Line Report, 2003. 
 
423
 Association of American Railroads (AAR), National Rail Freight Infrastructure Capacity and 
Investment Study, 200X. 
 
424
 “Barge Transportation in the United States”. Timothy Casey, Presentation at the MARE 
Forum USA, 2006, 
http://www.mareforum.com/ENERGY_TRANSPORTATION_USA_2006_PRESENTATIONS_
files/CASEY.pdf 
 
425
 See chapter 1.5.2 of this DRIA for a discussion of our projection of ethanol imports. 
 
426
 Energy Information Administration (EIA) historical company level ethanol and gasoline 
import data: 
http://www.eia.doe.gov/oil_gas/petroleum/data_publications/company_level_imports/cli_historic
al.html 
 
427
 “The U.S. Truck Driver Shortage: Analysis and Forecasts”, Prepared by Global Insights for 
the American Trucking Association, May 2005.  
http://www.truckline.com/NR/rdonlyres/E2E789CF-F308-463F-8831-
0F7E283A0218/0/ATADriverShortageStudy05.pdf 
 
428
 Our projections of the motor fuel demand can be found in chapter 1.2 of this DRIA. 
 
429
 “Renewable Fuel Standard Challenges Faced by Terminals”, Andrea Grant, Independent Fuel 
Terminal Operators Association, May, 13, 2008, presentation at the 2008 Society of Automotive 
Engineers Government-Industry Meeting.  
 
430
 “Infrastructure Requirements for an Expanded Fuel Ethanol Industry”, Downstream 
Alternative Incorporated, January 15, 2002. 
 
431
 A discussion of the volumes of biofuels we estimate would be used absent the RFS2 standards 
is located in chapter 1.2 of this DRIA. 
 
432
 A discussion of  the estimated number of terminals that carry diesel fuel is contained in 
Chapter V of the Regulatory Impact Analysis to the final highway diesel fuel rule 
http://www.epa.gov/otaq/highway-diesel/regs/ria-v.pdf, EPA Docket A-99-06. 
 
736  
                                                                                                                                                             
433
 “Renewable Fuel Standard Challenges Faced by Terminals”, Andrea Grant, Independent Fuel 
Terminal Operators Association, May, 13, 2008, presentation at the 2008 Society of Automotive 
Engineers Government-Industry Meeting.  
 
434
 “Renewable Fuel Standard Challenges Faced by Terminals”, Andrea Grant, Independent Fuel 
Terminal Operators Association, May, 13, 2008, presentation at the 2008 Society of Automotive 
Engineers Government-Industry Meeting.  
 
435
 Chapter 1.7 of this DRIA contains a discussion of our projections regarding the prevalence of 
flexible fuel vehicles in the vehicle fleet and the relative volumes of E85 versus E10 that would 
be used in these vehicles. 
 
436
 “Summary Data on Diesel Fuel Retailers”, Memorandum to the Docket, Jeffery Herzog, U.S. 
EPA, March 23, 2000, EPA Docket A-99-06, Docket Item II-B-07. 
 
437
 2007 National Association of Convenience Stores State of the Industry survey data 
www.nacsonline.com as reported in the National Petroleum News MarketFacts 2007, October 
2007. 
 
438
 “Diesel Throughput Volume by Percentage of Diesel Fuel Retailers”, Memorandum to the 
Docket, Jeffery Herzog, U.S. EPA, May 05, 2000, EPA Docket A-99-06, Docket Item II-B-14. 
 
439
 The National Ethanol Vehicle Coalition estimate of E85 refueling facilities is located at 
http://www.e85refueling.com/ estimates http://www.e85refueling.com/ 
 
440
 The “NEAR85” estimate of E85 retail facilities is located at http://www.neare85.com/ 
 
441
 National Petroleum News, MarketFacts 2007, Volume 99, Number 10, October 2007, 
www.npnweb.com 
 
442
 Underwriter Laboratories (UL) requirements for E85 retail equipment can be found at 
http://www.ul.com/regulators/e85.cfm 
443
 EIA September 2008 Monthly Energy Review Table 10.2b. 
444
 ibid 
445The Food, Conservation, and Energy Act of 2008, Part II, Subparts A and B (Sections 15321 
and 15331).   
446Source: June 23, 2008 Federal Times, Special Report: Fleet Management. 
447
 Ethanol Producer Magazine, “View From the Hill.”  July 2007. 
448
 EIA Annual Energy Outlook 2007, Table 17.   
449
 EIA Annual Energy Outlook 2007 & 2008, Table 2.   
450
 Ethanol Producer Magazine, “View From the Hill.”  July 2007. 
451
 Ibid 
452
 National Ethanol Vehicle Coalition, 2008 Purchasing Guide for Flexible Fuel Vehicles. 
453
 Ibid 
454
 DOE Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Transportation Energy Book, Vol 26, Table 
2.5: Domestic Consumption of Transportation Energy by Moe and Fuel Type 2005. 
737  
                                                                                                                                                             
455
 National Ethanol Vehicle Coalition, 2008 Purchasing Guide for Flexible Fuel Vehicles. 
456
 Senate Bill 3303 can be found at: http://thomas.loc.gov/cgi-bin/query/z?c110:S.3303: 
457
 House Rule 6559 can be found at: http://thomas.loc.gov/cgi-bin/bdquery/z?d110:H.R.6559: 
458
 NEVC FYI Newsletter: Volume 14, Issue 14: August 25, 2008 
459
 National Petroleum News, Market Facts 2007, October 2007 NPN Station Count 
460
 FYI Newsletter Volume 13, Issue 10, July 23, 2007 
461
 National Ethanol Vehicle Coalition, 2008 Purchasing Guide for Flexible Fuel Vehicles. 
462
 EIA Petroleum Marketing Annual 2006, Table 31 
463
 API Gasoline Tax Report, January 2008 
(http://www.api.org/statistics/fueltaxes/upload/October_2006_gasoline_and_diesel_summary_pa
ges.pdf_ 
464
 Brownstone, D., Small, K.A., 2005. Valuing time and reliability: assessing the evidence from 
road pricing demonstrations. Transportation Research Part A 39, 293-279. 
465
 Greene, David; Survey Evidence on the Importance of Fuel Availability to Choice of 
Alternative Fuels and Vehicles, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, 1997. 
466
 EIA, Petroleum Marketing Annual 2006, Tables 31, 34, and 48. 
467
 ABT Associates under subcontract with ICF Consulting Inc; Work Assignment 1-7 and 1-7.1, 
EPA Contract 68-C-01-164 for MSAT2, Legislative and Regulatory Developments:  Effects on 
Gasoline Supply, Subtasks 3.2, 4.1 and 4.2; benzene, toxics and sulfur control; January 14, 2003. 
468
 API, January 2008 Gasoline Taxes 
(http://www.api.org/statistics/fueltaxes/upload/January_2008_gasoline_and_diesel_summary_pa
ges-2.pdf) 
469
 Department of Energy, Alternative Fuels & Advanced Vehicles Data Center, Biodiesel 
Incentives and Laws.  Accessed July 2008.  
http://www.afdc.energy.gov/afdc/fuels/biodiesel_laws.html 
470
 Energy Information Administration, 2005 Prime Supplier Sales Volumes for No. 2 Diesel.  
Accessed 10/7/2008. 
http://tonto.eia.doe.gov/dnav/pet/pet_cons_prim_a_EPD2D_P00_Mgalpd_a.htm 
471
 Energy Information Administration, Fuel Oil and Kerosene Sales 2006, Table 16.  2005 data 
column used.  
http://www.eia.doe.gov/pub/oil_gas/petroleum/data_publications/fuel_oil_and_kerosene_sales/c
urrent/pdf/table16.pdf 
472
 Clean Air Act Section 211(o)(1) 
473
 Fargione, J., J. Hill, D. Tilman, S. Polasky, and P. Hawthorne. 2008. Land clearing and the 
biofuel carbon debt. Science 319 :1235–1238. 
474
 Searchinger, T., R. Heimlich, R.A. Houghton, F. Dong, A. Elobeid, J. Fabiosa, S. Tokgoz, D. 
Hayes, and T.-H. Yu. 2008. Use of U.S. croplands for biofuels increases greenhouse gases 
through emissions from land-use change. Science 319 :1238–1240. 
475
 http://www.epa.gov/sequestration/greenhouse_gas.html 
476
 Crutzen, P. J., Mosier, A. R., Smith, K. A., and Winiwarter, W.: N2O release from agro-
biofuel production negates global warming reduction by replacing fossil fuels, Atmos. Chem. 
Phys., 8, 389-395, 2008.  
477
 USGS (November 2006), “Natural Assessment of Oil and Gas Fact Sheet: Natural Bitumen 
Resources of the United States,” Fact Sheet 2006-3133; USGS (August 2003), “Heavy Oil and 
Natural Bitumen – Strategic Petroleum Resources,” Fact Sheet 70-03.  
738  
                                                                                                                                                             
478
 EIA Form 814.  
479
 International Energy Agency (March 14, 2006), Oil Market Report: A Monthly Oil Market 
and Stocks Assessment, www.oilmarketreport.org. pp. 18. 
480
 Energy Information Administration, “Country Analysis Briefs,” Venezuela Oil. 
http://www.eia.doe.gov/emeu/cabs/Venezuela/Oil.html (last viewed 6/18/2008).  
481
 Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers (May 2008), Statistical Handbook for 
Canada’s Upstream Petroleum Industry.  
482
 National Petroleum Council (2007), "Working Document of the NPC Global Oil & Gas 
Study" July 18, 2007, Topic Paper #22 Heavy Oil; California Annual Reports of the State Oil & 
Gas Supervisor, 2006, 
http://www.conservation.ca.gov/dog/pubs_stats/annual_reports/Pages/annual_reports.aspx (last 
viewed 6/18/2008). 
483
 Energy Information Administration, 2005 data. 
http://tonto.eia.doe.gov/dnav/pet/pet_move_impcus_a2_nus_epc0_im0_mbbl_a.htm (last viewed 
6/18/2008) 
484
 “N2O release from agro-biofuel production negates global warming reduction by replacing 
fossil fuels” P.J. Crutzen, A.R. Mosier, K.A. Smith, and W. Winiwarter, Atmospheric Chemistry 
and Physics, 8, 389–395, 2008. 
485
 www.fao.org/ag/agl/fertistat/ 
486
 http://wds.iea.org/wds/default.aspx 
487
 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Inventories, Chapter 11: N2) Emissions from Managed 
Soils, and CO2 Emissions from Lime and Urea Applications 
488
 International Rice Research Institute. www.iri.org. Last accessed: October 15, 2008. 
489
 Ethanol Expansion in the United States How Will the Agricultural Sector Adjust? Paul C. 
Westcott, USDA ERS FDS-07D-01 May 2007.   
490
 Technical Report, An Analysis of EPA Biofuel Scenarios with the CARD International 
Models, CARD Staff, October 2008.   
491
 Salil Arora, May Wu, and Michael Wang, "Update of Distillers Grains Displacement Ratios 
for Corn Ethanol Life-Cycle Analysis," September 2008. See 
http://www.transportation.anl.gov/pdfs/AF/527.pdf 
492
 The 2005 Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) Global Forest Resources Assessment 
(FRA) is available at http://www.fao.org/forestry/fra2005/en/ 
493
 https://www.gtap.agecon.purdue.edu 
494
 See Hertel, Thoma, Steven Rose, Richard Tol (eds.), (in press). Economic Analysis of Land 
Use in Global Climate Change Policy, Routledge Publishing. 
495
 USDA/FAO soil carbon map of the world is available for download at 
ftp://www.daac.ornl.gov/data/global_soil/IsricWiseGrids/State 
496
 Luyassert, S et al., 2008. Old-growth forests as global carbon sinks. Nature 455: 213-215.   
Link: http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v455/n7210/abs/nature07276.html  
497
 Herzog et al. 2003, Richards 1997, Stavins and Richards 2005. 
498
 Sunstein and Rowell, 2007, On Discounting Regulatory Benefits: Risk, Money, and 
Intergenerational Equity, Chicago Law Review 
499
 Technical Support Document on Benefits of Reducing GHG Emissions, U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency, June 12, 2008, www.regulations.gov (search phrase “Technical Support 
Document on Benefits of Reducing GHG Emissions”) 
739  
                                                                                                                                                             
500
 Searchinger et.al, 2007. 
501
 Tol, 2005 
502
 Newell and Pizer, 2003 
503
 Tol (2005, 2007). 
504
 OMB Circular A-4, 2003 
505
 EPA Guidelines for Preparing Economic Analyses, 2000 
506
 Newell and Pizer, 2003, Weitzman (1999, 2001), Nordhaus (2008), Guo et al., (2006), Saez, 
C.A. and J.C. Requena, “Reconciling sustainability and discounting in Cost-Benefit Analysis: A 
methodological proposal”, Ecological Economics, 2007, vol. 60, issue 4, pages 712-725. 
507
 Ramanathan and Feng, 2008. On avoiding dangerous anthropogenic interference with the 
climate system: Formidable challenges ahead. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
105:143245-14250. 
508
 Luyassert, S et al., 2008. Old-growth forests as global carbon sinks. Nature 455: 213-215.   
Link: http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v455/n7210/abs/nature07276.html 
509
 The digital soil carbon map of the world is available at 
ftp://www.daac.ornl.gov/data/global_soil/IsricWiseGrids/State 
510
 Schmidt, “System delimitation in agricultural consequential LCA,” Int J Life Cycle Assess, 
(2008) 13:350-364 
511
 International Energy Outlook 2007, Report #:DOE/EIA-0484(2007), Release Date: May 
2007, Tables G1 and G3.  
512
  U.S. EPA 2008,  Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks (EPA 430-R-08-
005), Tables 3-23 and3-24  http://www.epa.gov/climatechange/emissions/usinventoryreport.html 
513
 U.S. EPA 2008,  Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks (EPA 430-R-08-
005), Table ES-1 http://www.epa.gov/climatechange/emissions/usinventoryreport.html 
514
 Clarke et al., 2007.  
515
 Overview Presentaion to CRC on EPACT Testing  (September 2008) 
516
 U. S. EPA.  2007.  Final Regulatory Impact Analysis: Control of Hazardous Air Pollutants from Mobile Sources; 
EPA420-R-07-002; Office of Transportation and Air Quality, Ann Arbor, MI.  http://www.epa.gov/otaq/toxics.htm 
517
 Reddy, Sam R.  2007.  “A Model for Estimating Vapor Pressures of Commingled Ethanol Fuels.” SAE 2007-01-
4006. 
518
 
518
 U. S. EPA.  2007.  Regulatory Impact Analysis: Renewable Fuel Standard Program; EPA420-R-07-004; 
Office of Transportation and Air Quality, Ann Arbor, MI.  http://www.epa.gov/otaq/renewablefuels/index.htm 
519
 Add Reference for EPACT testing (EPA 2008) 
520
 Add CRC 2004 on fuel effects  (this should be the same as "CRC permeation study", above) 
521Southwest Research Institute.  2007.  Flex Fuel Vehicles (FFVs)  VOC/PM Cold Temperature Characterization 
When Operating on Ethanol (E10, E70, E85).  Prepared for U. S. Environmental Protection Agency.  Available in 
Docket EPA-HQ-OAR-2005-0161. 
 This reference seems to be for the SwRI E85 study (says it's 2006), also the Env. Canada study (is theis the 2008 
paper or the 2007 report (below) and Cert data (how should that be cited) 
522
  Environment Canada.  2007.  Comparison of Emissions from Conventional and Flexible Fuel Vehicles 
Operating on Gasoline and E85 Fuels.  ERM Report No. 05-039, Emissions Research Division.  Available in Docket 
EPA-HQ-OAR-2005-0161. 
523
 EPA Certification and Fuel Economy Information System. http://www.epa.gov/otaq/cfeis.htm 
524
 Southwest Research Institute.  2007.  Flex Fuel Vehicles (FFVs)  VOC/PM Cold Temperature Characterization 
When Operating on Ethanol (E10, E70, E85).  Prepared for U. S. Environmental Protection Agency.  Available in 
Docket EPA-HQ-OAR-2005-0161. 
525
 Graham, L. A.; Belisle, S. L. and C. Baas.  2008.  Emissions from light duty gasoline vehicles operating on low 
blend ethanol gasoline and E85.  Atmos. Environ. 42: 4498-4516. 
740  
                                                                                                                                                             
526
 Environment Canada.  2007.  Comparison of Emissions from Conventional and Flexible Fuel Vehicles Operating 
on Gasoline and E85 Fuels.  ERM Report No. 05-039, Emissions Research Division.  Available in Docket EPA-HQ-
OAR-2005-0161. 
527
 Auto/Oil Air Quality Improvement Research Program.  1996.  Phase I and II Test Data.  Prepared by Systems 
Applications International, Inc. 
528
 Need something on NONROAD update for ethanol effects. 
529
 U.S. EPA, 2008.  Biodiesel Effects on Heavy-Duty Highway Engines and Vehicles; Office of Transportation and 
Air Quality, Ann Arbor, MI. 
530
 U.S. EPA  2002 A Comprehensive Analysis of Biodiesel Impacts on Exhaust Emissions: Draft Technical Report 
(EPA420-P-02-001)   
531
 Memo on MOVESHC, CO & NOx emission rates 
532
 U.S. EPA.  2008.  Kansas City Characterization Study:  Final Report (EPA420-R-08-009)   
http://www.epa.gov/otaq/emission-factors-research/420r08009.pdf 
533
 U.S. EPA.  2008.  Analysis of Particulate Matter Emissions from Light-Duty Vehicles in Kansas City (EPA420-
R-08-010)   http://www.epa.gov/otaq/emission-factors-research/420r08010.pdf 
534
 memo on MOVES evap rates 
535
 U.S. EPA. 2002.  Technical Description of the Toxics Module for MOBILE6.2 and Guidance on Its Use for 
Emission Inventory Preparation.  (EPA420-R-02-029)  http://www.epa.gov/otaq/models/mobile6/r02029.pdf 
536
 Memo to docket on running MOVES 
537
 Details about NMIM are available at http://www.epa.gov/otaq/nmim.htm. 
538
 Information about the 2005 NEI may be found at http://www.epa.gov/ttn/chief/net/2005inventory.html. 
539
 Details concerning the Final Rule: Control of Emissions of Air Pollution from New Nonroad Spark-Ignition 
Engines, Equipment, and Vessels may be found at http://www.epa.gov/otaq/equip-ld.htm#. 
540
 See http://www.epa.gov/ttn/chief/emch/index.html. 
541
 Final Rule: Control of Emissions of Air Pollution from Locomotives and Marine Compression-Ignition Engines 
Less Than 30 Liters per Cylinder (published May 6, 2008 and republished June 30, 2008).  For details, see 
http://www.epa.gov/OMS/locomotv.htm#2008final 
542
 Sze, C., Whinihan, J., Olson, B., Schenk, C., Sobotowski, R. Impact of Test Cycle and Biodiesel Concentration 
of Emissions, SAE report 2007-01-4040 (2007). 
543
 U. S. EPA.  2007.  Final Regulatory Impact Analysis: Control of Hazardous Air Pollutants from Mobile Sources; 
EPA420-R-07-002; Office of Transportation and Air Quality, Ann Arbor, MI.  http://www.epa.gov/otaq/toxics.htm 
544
 Landman, L. C. (2007) Estimating Emissions Associated with Portable Fuel Containers (PFCs). U. S. EPA, 
Assessment and Standards Division, National Vehicle and Fuel Emissions Laboratory, Ann Arbor, MI, Report No. 
EPA420-R-07-001.  http://www.epa.gov/otaq/toxics.htm 
545
 U. S. EPA.  2007.  Regulatory Impact Analysis: Renewable Fuel Standard Program; EPA420-R-07-004; Office 
of Transportation and Air Quality, Ann Arbor, MI.  http://www.epa.gov/otaq/renewablefuels/index.htm 
546
 U. S. EPA. 1993. Final Regulatory Impact Analysis for Reformulated Gasoline. December 13, 1993. 
http://www.epa.gov/otaq/regs/fuels/rfg/ 
547
 Haskew, H. M.; Liberty, T. F.; McClement, D.  2004.  Fuel Permeation from Automotive Systems.  Prepared for 
the Coordinating Research Council by Harold Haskew and Associates and Automotive Testing Laboratories, Inc.  
September 2004.  CRC Project No. E-65.  http://www.crcao.com.  This document is available in Docket EPA-HQ-
OAR-2005-0036. 
548
 Hester, Charles.  2006.  Review of Data on HAP Content in Gasoline.  Memorandum from MACTEC to Steve 
Shedd, U. S. EPA, March 23, 2006.  This document is available in Docket EPA-HQ-OAR-2003-0053.  
549
 U. S. EPA.  2006.  Determination that Gasoline Distribution Stage 1 Area Source (GD AS) Category Does Not 
Need to Be Regulated Under Section 112(c)6.  Memoradum from Stephen Shedd to Kent Hustvedt, May 9, 2006.  
This document is available in Docket EPA-HQ-OAR-2005-0036. 
550
 U. S. EPA.  SPECIATE Version 4.0.  http://www.epa.gov/ttn/chief/software/speciate/index.html 
551
 Haskew, H. M., Liberty, T. F., McClement, D.  2004.  Fuel Permeation from Automotive Systems.  Report No. 
CRC E-65, Prepared for California Air Resources Board and Coordinating Research Council.  http://www.crcao.org/ 
552
 United States Department of Agriculture, Amber Waves, February 2004, page 9, U.S. Increasingly Imports 
Nitrogen and Potash Fertilizer.  http://www.ers.usda.gov/amberwaves/February04/ 
553
 Wen Huang, United States Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service, personal communication to 
Craig Harvey, US EPA, November 9, 2007.   
741  
                                                                                                                                                             
554
 40 CFR Part 63 National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants for Source Categories: Gasoline 
Distribution Bulk Terminals, Bulk Plants, Pipeline Facilities, and Gasoline Dispensing Facilities; Proposed Rule, 
Thursday, November 9, 2006, 66064-66092. 
555
 E. H. Pechan.  Documentation For The Final 2002 Nonpoint Sector (Feb 06 Version) National Emission 
Inventory For Criteria And Hazardous Air Pollutants, Appendix A, pp. A-89 to A-105.  Prepared for Emissions 
Inventory and Analysis Group (C339-02) Air Quality Assessment Division Office of Air Quality Planning and 
Standards U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Research Triangle Park, NC 27711, Report No. 
05.10.001/9014.401 Jul-06.  Available at 
ftp://ftp.epa.gov/EmisInventory/2002finalnei/documentation/nonpoint/2002nei_final_nonpoint_documentation0206
version.pdf. 
556
 Energy Information Administration.  2007.  Product Supplied, Petroleum Supply Reporting System.  
http://tonto.eia.doe.gov/dnav/pet/pet_cons_psup_dc_nus_mbbl_a.htm 
557
 EPA.  1994.  Final Regulatory Impact Analysis: Refueling Emission Regulations for Light Duty Vehicles and 
Trucks and Heavy Duty Vehicles.  Office of Mobile Sources, Ann Arbor, MI.  Available at 
http://www.epa.gov/otaq/orvr.htm. 
558
  U. S. EPA.  2001.  Final Rule: Control of Air Pollution From New Motor Vehicles: Heavy-Duty Engine and 
Vehicle Standards and Highway Diesel Fuel Sulfur Control Requirements, January 18, 2001.  
559
  U. S. EPA.  2008.  Final Rule: Control of Emissions of Air Pollution from Locomotives and Marine 
Compression-Ignition Engines Less than 30 Liters per Cylinder, Regulatory Impact Analysis, June 30, 2008. 
http://www.epa.gov/otaq/locomotv.htm 
560
  Emission Inventories for Ocean-Going Vessels Using Category 3 Propulsion Engines In or Near the United 
States, Draft Technical Support Document, EPA420-D-07-007, December 2007.  This is available in Docket OAR-
2007-0121at http://www.regulations.gov/ . 
561
 U. S. EPA.  2006.  National-Scale Air Toxics Assessment for 1999.  http://www.epa.gov/ttn/atw/nata1999. 
562
 U. S. EPA.  2007.  Approach for Developing 2002 and Future Emission Summaries.  Memorandum from 
Madeleine Strum to Docket, November 26, 2007.  This document is available in Docket EPA-HQ-OAR-2007-0491. 
563
 Federal Register.  2007.  National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants From Petroleum Refineries.  
72(170): 50715-50742.  http://www.epa.gov/EPA-AIR/2007/September/Day-04/a17009.htm. 
564
 Energy Information Administration.  2007.  Product Supplied, Petroleum Supply Reporting System.  
http://tonto.eia.doe.gov/dnav/pet/pet_cons_psup_dc_nus_mbbl_a.htm 
565
 Brady, D. and Pratt, G. C.  2007.  Volatile Organic Compound Emissions from Dry Mill Fuel Ethanol 
Production.  J. Air & Waste Manage. Assoc. 57: 1091-1102. 
566
 Prevention of Significant Deterioration Construction Permit Application.  Prepared for Verasun Fort Dodge, 
LLC, Fort Dodge Iowa, by Barr, Minneapolis, MN, December, 2007. 
567
 See Chapter 1.5 of the Draft Regulatory Impact Assessment of this rulemaking. 
568U. S. EPA.  2007.  Control of Hazardous Air Pollutants from Mobile Sources; Final Rule.  Federal Register, 72: 
8428-8570.  
569
 U. S. EPA.  2007.  Regulation of Fuels and Fuel Additives: Renewable Fuel Standard Program; Final Rule.  
Federal Register, 72: 23900-24014. 
570
 U. S. EPA.  2007.  Final Regulatory Impact Analysis: Control of Hazardous Air Pollutants from Mobile Sources; 
EPA420-R-07-002; Office of Transportation and Air Quality, Ann Arbor, MI.  http://www.epa.gov/otaq/toxics.htm 
571
 Energy Information Adminstration.  1999. Petroleum Marketing Annual.  Report No. DOE/EIA-0487(99).  
http://www.eia.doe.gov/pub/oil_gas/petroleum/data_publications/petroleum_marketing_annual/historical/1999/pma
_1999.html 
572
 Energy Information Administration.  2007.  Annual Energy Outlook 2007 with Projections to 2030.  U.S. 
Department of Energy, Report # DOE/EIA-0383.  http://www.eia.doe.gov/oiaf/aeo/index.html 
573
 U. S. EPA.  SPECIATE Version 4.0.  http://www.epa.gov/ttn/chief/software/speciate/index.html 
574
 
574
 Auto/Oil Air Quality Improvement Research Program.  1996.  Phase I and II Test Data.  Prepared by Systems 
Applications International, Inc. 
575
  Diesel Locomotives, Marine Distillate, Residual Boiler -- E. H. Pechan.  2005.  Documentation For Aircraft, 
Commercial Marine Vessel, Locomotive, And Other Nonroad Components Of The National Emissions Inventory, 
Volume I - Methodology.     
Prepared for U. S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Air Quality Planning and Standards, Research 
Triangle Park, NC.  http://www.epa.gov/ttn/chief/net/2002inventory.html 
742  
                                                                                                                                                             
576
  HDD Trucks -- R. Cook, E. Glover.  2002.  Technical Description of the Toxics Module for MOBILE6.2 and 
Guidance on Its Use for Emission Inventory Preparation. U. S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of 
Transportation and Air Quality.  Report No. EPA420-R-02-011.  http://www.epa.gov/otaq/m6.htm 
577
  Natural Gas Turbines -- U. S. EPA.  2000.  AP-42, 5th Edition, Volume 1.  Chapter 3: Stationary Internal 
Combustion Sources.  http://www.epa.gov/ttn/chief/ap42/ch03/index.html 
578
 Control of Hazardous Air Pollutants From Mobile Sources (72 FR 8428; February 26, 2007). 
579 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Byun, D.W., Ching, J.K.S., Eds (1999) Science algorithms of EPA 
Models-3 Community Multiscale Air Quality (CMAQ modeling system, EPA/600/R-99/030, Office of Research and 
Development).    
580 Byun, D.W., Schere, K.L. (2006) Review of the Governing Equations, Computational Algorithms, and Other 
Components of the Models-3 Community Multiscale Air Quality (CMAQ) Modeling System, J. Applied Mechanics 
Reviews 59 (2): 51-77. 
581 Dennis, R.L., Byun, D.W., Novak, J.H., Galluppi, K.J., Coats, C.J., Vouk, M.A. (1996) The next generation of 
integrated air quality modeling: EPA’s Models-3, Atmos Environ 30:1925-1938. 
582
 US EPA (2007) Regulatory Impact Analysis of the Proposed Revisions to the National Ambient Air Quality 
Standards for Ground-Level Ozone. EPA document number 442/R-07-008, July 2007. 
583
 Aiyyer, A, Cohan, D., Russell, A., Stockwell, W., Tanrikulu, S., Vizuete, W., Wilczak, J. (2007) Final Report: 
Third Peer Review of the CMAQ Model. p. 23. 
584
 Grell, G., J. Dudhia, D. Stauffer (1994) A Description of the Fifth-Generation Penn State/NCAR Mesoscale 
Model (MM5), NCAR/TN-398+STR., 138 pp, National Center for Atmospheric Research, Boulder CO. 
585
 final LocoMarine AQM TSD 
586
 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Byun, D.W., Ching, J.K.S., Eds (1999) Science algorithms of EPA 
Models-3 Community Multiscale Air Quality (CMAQ modeling system, EPA/600/R-99/030, Office of Research and 
Development).  Please also see: http://www.cmascenter.org/ 
587
 Yantosca, B. (2004) GEOS-CHEMv7-01-02 User’s Guide, Atmospheric Chemistry Modeling Group, Harvard 
University, Cambridge, MA, October 15, 2004. 
588
 Finlayson-Pitts BJ, Pitts JN Jr. (1986) Atmospheric Chemistry: Fundamentals and Experimental Techniques, 
Wiley, New York. 
589
 Atkinson R, Arey J (2003) Atmospheric Degradation of Volatile Organic Compounds. Chem Rev 103: 4605-
4638. 
590
 Atkinson, R., Baulch, D.L., Cox, R.A., Crowley, J.N., Hampson, R.F. Jr., Hynes, R.G., Jenkin, M.E., Kerr, J.A., 
Rossi, M.J., Troe, J. (2005) Evaluated Kinetic and Photochemical Data for Atmospheric Chemistry - IUPAC 
Subcommittee on Gas Kinetic Data Evaluation for Atmospheric Chemistry. July 2005 web version. 
http://www.iupac-kinetic.ch.cam.ac.uk/index.html. 
591
 Atkinson, R., Baulch, D.L., Cox, R.A., Crowley, J.N., Hampson, R.F. Jr., Hynes, R.G., Jenkin, M.E., Kerr, J.A., 
Rossi, M.J., Troe, J. (2005) Evaluated Kinetic and Photochemical Data for Atmospheric Chemistry - IUPAC 
Subcommittee on Gas Kinetic Data Evaluation for Atmospheric Chemistry. July 2005 web version. 
http://www.iupac-kinetic.ch.cam.ac.uk/index.html. 
592
 Atkinson, R., Baulch, D.L., Cox, R.A., Crowley, J.N., Hampson, R.F. Jr., Hynes, R.G., Jenkin, M.E., Kerr, J.A., 
Rossi, M.J., Troe, J. (2005) Evaluated Kinetic and Photochemical Data for Atmospheric Chemistry - IUPAC 
Subcommittee on Gas Kinetic Data Evaluation for Atmospheric Chemistry. July 2005 web version. 
http://www.iupac-kinetic.ch.cam.ac.uk/index.html. 
593
 Atkinson, R., Baulch, D.L., Cox, R.A., Crowley, J.N., Hampson, R.F. Jr., Hynes, R.G., Jenkin, M.E., Kerr, J.A., 
Rossi, M.J., Troe, J. (2005) Evaluated Kinetic and Photochemical Data for Atmospheric Chemistry - IUPAC 
Subcommittee on Gas Kinetic Data Evaluation for Atmospheric Chemistry. July 2005 web version. 
http://www.iupac-kinetic.ch.cam.ac.uk/index.html. 
594
 Atkinson, R., Baulch, D.L., Cox, R.A., Crowley, J.N., Hampson, R.F. Jr., Hynes, R.G., Jenkin, M.E., Kerr, J.A., 
Rossi, M.J., Troe, J. (2005) Evaluated Kinetic and Photochemical Data for Atmospheric Chemistry - IUPAC 
Subcommittee on Gas Kinetic Data Evaluation for Atmospheric Chemistry. July 2005 web version. 
http://www.iupac-kinetic.ch.cam.ac.uk/index.html. 
595
 Sander, S.P., Friedl, R.R., Golden, D.M., Kurylo, M.J., Huie, R.E., Orkin, V.L., Moortgat, G.K., Ravishankara, 
A.R., Kolb, C.E., Molina, M.J., Finlayson-Pitts, B.J. (2003) Chemical Kinetics and Photochemical Data for use in 
Atmospheric Studies, Evaluation Number 14. NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
http://jpldataeval.jpl.nasa.gov/index.html. 
743  
                                                                                                                                                             
596
 Sander, S.P., Friedl, R.R., Golden, D.M., Kurylo, M.J., Huie, R.E., Orkin, V.L., Moortgat, G.K., Ravishankara, 
A.R., Kolb, C.E., Molina, M.J., Finlayson-Pitts, B.J. (2003) Chemical Kinetics and Photochemical Data for use in 
Atmospheric Studies, Evaluation Number 14. NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
http://jpldataeval.jpl.nasa.gov/index.html. 
597
 Atkinson, R., Baulch, D.L., Cox, R.A., Crowley, J.N., Hampson, R.F. Jr., Hynes, R.G., Jenkin, M.E., Kerr, J.A., 
Rossi, M.J., Troe, J. (2005) Evaluated Kinetic and Photochemical Data for Atmospheric Chemistry - IUPAC 
Subcommittee on Gas Kinetic Data Evaluation for Atmospheric Chemistry. July 2005 web version. 
http://www.iupac-kinetic.ch.cam.ac.uk/index.html. 
598
 Finlayson-Pitts BJ, Pitts JN Jr. (1986) Atmospheric Chemistry: Fundamentals and Experimental Techniques, 
Wiley, New York. 
599
 Sander, S.P., Friedl, R.R., Golden, D.M., Kurylo, M.J., Huie, R.E., Orkin, V.L., Moortgat, G.K., Ravishankara, 
A.R., Kolb, C.E., Molina, M.J., Finlayson-Pitts, B.J. (2003) Chemical Kinetics and Photochemical Data for use in 
Atmospheric Studies, Evaluation Number 14. NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory. 
http://jpldataeval.jpl.nasa.gov/index.html. 
600
 Yarwood G, Rao S, Yocke M, Whitten GZ (2005) Updates to the Carbon Bond Chemical Mechanism: CB05. 
Final Report to the US EPA, RT-0400675, December 8, 2005. 
http://www.camx.com/publ/pdfs/CB05_Final_Report_120805.pdf. 
601
 Atkinson, R., Baulch, D.L., Cox, R.A., Crowley, J.N., Hampson, R.F. Jr., Hynes, R.G., Jenkin, M.E., Kerr, J.A., 
Rossi, M.J., Troe, J. (2005) Evaluated Kinetic and Photochemical Data for Atmospheric Chemistry - IUPAC 
Subcommittee on Gas Kinetic Data Evaluation for Atmospheric Chemistry. July 2005 web version. 
http://www.iupac-kinetic.ch.cam.ac.uk/index.html. 
602
 Anderson LG, Lanning JA, Wilkes E, Wolfe P, Jones RH (1997) Effects of Using Oxygenated Fuels on Carbon 
Monoxide, Formaldehyde and Acetaldehyde Concentrations in Denver.  Paper 97-RP139.05, Air & Waste 
Management Association 90th Annual Meeting & Exhibition, June 8-13, 1997, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. 
603
 Jeffrey S. Gaffney, Nancy A. Marley, Randal S. Martin, Roy W. Dixon, Luis G. Reyes, and Carl J. Popp (1997) 
Potential Air Quality Effects of Using Ethanol-Gasoline Fuel Blends: A Field Study in Albuquerque, New Mexico. 
Environ Sci Technol 31(11): 3053 - 3061; DOI: 10.1021/es9610388. 
604
 Grosjean D (1999) Ambient levels of peroxyacetyl nitrate in southern California, Report from DGA, Inc., 
Ventura, CA to California Air Resources Board, Sacramento, CA, Agreement 99-703, Draft, August 31. 
605
 Allen P, R Bradley, BE Croes, J DaMassa, R Effa, M Fuentes, A Hebert, D Luo, R Vincent, L Woodhouse, E 
Yang (1999) Analysis of the Air Quality Impacts of the Use of Ethanol in Gasoline. California Air Resources Board, 
September 28, 1999. 
606
 Jacobson M (2007) Effects of ethanol (E85) versus gasoline vehicles on cancer and mortality in the United 
States, Environ Sci Technol 41: 4150-4157. 
607
 Grosjean D (1997) Atmospheric Chemistry of Alcohols. J Braz Chem Soc 8(4): 433-442. 
608
 Andrade JB de, Andrade MV, Pinheiro HLC (1998) Atmospheric levels of formaldehyde and acetaldehyde and 
their relationship with the vehicular fleet composition in Salvador, Bahia, Brazil. J Braz Chem Soc 9(3): 219-223. 
609
 Montero L, Vasconcellos PC, Souza SR, Pires MAF, Sanchez-Ccoyllo OR, Andrade MF, Carvalho LRF (2001) 
Measurements of Atmospheric Carboxylic Acids and Carbonyl Compounds in Sao Paulo City, Brazil. Environ Sci 
Technol 35: 3071-3081. 
610
 Colon M, Pleil JD, Hartlage TA, Guardani ML, Martins MH (2001) Survey of volatile organic compounds 
associated with automotive emissions in the urban airshed of Sao Paulo, Brazil. Atmos Environ 35: 4017–4031. 
611
 Tanner R, Miguel A, deAndrade J, Gaffney J, Streit G (1988) Atmospheric Chemistry of Aldehydes, Enhanced 
Peroxyacetyl Nitrate Formation from Ethanol-Fueled Vehicles. Envion Sci Technol 22(9): 1026-1037. 
612
 Grosjean E, Grosjean D, Woodhouse L, Yang Y, (2002) Peroxyacetyl nitrate and peroxypropionyl nitrate in 
Porto Alegre, Brazil, Atmos Environ 36: 2405-2419. 
613
 Grosjean D, Grosjean E, Moreira LFR (2002) Speciated Ambient Carbonyls in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Environ 
Sci Technol 36: 1389-1395. 
614
 EM Martins, G Arbilla (2003) Computer modeling study of ethanol and aldehyde reactivities in Rio de Janeiro 
urban air. Atmos Environ 37: 1715–1722. 
615
 Hannigan, Michael P., William F. Busby, Jr., Glen R. Cass (2005) Source Contributions to the Mutagenicity of 
Urban Particulate Air Pollution. J Air Waste Mgmt 55: 399-410. 
616
 Zheng M, GR Cass, JJ Schauer, ES Edgerton (2002) Source Apportionment of PM2.5 in the Southeastern United 
States Using Solvent-Extractable Organic Compounds as Tracers. Environ Sci Technol 36: 2631-2371. 
744  
                                                                                                                                                             
617
 EPA (2002) National Air Quality and Emission Trends Report, 2001. EPA 454/K-02-001, September 2002. 
http://www.epa.gov/air/airtrends/aqtrnd01/summary.pdf 
618
 Schauer JJ, GR Cass (2000) Source Apportionment of Wintertime Gas-Phase and Particle-Phase Air Pollutants 
Using Organic Compounds as Tracers, Environ Sci Technol 34(9): 1821-1832.  http://pubs.acs.org/cgi-
bin/article.cgi/esthag/2000/34/i09/pdf/es981312t.pdf 
619
 Kleeman MJ, GR Cass (1999) Identifying the Effect of Individual Emission Sources on Particulate Air Quality 
Within a Photochemical Aerosol Processes Trajectory Model. Atmos Environ 33: 4597-4613. 
620
 Watson J, Fujita E, Chow J, Zielinska B, Richards L, Neff W, Dietrich D (1998) Northern Front Range Air 
Quality Study Final Report: Volume 1. June 30, 1998. For Colorado State University, Cooperative Institute for 
Research in the Atmosphere, by Desert Research Institute, Reno, NV. This document is available in EPA Docket 
EPA-HQ-OAR-2005-0161. 
621
 Schauer JJ, WF Rogge, LM Hildemann, MA Mazurek, GR Cass, B Simoneit (1996) Source Apportionment of 
Airborne Particulate Matter Using Organic Compounds as Tracers. Atmos Environ 30: 3837-3855. 
622
 Lewandowski M, M Jaoui , JH Offenberg , TE Kleindienst, EO Edney, RJ Sheesley, JJ Schauer (2008)  Primary 
and secondary contributions to ambient PM in the midwestern United States, Environ Sci Technol 42(9):3303-3309.  
http://pubs.acs.org/cgi-bin/article.cgi/esthag/2008/42/i09/html/es0720412.html 
623
 Kleindienst TE, M Jaoui, M Lewandowski, JH Offenberg, EO Edney (2007) Estimates of the contributions of 
biogenic and anthropogenic hydrocarbons to secondary organic aerosol at a southeastern U.S. location, Atmos 
Environ 41(37):8288-8300. 
624
 Offenberg JH, CW Lewis, M Lewandowski, M Jaoui, TE Kleindienst, EO Edney (2007) Contributions of 
Toluene and -pinene to SOA Formed in an Irradiated Toluene/-pinene,NOx/Air Mixture: Comparison of Results 
Using 14C Content and SOA Organic Tracer Methods, Environ Sci Technol 41: 3972-3976. 
625
 Byun DW, Schere, KL (2006) Review of the Governing Equations, Computational Algorithms, and Other 
Components of the Models-3 Community Multiscale Air Quality (CMAQ) Modeling System, J Applied Mechanics 
Reviews 59: 51-76. 
626
 Pandis, S.N., Harley, R.A., Cass, G.R., Seinfeld, J.H. (1992) Secondary organic aerosol formation and transport. 
Atmos Environ 13, 2269–2282. 
627
 H Takekawa, H Minoura, S Yamazaki (2003) Temperature dependence of secondary organic aerosol formation 
by photo-oxidation of hydrocarbons. Atmos Environ 37: 3413–3424. 
628
 M J. Kleeman, Q Ying, Jin Lu, M J. Mysliwiec, R J. Griffin, Jianjun Chen, Simon Clegg (2007) Source 
apportionment of secondary organic aerosol during a severe photochemical smog episode. Atmos Environ 41: 576–
591. 
629
 Robinson, A. L.; Donahue, N. M.; Shrivastava, M.; Weitkamp, E. A.; Sage, A. M.; 
Grieshop, A. P.; Lane, T. E.; Pierce, J. R.; Pandis, S. N. (2007) Rethinking organic aerosol: 
Semivolatile emissions and photochemical aging. Science 315: 1259-1262. 
630
 U. S. EPA (2002) National Air Quality and Emissions Trends Report, 2001. EPA 454/K-02-001, September 
2002. http://www.epa.gov/air/airtrends/aqtrnd01/summary.pdf 
631
 U. S. EPA (2006) National-Scale Air Toxics Assessment for 1999. http://www.epa.gov/ttn/atw/nata1999   
632
 U. S. EPA (2007) Regulatory Impact Analysis for the Control of Hazardous Air Pollutants from Mobile Sources 
Rule, Chapter 3, Air Quality and Resulting Health and Welfare Effects of Air Pollution from Mobile Sources. 72 FR 
8428, February 26, 2007. http://www.epa.gov/otaq/regs/toxics/420r07002.pdf 
633
 TE Kleindienst (2008) Hypothetical SOA Production from Ethanol Photooxidation.  Memo to the Docket EPA-
HQ-OAR-2005-0161. 
634
 BJ Turpin, JJ Huntzicker, SM Larson, GR Cass (1991) Los Angeles Summer Midday Particulate Carbon: 
Primary and Secondary Aerosol. Environ Sci Technol 25: 1788-1793. 
635
 BJ Turpin, JJ Huntzicker (1995) Identification of Secondary Organic Aerosol Episodes and Quantitation of 
Primary and Secondary Organic Aerosol Concentrations During SCAQS. 
Atmos Environ 29(23): 3527-3544. 
636
 Bae M-S, Schauer JJ, Turner JR (2006) Estimation of the Monthly Average Ratios of Organic Mass to Organic 
Carbon for Fine Particulate Matter at an Urban Site, Aerosol Sci Technol 40(12): 1123-1139. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/02786820601004085. 
637
 Kleindienst TE, M Jaoui, M Lewandowski, JH Offenberg, EO Edney (2007) Estimates of the contributions of 
biogenic and anthropogenic hydrocarbons to secondary organic aerosol at a southeastern U.S. location. Atmos 
Environ 41(37):8288-8300. 
745  
                                                                                                                                                             
638
 Offenberg JH, CW Lewis, M Lewandowski, M Jaoui, TE Kleindienst, EO Edney (2007) Contributions of 
Toluene and -pinene to SOA Formed in an Irradiated Toluene/-pinene,NOx/Air Mixture: Comparison of Results 
Using 14C Content and SOA Organic Tracer Methods, Environ Sci Technol 41: 3972-3976. 
639
 Claeys M, R Szmigielski, I Kourtchev, P Van der Veken, R Vermeylen, W Maenhaut, M Jaoui, TE Kleindienst, 
M Lewandowski, JH Offenberg, EO Edney (2007) Hydroxydicarboxylic acids: Markers for secondary organic 
aerosol from the photooxidation of -pinene. Environ Sci Technol 41(5): 1628-1634. 
640
 Edney EO, TE Kleindienst, M Jaoui, M Lewandowski, JH Offenberg, W Wang, M Claeys (2005) Formation of 
2-methyl tetrols and 2-methylglyceric acid in secondary organic aerosol from laboratory irradiated 
isoprene/NOX/SO2/air mixtures and their detection in ambient PM2.5 samples collected in the Eastern United States. 
Atmos Environ 39: 5281-5289. 
641
 Jaoui M, TE Kleindienst, M Lewandowski, JH Offenberg, EO Edney (2005) Identification and quantification of 
aerosol polar oxygenated compounds bearing carboxylic or hydroxyl groups. 2. Organic tracer compounds from 
monoterpenes. Environ Sci Technol 39: 5661-5673. 
642
 Kleindienst TE, TS Conver, CD McIver, EO Edney (2004) Determination of secondary organic aerosol products 
from the photooxidation of toluene and their implications in ambient PM2.5. J Atmos  Chem 47: 70-100. 
643
 Kleindienst TE, TS Conver, CD McIver, EO Edney (2004) Determination of secondary organic aerosol products 
from the photooxidation of toluene and their implication in ambient PM2.5,  J Atmos Chem 47: 70-100. 
644
 Izumi L, T Fukuyama (1990) Photochemical aerosol formation from aromatic hydrocarbons in the presence of 
NOx, Atmos Environ 24A: 1433. 
645
 Martin-Reviego M, K Wirtz (2005) Is benzene a precursor for secondary organic aerosol? Environ Sci Technol 
39: 1045-1054. 
646
 Lewandowski M, M Jaoui , JH Offenberg , TE Kleindienst, EO Edney, RJ Sheesley, JJ Schauer (2008)  Primary 
and secondary contributions to ambient PM in the midwestern United States, Environ Sci Technol 42(9):3303-3309.  
http://pubs.acs.org/cgi-bin/article.cgi/esthag/2008/42/i09/html/es0720412.html. 
647
 Kleindienst TE, M Jaoui, M Lewandowski, JH Offenberg, EO Edney (2007) Estimates of the contributions of 
biogenic and anthropogenic hydrocarbons to secondary organic aerosol at a southeastern U.S. location. Atmos 
Environ 41(37):8288-8300. 
648
 Henze DK, JH Seinfeld (2006) Global secondary organic aerosol from isoprene oxidation. Geophys Res Lett 33: 
L09812. doi:10.1029/2006GL025976. 
649
 Jaoui M, M Lewandowski, TE Kleindienst, JH Offenberg, EO Edney (2007) β -Caryophyllinic acid: An 
atmospheric tracer for β-caryophyllene secondary organic aerosol. Geophys Res Lett 34: L05816. 
doi:10.1029/2006GL028827. 
650
 Griffin RJ, DR Cocker III, RC Flagan, JH Seinfeld (1999) Organic aerosol formation from oxidation of biogenic 
hydrocarbons, J Geophys Res 104: 3555-3567. 
651
 Ng NL, JH Kroll, AWH Chan, PS Chabra, RC Flagan, JH Seinfeld (2007) Secondary organic aerosol formation 
from m-xylene, toluene, and benzene. Atmos Chem Phys 7: 3909-3922. 
652 U.S. EPA (2004) Air Quality Criteria for Particulate Matter (Oct 2004), Volume I Document No. EPA600/P-99/002aF and Volume II Document No. EPA600/P-99/002bF.
  
This document is available in Docket EPA-HQ-OAR-2005-0161. 
653
 
U.S. EPA (2005) Review of the National Ambient Air Quality Standard for Particulate Matter: Policy Assessment of Scientific and Technical Information, OAQPS Staff 
Paper.  EPA-452/R-05-005.
  This document is available in Docket EPA-HQ-OAR-2005-0161. 
654 U.S. EPA 2006. Provisional Assessment of Recent Studies on Health Effects of Particulate Matter Exposure.  EPA/600/R-06/063.
  This document is available 
in Docket EPA-HQ-OAR-2005-0161. 
655 Laden F; Neas LM; Dockery DW; et al. 2000. “Association of fine particulate matter from different sources with daily mortality in six U.S. cities.”  Environ Health 
Perspectives 108(10):941-947. 
656 Schwartz J; Laden F; Zanobetti A.  2002.  “The concentration-response relation between PM(2.5) and daily deaths.” Environ Health Perspect 110(10): 1025-1029. 
657 Janssen NA; Schwartz J; Zanobetti A.; et al.  2002. “Air conditioning and source-specific particles as modifiers of the effect of PM10 on hospital admissions for heart and lung 
disease.”  Environ Health Perspect 110(1):43-49. 
658 Dockery, DW; Pope, CA, III; Xu, X; et al. 1993. “An association between air pollution and mortality in six U.S. cities.” N Engl J Med 329:1753-1759. 
659 Pope, CA, III; Burnett, RT; Thun, MJ; Calle, EE; et al. 2002. “Lung cancer, cardiopulmonary mortality, and long-term exposure to fine particulate air pollution.”  J Am Med 
Assoc 287: 1132-1141. 
660 Krewski, D; Burnett, RT; Goldberg, M S; et al. 2000. “Reanalysis of the Harvard Six Cities study and the American Cancer Society study of particulate air pollution and 
mortality. A special report of the Institute's Particle Epidemiology Reanalysis Project.”  Cambridge, MA: Health Effects Institute. 
661 Jerrett, M; Burnett, RT; Ma, R; et al. 2005. “Spatial Analysis of Air Pollution and Mortality in Los Angeles.” Epidemiology. 16(6):727-736. 
662 Künzli, N.; Jerrett, M.; Mack, W.J.; et al.(2004) Ambient air pollution and atherosclerosis in Los Angeles.  Environ Health Perspect doi:10.1289/ehp.7523 [Available at 
http://dx.doi.org/]. 
746  
                                                                                                                                                             
663
 Riediker, M.; Cascio, W.E.; Griggs, T.R.; et al. 2004. "Particulate matter exposure in cars is associated with 
cardiovascular effects in healthy young men."  Am J Respir Crit Care Med 169: 934-940. 
664
 Maynard, D.; Coull, B.A.; Gryparis, A.; Schwartz, J. (2007) Mortality risk associated with short-term exposure to 
traffic particles and sulfates.  Environmental Health Perspectives 115:  751-755. 
665
 Ryan, P.H.; LeMasters, G.K.; Biswas, P.; Levin, L.; Hu, S.; Lindsey, M.; Bernstein, D.I.; Lockey, J.; Villareal, 
M.; Khurana Hershey, G.K.; Grinshpun, S.A. (2007) A comparison of proximity and land use regression traffic 
exposure models and wheezing in infants.  Environ Health Perspect 115:  278-84. 
666
 Morgenstern, V.; Zutavern, A.; Cyrys, J.; Brockow, I.; Gehring, U.; Koletzko, S.; Bauer, C.P.; Reinhart, D; 
Wichmann, H-E.; Heinrich, J. (2007) Respiratory health and individual estimated expousure to traffic-related air 
pollutant in a cohort of young children.  Occupational and Environmental Medicine 64:  8-16. 
667
 Franco Suglia, S.; Gryparis, A.; Wright, R.O.; Schwartz, J.; Wright, R.J. (2007) Association of black carbon with 
cognition among children in a prospective birth cohort study.  American Journal of Epidemiology 167:  280-286. 
668 U.S. EPA. Air Quality Criteria for Ozone and Related Photochemical Oxidants (Final). U.S. EPA, Washington, DC, EPA/600/R-05/004aF-cF, 2006.
  This document 
is contained in Docket EPA-HQ-OAR-2005-0161. 
669 U.S. EPA, Review of the National Ambient Air Quality Standards for Ozone:  Policy Assessment of Scientific and Technical Information, OAQPS Staff Paper, Washington, 
DC, EPA-452/R-07-003, January 2007. 
 This document is available in Docket EPA-HQ-OAR-2005-0161. 
670
 National Research Council (NRC), 2008.  Estimating Mortality Risk Reduction and Economic Benefits from 
Controlling Ozone Air Pollution.  The National Academies Press: Washington, D.C. 
671
 
Bates, D.V.; Baker-Anderson, M.; Sizto, R. (1990)  Asthma attack periodicity: a study of hospital emergency visits in Vancouver.  Environ. Res. 51: 51-70. 
672
 
Thurston, G.D.; Ito, K.; Kinney, P.L.; Lippmann, M. (1992)  A multi-year study of air pollution and respiratory hospital admissions in three New York State metropolitan 
areas:  results for 1988 and 1989 summers.  J. Exposure Anal. Environ. Epidemiol. 2:429-450. 
673
 
Thurston, G.D.; Ito, K.; Hayes, C.G.; Bates, D.V.; Lippmann, M. (1994) Respiratory hospital admissions and summertime haze air pollution in Toronto, Ontario: 
consideration of the role of acid aerosols. Environ. Res. 65: 271-290. 
674 Lipfert, F.W.; Hammerstrom, T. (1992) Temporal patterns in air pollution and hospital admissions. Environ. Res. 59: 374-399. 
675
 
Burnett, R.T.; Dales, R.E.; Raizenne, M.E.; Krewski, D.; Summers, P.W.; Roberts, G.R.; Raad-Young, M.; Dann,T.; Brook, J. (1994) Effects of low ambient levels of ozone 
and sulfates on the frequency of respiratory admissions to Ontario hospitals. Environ. Res. 65: 172-194. 
676
 
U.S. EPA. Air Quality Criteria for Ozone and Related Photochemical Oxidants (Final). U.S. EPA, Washington, DC, EPA/600/R-05/004aF-cF, 2006.
  This document 
is contained in Docket EPA-HQ-OAR-2005-0161. 
677 U.S. EPA. Air Quality Criteria for Ozone and Related Photochemical Oxidants (Final). U.S. EPA, Washington, DC, EPA/600/R-05/004aF-cF, 2006.
  This document 
is contained in Docket EPA-HQ-OAR-2005-0161. 
678
 
Devlin, R. B.; McDonnell, W. F.; Mann, R.; Becker, S.; House, D. E.; Schreinemachers, D.; Koren, H. S. (1991) Exposure of humans to ambient levels of ozone for 6.6 hours 
causes cellullar and biochemical changes in the lung. Am. J. Respir. Cell Mol. Biol. 4: 72-81. 
679
 
Koren, H. S.; Devlin, R. B.; Becker, S.; Perez, R.; McDonnell, W. F. (1991) Time-dependent changes of markers associated with inflammation in the lungs of humans 
exposed to ambient levels of ozone. Toxicol. Pathol. 19: 406-411. 
680
 
Koren, H. S.; Devlin, R. B.; Graham, D. E.; Mann, R.; McGee, M. P.; Horstman, D. H.; Kozumbo, W. J.; Becker, S.; House, D. E.; McDonnell, W. F.; Bromberg, P. A. 
(1989a) Ozone-induced inflammation in the lower airways of human subjects. Am. Rev. Respir. Dis. 139: 407-415. 
681
 
Schelegle, E.S.; Siefkin, A.D.; McDonald, R.J. (1991)  Time course of ozone-induced neutrophilia in normal humans.  Am. Rev. Respir. Dis. 143:1353-1358. 
682
 
U.S. EPA (1996).  Air Quality Criteria for Ozone and Related Photochemical Oxidants, EPA600-P-93-004aF; (See page 7-171).
  This document is contained 
in Docket EPA-HQ-OAR-2005-0161. 
683
 
Hodgkin, J.E.; Abbey, D.E.; Euler, G.L.; Magie, A.R. (1984) COPD prevalence in nonsmokers in high and low photochemical air pollution areas. Chest 86: 830-838. 
684
 
Euler, G.L.; Abbey, D.E.; Hodgkin, J.E.; Magie, A.R. (1988)  Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease symptom effects of long-term cumulative exposure to ambient levels of 
total oxidants and nitrogen dioxide in California Seventh-day Adventist residents.  Arch. Environ. Health 43: 279-285. 
685
 
Abbey, D.E.; Petersen, F.; Mills, P.K.; Beeson, W.L. (1993)  Long-term ambient concentrations of total suspended particulates, ozone, and sulfur dioxide and respiratory 
symptoms in a nonsmoking population.  Arch. Environ. Health 48: 33-46. 
686 U.S. EPA, Review of the National Ambient Air Quality Standards for Ozone:  Policy Assessment of Scientific and Technical Information, OAQPS Staff Paper, Washington, 
DC, EPA-452/R-07-003, January 2007.
  This document is available in Docket EPA-HQ-OAR-2005-0161.  
687 U.S. EPA. Air Quality Criteria for Ozone and Related Photochemical Oxidants (Final). U.S. EPA, Washington, DC, EPA/600/R-05/004aF-cF, 2006.
  This document 
is contained in Docket EPA-HQ-OAR-2005-0161. 
688 U.S. EPA. Air Quality Criteria for Ozone and Related Photochemical Oxidants (Final). U.S. EPA, Washington, DC, EPA/600/R-05/004aF-cF, 2006.
  This document 
is contained in Docket EPA-HQ-OAR-2005-0161. 
689 Avol, E. L.; Trim, S. C.; Little, D. E.; Spier, C. E.; Smith, M. N.; Peng, R.-C.; Linn, W. S.; Hackney, J. D.; Gross, K. B.; D'Arcy, J. B.; Gibbons, D.; Higgins, I. T. T. (1990) 
Ozone exposure and lung function in children attending a southern California summer camp. Presented at: 83rd annual meeting and exhibition of the Air & Waste Management 
Association; June; Pittsburgh, PA. Pittsburgh, PA: Air & Waste Management Association; paper no. 90-150.3. 
690 Higgins, I. T. T.; D'Arcy, J. B.; Gibbons, D. I.; Avol, E. L.; Gross, K. B. (1990) Effect of exposures to ambient ozone on ventilatory lung function in children. Am. Rev. 
Respir. Dis. 141: 1136-1146. 
747  
                                                                                                                                                             
691 Raizenne, M. E.; Burnett, R. T.; Stern, B.; Franklin, C. A.; Spengler, J. D. (1989) Acute lung function responses to ambient acid aerosol exposures in children. Environ. Health 
Perspect. 79: 179-185. 
692 Raizenne, M.; Stern, B.; Burnett, R.; Spengler, J. (1987) Acute respiratory function and transported air pollutants: observational studies. Presented at: 80th annual meeting of 
the Air Pollution Control Association; June; New York, NY. Pittsburgh, PA: Air Pollution Control Association; paper no. 87-32.6. 
693 Spektor, D. M.; Lippmann, M. (1991) Health effects of ambient ozone on healthy children at a summer camp.  In: Berglund, R. L.; Lawson, D. R.; McKee, D. J., eds. 
Tropospheric ozone and the environment: papers from an international conference; March 1990; Los Angeles, CA. Pittsburgh, PA: Air & Waste Management Association; pp. 83-
89.  (A&WMA transaction series no. TR-19). 
694 Spektor, D. M.; Thurston, G. D.; Mao, J.; He, D.; Hayes, C.; Lippmann, M. (1991) Effects of single- and multiday ozone exposures on respiratory function in active normal 
children. Environ. Res. 55: 107-122. 
695
 
Spektor, D. M.; Lippman, M.; Lioy, P. J.; Thurston, G. D.; Citak, K.; James, D. J.; Bock, N.; Speizer, F. E.; Hayes, C. (1988a) Effects of ambient ozone on respiratory 
function in active, normal children. Am. Rev. Respir. Dis. 137: 313-320. 
696 U.S. EPA. Air Quality Criteria for Ozone and Related Photochemical Oxidants (Final). U.S. EPA, Washington, DC, EPA/600/R-05/004aF-cF, 2006.
  This document 
is contained in Docket EPA-HQ-OAR-2005-0161. 
697
 
Hazucha, M. J.; Folinsbee, L. J.; Seal, E., Jr. (1992) Effects of steady-state and variable ozone concentration profiles on pulmonary function. Am. Rev. Respir. Dis. 146: 1487-
1493. 
698
 
Horstman, D.H.; Ball, B.A.; Folinsbee, L.J.; Brown, J.; Gerrity, T. (1995) Comparison of pulmonary responses of asthmatic and nonasthmatic subjects performing light 
exercise while exposed to a low level of ozone.  Toxicol. Ind. Health. 
699
 
Horstman, D.H.; Folinsbee, L.J.; Ives, P.J.; Abdul-Salaam, S.; McDonnell, W.F. (1990) Ozone concentration and pulmonary response relationships for 6.6-hour exposures 
with five hours of moderate exercise to 0.08, 0.10, and 0.12 ppm. Am. Rev. Respir. Dis. 142: 1158-1163. 
700
 U.S. EPA (2000). Air Quality Criteria for Carbon Monoxide. EPA600-P-99-001F. June 1, 2000. U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Research and Development, National Center for Environmental 
Assessment, Washington, D.C.  This document is available online at  http://www.epa.gov/ncea/pdfs/coaqcd.pdf.  A 
copy of this document is available in Docket EPA-HQ-OAR-2005-0161. 
701
 U.S. EPA (2000). Air Quality Criteria for Carbon Monoxide. EPA600-P-99-001F. June 1, 2000. U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Research and Development, National Center for Environmental 
Assessment, Washington, D.C.  This document is available online at  http://www.epa.gov/ncea/pdfs/coaqcd.pdf.  A 
copy of this document is available in Docket EPA-HQ-OAR-2005-0161. 
702
 Coburn, R.F. (1979) Mechanisms of carbon monoxide toxicity.  Prev. Med. 8:310-322. 
703
 Helfaer, M.A., and Traystman, R.J.  (1996) Cerebrovascular effects of carbon monoxide.  In:  Carbon Monoxide 
(Penney, D.G., ed).  Boca Raton, CRC Press, 69-86. 
704
 Benignus, V.A.  (1994) Behavioral effects of carbon monoxide: meta analyses and extrapolations.  J. Appl. 
Physiol.  76:1310-1316. 
705
 U.S. EPA (2000). Air Quality Criteria for Carbon Monoxide. EPA600-P-99-001F. June 1, 2000. U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Research and Development, National Center for Environmental 
Assessment, Washington, D.C.  This document is available online at  http://www.epa.gov/ncea/pdfs/coaqcd.pdf.  A 
copy of this document is available in Docket EPA-HQ-OAR-2005-0161. 
706
 U.S. EPA (2000). Air Quality Criteria for Carbon Monoxide. EPA600-P-99-001F. June 1, 2000. U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Research and Development, National Center for Environmental 
Assessment, Washington, D.C.  This document is available online at  http://www.epa.gov/ncea/pdfs/coaqcd.pdf.  A 
copy of this document is available in Docket EPA-HQ-OAR-2005-0161. 
707
 U.S. EPA (2000). Air Quality Criteria for Carbon Monoxide. EPA600-P-99-001F. June 1, 2000. U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Research and Development, National Center for Environmental 
Assessment, Washington, D.C.  This document is available online at  http://www.epa.gov/ncea/pdfs/coaqcd.pdf.  A 
copy of this document is available in Docket EPA-HQ-OAR-2005-0161. 
708
 U.S. EPA (2000). Air Quality Criteria for Carbon Monoxide. EPA600-P-99-001F. June 1, 2000. U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Research and Development, National Center for Environmental 
Assessment, Washington, D.C.  This document is available online at  http://www.epa.gov/ncea/pdfs/coaqcd.pdf.  A 
copy of this document is available in Docket EPA-HQ-OAR-2005-0161. 
709 National Research Council, 1993.  Protecting Visibility in National Parks and Wilderness Areas.  National Academy of Sciences Committee on Haze in National Parks and 
Wilderness Areas.  National Academy Press, Washington, DC.  This book is available electronically at http://www.nap.edu/books/0309048443/html/ and is available in Docket 
EPA-HQ-OAR-2005-0161. 
710 U.S. EPA , National Ambient Air Quality Standards for Particulate Matter; Proposed Rule; January 17, 2006, Vol71  p 2676.  This document is available in 
Docket EPA-HQ-OAR-2005-0161.  This information is available electronically at: http://epa.gov/fedrgstr/EPA-AIR/2006/January/Day-17/a177.pdf  
711
 PM AQCD 
712
 PM staff paper 
748  
                                                                                                                                                             
713
 final Integrated Review Plan for secondary NoxSox review 
714
 Environmental Protection Agency (2003). Response Of Surface Water Chemistry to the Clean Air Act 
Amendments of 1990. National Health and Environmental Effects Research Laboratory, Office of Research and 
Development, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Research Triangle Park, NC. EPA 620/R–03/001. 
715
 Fenn, M.E. and Blubaugh, T.J. (2005) Winter Deposition of Nitrogen and Sulfur in the Eastern Columbia River 
Gorge National Scenic Area, USDA Forest Service. 
716
 Galloway, J. N.; Cowling, E. B. (2002). Reactive nitrogen and the world: 200 years of change. Ambio 31: 64–71. 
717 Bricker, Suzanne B., et al., National Estuarine Eutrophication Assessment, Effects of Nutrient Enrichment in the Nation’s Estuaries, National Ocean Service, National Oceanic 
and Atmospheric Administration, September, 1999. 
718 Winner, W.E., and C.J. Atkinson. 1986. “Absorption of air pollution by plants, and consequences for growth.” Trends in Ecology and Evolution 1:15-18.  
719 U.S. EPA. Air Quality Criteria for Ozone and Related Photochemical Oxidants (Final). U.S. EPA, Washington, DC, EPA/600/R-05/004aF-cF, 2006.
  This document 
is contained in Docket EPA-HQ-OAR-2005-0161. 
720 Tingey, D.T., and Taylor, G.E. 1982. “Variation in plant response to ozone: a conceptual model of physiological events.”  In: Effects of Gaseous Air Pollution in Agriculture 
and Horticulture (Unsworth, M.H., Omrod, D.P., eds.) London, UK: Butterworth Scientific, pp.113-138. 
721 U.S. EPA. Air Quality Criteria for Ozone and Related Photochemical Oxidants (Final). U.S. EPA, Washington, DC, EPA/600/R-05/004aF-cF, 2006.
  This document 
is contained in Docket EPA-HQ-OAR-2005-0161. 
722 U.S. EPA. Air Quality Criteria for Ozone and Related Photochemical Oxidants (Final). U.S. EPA, Washington, DC, EPA/600/R-05/004aF-cF, 2006. This document 
is contained in Docket EPA-HQ-OAR-2005-0161. 
723 U.S. EPA. Air Quality Criteria for Ozone and Related Photochemical Oxidants (Final). U.S. EPA, Washington, DC, EPA/600/R-05/004aF-cF, 2006.  This document 
is contained in Docket EPA-HQ-OAR-2005-0161. 
724 U.S. EPA. Air Quality Criteria for Ozone and Related Photochemical Oxidants (Final). U.S. EPA, Washington, DC, EPA/600/R-05/004aF-cF, 2006. This document 
is contained in Docket EPA-HQ-OAR-2005-0161. 
725 Ollinger, S.V., J.D. Aber and P.B. Reich. 1997. “Simulating ozone effects on forest productivity: interactions between leaf canopy and stand level processes.” Ecological 
Applications 7:1237-1251.  
726 Winner, W.E., 1994.  “Mechanistic analysis of plant responses to air pollution.” Ecological Applications, 4(4):651-661. 
727 U.S. EPA. Air Quality Criteria for Ozone and Related Photochemical Oxidants (Final). U.S. EPA, Washington, DC, EPA/600/R-05/004aF-cF, 2006.  This document 
is contained in Docket EPA-HQ-OAR-2005-0161. 
728 U.S. EPA. Air Quality Criteria for Ozone and Related Photochemical Oxidants (Final). U.S. EPA, Washington, DC, EPA/600/R-05/004aF-cF, 2006.  This document 
is contained in Docket EPA-HQ-OAR-2005-0161. 
729 Fox, S., and R. A. Mickler, eds. 1996.  Impact of Air Pollutants on Southern Pine Forests. Springer-Verlag, NY, Ecol. Studies, Vol. 118, 513 pp. 
730
 
De Steiguer, J., J. Pye, C. Love. 1990. “Air Pollution Damage to U.S. Forests.” Journal of Forestry, Vol 88
 
(8) pp. 17-22.
 
731 Pye, J.M. 1988. “Impact of ozone on the growth and yield of trees: A review.” Journal of Environmental Quality 17 pp.347-360. 
732 U.S. EPA. Air Quality Criteria for Ozone and Related Photochemical Oxidants (Final). U.S. EPA, Washington, DC, EPA/600/R-05/004aF-cF, 2006.  This document 
is contained in Docket EPA-HQ-OAR-2005-0161. 
733 U.S. EPA. Air Quality Criteria for Ozone and Related Photochemical Oxidants (Final). U.S. EPA, Washington, DC, EPA/600/R-05/004aF-cF, 2006.  This document 
is contained in Docket EPA-HQ-OAR-2005-0161. 
734 McBride, J.R., P.R. Miller, and R.D. Laven. 1985. “Effects of oxidant air pollutants on forest succession in the mixed conifer forest type of southern California.”  In:  Air 
Pollutants Effects On Forest Ecosystems, Symposium Proceedings, St. P, 1985,  p. 157-167. 
735 Miller, P.R., O.C. Taylor, R.G. Wilhour. 1982. Oxidant air pollution effects on a western coniferous forest ecosystem. Corvallis, OR: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 
Environmental Research Laboratory (EPA600-D-82-276). 
736
 
U.S. EPA. Air Quality Criteria for Ozone and Related Photochemical Oxidants (Final). U.S. EPA, Washington, DC, EPA/600/R-05/004aF-cF, 2006.  This document 
is contained in Docket EPA-HQ-OAR-2005-0161. 
737 Kopp, R. J.; Vaughn, W. J.; Hazilla, M.; Carson, R. 1985.  “Implications of environmental policy for U.S. agriculture: the case of ambient ozone standards.”  J. Environ. 
Manage.  20:321-331. 
738 Adams, R. M.; Hamilton, S. A.; McCarl, B. A.  1986.  “The benefits of pollution control: the case of ozone and U.S. agriculture.”  Am. J.  Agric. Econ.  34: 3-19. 
739 Adams, R. M.; Glyer, J. D.; Johnson, S. L.; McCarl, B. A.  1989.  “A reassessment of the economic effects of ozone on U.S. agriculture.”  JAPCA  39:960-968. 
740 Abt Associates, Inc.  1995.  Urban ornamental plants: sensitivity to ozone and potential economic losses.  U.S. EPA, Office of Air Quality Planning and Standards, Research 
Triangle Park.  Under contract to RADIAN Corporation, contract no. 68-D3-0033, WA no. 6.  pp. 9-10. 
741
 U.S. EPA (2007) Control of Hazardous Air Pollutants from Mobile Sources. 72 FR 8428; February 26, 2007. 
742
 U.S. EPA (2003) Integrated Risk Information System File of Acrolein.  National Center for Environmental 
Assessment, Office of Research and Development, Washington, D.C. 2003.  This material is available electronically 
at http://www.epa.gov/iris/subst/0364.htm. 
743
 U.S. EPA  (2006) National-Scale Air Toxics Assessment for 1999.  This material is available electronically at 
http://www.epa.gov/ttn/atw/nata1999/risksum.html. 
744
 U.S. EPA (2006) National-Scale Air Toxics Assessment for 1999.  http://www.epa.gov/ttn/atw/nata1999. 
749  
                                                                                                                                                             
745 U.S. EPA
.
 2000. Integrated Risk Information System File for Benzene.  This material is available electronically at: http://www.epa.gov/iris/subst/0276.htm. 
746 International Agency for Research on Cancer, IARC monographs on the evaluation of carcinogenic risk of chemicals to humans, Volume 29, Some industrial chemicals and 
dyestuffs, International Agency for Research on Cancer, World Health Organization, Lyon, France, p. 345-389, 1982.  
747 Irons, R.D.; Stillman, W.S.; Colagiovanni, D.B.; Henry, V.A. (1992) Synergistic action of the benzene metabolite hydroquinone on myelopoietic stimulating activity of 
granulocyte/macrophage colony-stimulating factor in vitro, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 89:3691-3695. 
748
 
International Agency for Research on Cancer
 (IARC).  1987. Monographs on the evaluation of carcinogenic risk of chemicals to humans, Volume 29, Supplement 
7, Some industrial chemicals and dyestuffs, World Health Organization, Lyon, France. 
749
 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Toxicology Program 11th Report on Carcinogens 
available at: http://ntp.niehs.nih.gov/go/16183. 
750 Aksoy, M.  (1989).  Hematotoxicity and carcinogenicity of benzene.  Environ. Health Perspect.  82: 193-197. 
751 Goldstein, B.D.  (1988).  Benzene toxicity.  Occupational medicine.  State of the Art Reviews.  3: 541-554.  
752 Rothman, N., G.L. Li, M. Dosemeci, W.E. Bechtold, G.E. Marti, Y.Z. Wang, M. Linet, L.Q. Xi, W. Lu, M.T. Smith, N. Titenko-Holland, L.P. Zhang, W. Blot, S.N. Yin, and 
R.B. Hayes (1996) Hematotoxicity among Chinese workers heavily exposed to benzene. Am. J. Ind. Med. 29: 236-246. 
753 U.S. EPA 2002 Toxicological Review of Benzene (Noncancer Effects).  Environmental Protection Agency, 
Integrated Risk Information System (IRIS), Research and Development, National Center for Environmental 
Assessment, Washington DC. This material is available electronically at http://www.epa.gov/iris/subst/0276.htm. 
754 Qu, O.; Shore, R.; Li, G.; Jin, X.; Chen, C.L.; Cohen, B.; Melikian, A.; Eastmond, D.; Rappaport, S.; Li, H.; Rupa, D.; Suramaya, R.;  Songnian, W.;  Huifant,  Y.;  Meng, M.;  
Winnik, M.; Kwok, E.; Li, Y.; Mu, R.; Xu, B.; Zhang, X.; Li, K. (2003).  HEI Report 115, Validation & Evaluation of Biomarkers in Workers Exposed to Benzene in China.   
755 Qu, Q., R. Shore, G. Li, X. Jin, L.C. Chen, B. Cohen, et al. (2002).  Hematological changes among Chinese workers with a broad range of benzene exposures.  Am. J. Industr. 
Med. 42: 275-285. 
756 Lan, Qing, Zhang, L., Li, G., Vermeulen, R., et al. (2004).  Hematotoxically in Workers Exposed to Low Levels of Benzene.  Science 306: 1774-1776. 
757 Turtletaub, K.W. and Mani, C.  (2003). Benzene metabolism in rodents at doses relevant to human exposure from Urban Air.  Research Reports Health Effect Inst. Report 
No.113. 
758 U.S. EPA. 2002.  Health Assessment of 1,3-Butadiene. Office of Research and Development, National Center for Environmental Assessment, Washington Office, 
Washington, DC.  Report No. EPA600-P-98-001F.
 This document is available electronically at http://www.epa.gov/iris/supdocs/buta-
sup.pdf. 
759 U.S. EPA. 2002 “Full IRIS Summary for 1,3-butadiene (CASRN 106-99-0)” Environmental Protection Agency, 
Integrated Risk Information System (IRIS), Research and Development, National Center for Environmental 
Assessment, Washington, DC http://www.epa.gov/iris/subst/0139.htm. 
760
 
International Agency for Research on Cancer
 (IARC) (1999) Monographs on the evaluation of carcinogenic risk of chemicals to humans, Volume 71, Re-
evaluation of some organic chemicals, hydrazine and hydrogen peroxide and Volume 97 (in preparation), World Health 
Organization, Lyon, France.
 
761
 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Toxicology Program 11th Report on Carcinogens 
available at: http://ntp.niehs.nih.gov/go/16183. 
762 Bevan, C.; Stadler, J.C.; Elliot, G.S.; et al. (1996) Subchronic toxicity of 4-vinylcyclohexene in rats and mice by inhalation. Fundam. Appl. Toxicol. 32:1-10.  
763 U.S. EPA
.
 1987.  Assessment of Health Risks to Garment Workers and Certain Home Residents from Exposure to Formaldehyde, Office of Pesticides and Toxic Substances, 
April 1987. 
764 Hauptmann, M..; Lubin, J. H.; Stewart, P. A.; Hayes, R. B.; Blair, A.  2003.  Mortality from lymphohematopoetic malignancies among workers in formaldehyde industries.  
Journal of the National Cancer Institute 95: 1615-1623. 
765 Hauptmann, M..; Lubin, J. H.; Stewart, P. A.; Hayes, R. B.; Blair, A.  2004.  Mortality from solid cancers among workers in formaldehyde industries.  American Journal of 
Epidemiology 159: 1117-1130. 
766 Pinkerton, L. E.  2004.  Mortality among a cohort of garment workers exposed to formaldehyde: an update.  Occup. Environ. Med. 61: 193-200. 
767
 Coggon, D, EC Harris, J Poole, KT Palmer. 2003. Extended follow-up of a cohort of British chemical workers 
exposed to formaldehyde. J National Cancer Inst. 95:1608-1615. 
768 Conolly, RB, JS Kimbell, D Janszen, PM Schlosser, D Kalisak, J Preston, and FJ Miller. 2003.  Biologically motivated computational modeling of formaldehyde 
carcinogenicity in the F344 rat.  Tox Sci 75: 432-447. 
769 Conolly, RB, JS Kimbell, D Janszen, PM Schlosser, D Kalisak, J Preston, and FJ Miller. 2004. Human respiratory tract cancer risks of inhaled formaldehyde: Dose-response 
predictions derived from biologically-motivated computational modeling of a combined rodent and human dataset.  Tox Sci 82: 279-296. 
770 Chemical Industry Institute of Toxicology (CIIT).1999. Formaldehyde: Hazard characterization and dose-response assessment for carcinogenicity by the route of inhalation.  
CIIT, September 28, 1999. Research Triangle Park, NC. 
771
 International Agency for Research on Cancer (2006) Formaldehyde, 2-Butoxyethanol and 1-tert-Butoxypropan-
2-ol.  Monographs Volume 88. World Health Organization, Lyon, France. 
772
 Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR). 1999. Toxicological profile for Formaldehyde. 
Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service. 
http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxprofiles/tp111.html 
750  
                                                                                                                                                             
773
 WHO (2002) Concise International Chemical Assessment Document 40: Formaldehyde.  Published under the 
joint sponsorship of the United Nations Environment Programme, the International Labour Organization, and the 
World Health Organization, and produced within the framework of the Inter-Organization Programme for the Sound 
Management of Chemicals.  Geneva. 
774 U.S. EPA (1988).  Integrated Risk Information System File of Acetaldehyde. Research and Development, National Center for 
Environmental Assessment, Washington, DC. This material is available electronically at http://www.epa.gov/iris/subst/0290.htm. 
775
 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Toxicology Program 11th Report on Carcinogens 
available at: http://ntp.niehs.nih.gov/go/16183. 
776
 International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC). 1999. Re-evaluation of some organic chemicals, 
hydrazine, and hydrogen peroxide.  IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risk of Chemical to 
Humans, Vol 71. Lyon, France. 
777
 U.S. EPA (1988).  Integrated Risk Information System File of Acetaldehyde.  This material is available 
electronically at http://www.epa.gov/iris/subst/0290.htm. 
778
 U.S. EPA. 2003. Integrated Risk Information System File of Acrolein.  Research and Development, National 
Center for Environmental Assessment, Washington, DC. This material is available electronically at 
http://www.epa.gov/iris/subst/0364.htm. 
779
 Appleman, L.M., R.A. Woutersen, and V.J. Feron. (1982). Inhalation toxicity of acetaldehyde in rats. I. Acute 
and subacute studies. Toxicology. 23: 293-297. 
780
 Myou, S.; Fujimura, M.; Nishi K.; Ohka, T.; and Matsuda, T.  (1993) Aerosolized acetaldehyde induces 
histamine-mediated bronchoconstriction in asthmatics.  Am. Rev. Respir.Dis.148(4 Pt 1): 940-943. 
781
 Integrated Risk Information System File of Acrolein.  Research and Development, National Center for 
Environmental Assessment, Washington, DC.  This material is available at http://www.epa.gov/iris/subst/0364.htm 
782
 
International Agency for Research on Cancer
 (IARC). 1995. Monographs on the evaluation of carcinogenic risk of chemicals to humans, Volume 63, Dry cleaning, 
some chlorinated solvents and other industrial chemicals, World Health Organization, Lyon, France. 
783
 Weber-Tschopp, A; Fischer, T; Gierer, R; et al. (1977) Experimentelle reizwirkungen von Acrolein auf den 
Menschen. Int Arch Occup Environ Hlth 40(2):117-130. In German 
784
 Sim, VM; Pattle, RE. (1957) Effect of possible smog irritants on human subjects. J Am Med Assoc 
165(15):1908-1913. 
785
 Morris JB, Symanowicz PT, Olsen JE, et al. 2003. Immediate sensory nerve-mediated respiratory responses to 
irritants in healthy and allergic airway-diseased mice. J Appl Physiol 94(4):1563-1571. 
786
 Sim VM, Pattle RE. Effect of possible smog irritants on human subjects JAMA165: 1980-2010, 1957. 
787 U. S. EPA.  2004.  Toxicological Review of Naphthalene (Reassessment of the Inhalation Cancer Risk), Environmental 
Protection Agency, Integrated Risk Information System, Research and Development, National Center for 
Environmental Assessment, Washington, DC.  This material is available electronically at 
http://www.epa.gov/iris/subst/0436.htm.  
788 Oak Ridge Institute for Science and Education.  (2004).  External Peer Review for the IRIS Reassessment of the Inhalation Carcinogenicity of Naphthalene.  August 2004.  
http://cfpub.epa.gov/ncea/cfm/recordisplay.cfm?deid=84403 
789
 National Toxicology Program (NTP). (2004). 11th Report on Carcinogens.  Public Health Service, U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services, Research Triangle Park, NC.  Available from: http://ntp-
server.niehs.nih.gov. 
790 International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC).  (2002).  Monographs on the Evaluation of the Carcinogenic Risk of Chemicals for Humans.  Vol. 82.  Lyon, France. 
791 U. S. EPA. 1998. Toxicological Review of Naphthalene, Environmental Protection Agency, Integrated Risk 
Information System, Research and Development, National Center for Environmental Assessment, Washington, DC.  
This material is available electronically at http://www.epa.gov/iris/subst/0436.htm 
792 International Agency for Research on Cancer
 (IARC). 1988. Monographs on the evaluation of carcinogenic risk of chemicals to humans, Volume 44, Alcohol 
Drinking, World Health Organization, Lyon, France. 
793 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2005. National Toxicology Program 11th Report on 
Carcinogens available at: ntp.niehs.nih.gov/index.cfm?objectid=32BA9724-F1F6-975E-7FCE50709CB4C932. 
794 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.  2000. 10th Special Report to the U.S. Congress on Alcohol and 
Health. June. 2000. 
795 Goodlett CR, KH Horn, F Zhou. 2005. Alcohol teratogeniesis: mechanisms of damage and strategies for 
intervention. Exp. Biol. Med. 230:394-406. 
796 Riley EP, CL McGee. 2005. Fetal alcohol spectrum disorders: an overview with emphasis on changes in brain 
and behavior. Exp. Biol. Med. 230:357-365. 
751  
                                                                                                                                                             
797 Zhang X, JH Sliwowska, J Weinberg. 2005. Prenatal alcohol exposure and fetal programming: effects on 
neuroendocrine and immune function. Exp. Biol. Med. 230:376-388. 
798 Riley EP, CL McGee, ER Sowell. 2004. Teratogenic effects of alcohol: a decade of brain imaging. Am. J. Med. 
Genet. Part C: Semin. Med. Genet. 127:35-41. 
799 Gunzerath L, V Faden, S Zakhari, K Warren. 2004. National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism report 
on moderate drinking. Alcohol. Clin. Exp. Res. 28:829-847. 
800 World Health Organization (WHO). 2004. Global status report on alcohol 2004. Geneva, Switzerland: 
Department of Mental Health and Substance Abuse. Available: 
http://www.who.int/substance_abuse/publications/global_status_report_2004_overview.pdf 
801 Chen W-JA, SE Maier, SE Parnell, FR West. 2003. Alcohol and the developing brain: neuroanatomical studies. 
Alcohol Res. Health 27:174-180. 
802 Driscoll CD, AP Streissguth, EP Riley. 1990. Prenatal alcohol exposure comparability of effects in humans and 
animal models. Neurotoxicol. Teratol. 12:231-238.  
803
 EPA.  2005.  Full IRIS Summary for n-Hexane (CASRN 11054-3).  Integrated Risk Information System (IRIS), 
Office of Research and Development, National Center for Environmental Assessment, Washington, DC.  Available 
at www.epa.gov/iris/subst/0486.htm. 
804 U.S. EPA. 2006. Air quality criteria for ozone and related photochemical oxidants (Ozone CD). Research 
Triangle Park, NC: National Cetner for Environmental Assesssment; report no. EPA/600/R-05/004aF-cF.3v. page 5-
78 Available at http://cfpub.epa.gov/ncea/.  
805 U.S. EPA Air Quality Criteria for Ozone and Related Photochemical Oxidants (Final). U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency, Washington, D.C., EPA 600/R-05/004aF-cF, 2006.  page 5-63.  This document is available in 
Docket EPA-HQ-OAR-2005-0161.  This document may be accessed electronically at: 
http://www.epa.gov/ttn/naaqs/standards/ozone/s_o3_cr_cd.html 
806 U.S. EPA Air Quality Criteria for Ozone and Related Photochemical Oxidants (Final). U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency, Washington, D.C., EPA 600/R-05/004aF-cF, 2006.  page 5-78. This document is available in 
Docket EPA-HQ-OAR-2005-0161.  This document may be accessed electronically at: 
http://www.epa.gov/ttn/naaqs/standards/ozone/s_o3_cr_cd.html 
807
 Inhalation health effect concerns for volatilized a.i. compounds are discussed for individual products, e.g., 
oxydimeton-methyl, carbaryl (and carbamates,generally), diazinon, at 
http://www.epa.gov/pesticides/reregistration/status.htm .  A.I. vapor pressure and a discussion of product 
volatilization can be found at http://www.epa.gov/ttn/chief/ap42/ch09/final/c9s02-2.pdf 
808
 U.S. EPA Integrated Risk Information System (IRIS) database is available at:  www.epa.gov/iris 
809 Nouchi I, S Toyama.  1998. Effects of ozone and peroxyacetyl nitrate on polar lipids and fatty acids in leaves of 
morning glory and kidney bean. Plant Physiol. 87:638-646. 
810 Oka E, Y Tagami, T Oohashi, N Kondo. 2004. A physiological and morphological study on the injury caused by 
exposure to the air pollutant, peroxyacetyl nitrate (PAN), based on the quantitative assessment of the injury. J Plant 
Res. 117:27-36. 
811 Sun E-J, M-H Huang. 1995. Detection of peroxyacetyl nitrate at phytotoxic level and its effects on vegetation in 
Taiwan. Atmos. Env. 29:2899-2904. 
812 Koukol J, WM Dugger, Jr., RL Palmer. 1967. Inhibitory effect of peroxyacetyl nitrate on cyclic 
photophosphorylation by chloroplasts from black valentine bean leaves. Plant Physiol. 42:1419-1422. 
813 Thompson CR, G Kats. 1975. Effects of ambient concentrations of peroxyacetyl nitrate on navel orange trees. 
Env. Sci. Technol. 9:35-38. 
814 Bytnerowicz A, ME Fenn. 1995. Nitrogen deposition in California forests: A Review. Environ. Pollut. 92:127-
146. 
815 US EPA. 1991. Effects of organic chemicals in the atmosphere on terrestrial plants. EPA/600/3-91/001. 
816 Cape JN, ID Leith, J Binnie, J Content, M Donkin, M Skewes, DN Price AR Brown, AD Sharpe.  2003. Effects of 
VOCs on herbaceous plants in an open-top chamber experiment. Environ. Pollut. 124:341-343. 
817 Cape JN, ID Leith, J Binnie, J Content, M Donkin, M Skewes, DN Price AR Brown, AD Sharpe.  2003. Effects of 
VOCs on herbaceous plants in an open-top chamber experiment. Environ. Pollut. 124:341-343. 
818 Viskari E-L. 2000. Epicuticular wax of Norway spruce needles as indicator of traffic pollutant deposition. Water, 
Air, and Soil Pollut. 121:327-337. 
819 Ugrekhelidze D, F Korte, G Kvesitadze. 1997. Uptake and transformation of benzene and toluene by plant leaves. 
Ecotox. Environ. Safety 37:24-29. 
752  
                                                                                                                                                             
820 Kammerbauer H, H Selinger, R Rommelt, A Ziegler-Jons, D Knoppik, B Hock. 1987. Toxic components of 
motor vehicle emissions for the spruce Pciea abies. Environ. Pollut. 48:235-243. 
821
 Kwaitkowski, J.R., McAloon, A., Taylor, F., Johnston, D.B., Industrial Crops and Products 
23 (2006) 288-296.  A copy of the current USDA model can be obtained by contacting the 
corresponding author. 
822
 Gallagher, P.W., Brubaker, H., and Shapouri, H. “Plant Size: Capital Cost Relationships in 
the Dry Mill Ethanol Industry,” Biomass and Bioenergy Vol. 28. 2005. Pp. 565-7. 
823
 See Section XXXX of this DRIA for biomass costs; coal costs taken from EIA Annual 
Energy Outlook 2008 Table 34.  
824
 Bioenergy Feedstock Characteristics from Jonathan Scurlock, Oak Ridge National 
Laboratories, available at http://bioenergy.ornl.gov/papers/misc/biochar_factsheet.html (accessed 
October 1, 2008) 
825
 EIA Annual Energy Outlook 2008, Tables 8 and 13.  Available at 
http://www.eia.doe.gov/oiaf/aeo/aeoref_tab.html 
826
 Corn Stover Collection Project, David A. Glassner, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, 
1617 Cole Blvd., Golden, CO 80401, James R. Hettenhaus, Chief Executive Assistance, 3211 
Trefoil Ave, Charlotte, NC 28226, and Thomas M. Schechinger, Iron Horse Custom Farming, 
816 Iron Horse Rd, Harlan, IA 51537; in BioEnergy ’98: Expanding BioEnergy Partnerships 
827
 Abhijith Mukunda, Graduate Student School of Industrial Engineering, Purdue University, 
West Lafayette IN 47907, Klein E Ileleji, Assistant Professor, School of Agricultural & 
Biological Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette IN 47907, Hong Wan, Assistant 
Professor, School of Industrial Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette IN47906, 
Simulation of Corn Stover Logistics from On-farm Storage to an Ethanol Plant, Paper Number: 
0661772006, ASABE Annual International Meeting, Portland Convention Center, Portland, 
Oregon, 9 - 12 July 2006   
828
 Shahab Sokhansanj, , Anthony Turhollow, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, North Logan, UT 
84341-8804,  Janet Cushman, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN 37831-6422, John 
Cundiff, Biological Systems Engineering, Virginia Technical University, Blacksburg, VA 
24061-0303, Engineering aspects of collecting corn stover for bioenergy, Biomass and 
Bioenergy 23 (2002) 347 – 355; Received 15 October 2001; received in revised form 15 April 
2002; accepted 3 May 2002; 2002 Published by Elsevier Science Ltd. 
829
 David A. Glassner, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, CO 80401, James R. 
Hettenhaus, Chief Executive Assistance, Charlotte, NC 28226, and Thomas M. Schechinger, 
Iron Horse Custom Farming, Harlan, IA 51537; Corn Stover Collection Project, in BioEnergy 
’98: Expanding BioEnergy Partnerships  
830
 J.E. Atchison, Atchison Consultants, Inc., J. R. Hettenhaus, Chief Executive Assistance, Inc. 
Charlotte, North Carolina, National Renewable Energy Laboratory Golden, Colorado, 
.Innovative Methods for Corn Stover Collecting, Handling, Storing and Transporting, March 
2003. 
831
 Daniel R. Petrolia, Department of Applied Economics, College of Food, Agriculture, and 
Natural Resources Sciences, University of Minnesota, The Economics of Harvesting and 
Transporting Corn Stover for Conversion to Fuel Ethanol: A Case Study for Minnesota,  
Staff Paper P06-12 August 2006 
832
 Renee Sayler & Kenneth Von Bargen, Principal Investigators, Feasibility of Corn Residue 
Collection in Kearney, Nebraska Area, for Western Regional Biomass Energy Program, Report 
753  
                                                                                                                                                             
of findings, by University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Industrial Agricultural Products Center, Lincoln, 
NE  68583, September 1993. 
833
 John S. Cundiff, Professor, Robert D. Grisso, Professor, Biological Systems Engineering 
Dept(MS 0303), Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061, Hosein Shapouri, Senior Agricultural 
Economist, U.S.D.A., Office of Energy Policy and New Uses, Washington DC 20250-3815, 
Economic Analysis of two Receiving Facility Designs for a Bioenergy Plant, Paper Number: 
076051,2007 ASABE Annual International Meeting, Sponsored by ASABE, Minneapolis 
Convention Center, Minneapolis, Minnesota, 17 - 20 June 2007 
834
 Kevin J. Shinners – Professor of Agricultural Engineering, Ben N. Binversie – Graduate 
Research Assistant, Department of Biological Systems Engineering, University of  Wisconsin, 
Madison, WI, Philippe Savoie – Research Scientist, Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, Quebec, 
Canada, Whole-Plant Corn Harvesting for Biomass: Comparison of Single-Pass and Multiple-
Pass Harvest Systems, Paper Number: 036089 2003 ASAE Annual International Meeting, 
Sponsored by ASAE, Riviera Hotel and Convention Center, Las Vegas, Nevada, USA, 27- 30 
July 2003. 
835
 S. Sokhansanj1, A. Turhollow, and R. Perlack, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Tennessee, 
USA 37830, Stochastic Modeling of Costs of Corn Stover Costs Delivered to an Intermediate 
Storage Facility, Paper Number: 024190, Presented at: 2002 ASAE Annual International 
Meeting / CIGR XVth World Congress, Sponsored by ASAE and CIGR, Hyatt Regency 
Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA, July 28-July 31, 2002  
836
 D. Montross, Associate Professor, Scott A. Shearer, Professor, Timothy S. Stombaugh, 
Associate Extension Professor, Stephen F. Higgins, Research Specialist, and Samuel G. McNeill, 
Associate Extension Professor, Department of Biosystems and Agricultural Engineering, 
University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky; and Shahab Sokhansanj, Professor, Oak Ridge 
National Laboratory, Environmental Sciences Division, Oak Ridge, Tennessee, Corn Stover 
Availability and Collection Efficiency Using Typical Hay Equipment, This article is published 
with the approval of the Director of the Kentucky Agricultural Experiment Station and 
designated Paper No. 04-05-066.  Transactions of the ASABE, Vol. 50(3): 705−711 – 2007 
American Society of Agricultural and Biological Engineers, ISSN 0001−2351. 
837
 American Society of Agricultural and Biological Engineers (ASABE), ASABE Standards, 
2007, 54th Edition, Standards, Engineering Practices, Data, 2950 Niles Road, St. Joseph, MI 
49085-9659. 
838
 William Edwards, extension economist,  Machinery Management: Estimating Farm  
Machinery Costs, PM 710 Paper version,  Revised November 2001; Electronic version Revised 
August 2005, University Extension, Iowa State University.  
839
 Mark Hanna, Extension Engineer, University Extension, Iowa State University, Ames Iowa, 
Estimating the Field Capacity of Farm Machines, File A3-24, April 2002. 
840
 Terry Kastens, Extension Agricultural Economist, Kansas State University Agricultural 
Experiment Station and Cooperative Extension Service, Farm Machinery Operation Cost 
Calculations,  MF-2244 May 1997 
841
 Machinery Cost Estimates: Forage Field Operations, University of Illinois Farm Business 
Management Handbook, University of Illinois Extension FBM 0203 Department of  Agricultural 
and Consumer Economics • College of Agricultural, Consumer and  Environmental Sciences, 
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 
754  
                                                                                                                                                             
842
 Tim Cross, Agricultural Economics, Agriculture Machinery Cost Calculation Methods, E12-
2015-00-032-98, Agricultural Extension Service, The University of Tennessee Institute of 
Agriculture.  
843
 Agricultural Prices 2006 Summary, July 2007 United States, Department of Agriculture  
National Agricultural Statistics Service, Pr 1-3 (07)  
844
 National Agricultural Statistics Service, Quick Stats (Agricultural Statistics Data Base, State 
and County Data), USDA, http://www.nass.usda.gov/ 
845
 L. O. Pordesimo, W. C. Edens, The University of Tennessee, Dept. of Biosystems 
Engineering and Environmental Science, Knoxville, TN, U.S.A., S. Sokhansanj Oak Ridge 
National Laboratory, Environmental Sciences Division, Oak Ridge, TN, U.S.A., Distribution of 
Above Ground Biomass in Corn , Stover, Paper Number: 02-6059; 2002 ASAE Annual 
International Meeting/CIGR XVth World Congress, Hyatt Regency Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, 
USA,; July 29-31, 2002. 
846
 Kevin J. Shinners, Professor of Agricultural Engineering, Ben N. Binversie, Graduate 
Research Assistant, Department of Biological Systems Engineering, University of Wisconsin, 
Madison, WI, Philippe Savoie, Research Scientist, Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, Quebec, 
Canada;  Harvest and Storage Of Wet and Dry Corn Stover As A Biomass Feedstock, Paper 
Number: 036088, 2003 ASAE Annual International Meeting Riviera Hotel and Convention 
Center, Las Vegas, Nevada, USA, 27- 30 July 2003 
847
 R.L. Graham, R.D. Perlack, and L.L. Wright, Environ. Sci. Div., Oak Ridge National Lab., 
Oak Ridge, TN 37831-6407; R. Nelson, Engineering Extension Programs, Kansas State Univ., 
Manhattan, KS 66506, and J. Sheehan, National Renewable Energy Lab., Golden, CO 80401. 
Current and Potential U.S. Corn Stover Supplies, Agronomy Journal 99:1–11, American Society 
of Agronomy, Madison, WI 53711 USA; doi:10.2134/agronj2005.0222 prepared 2005; 
published online 1 January 2007 
848
 Ron Kotrba, Ethanol Producer Magazine staff writer, The Great Biomass Inquisition,  
Ethanol Producer Magazine, January 2007. 
http://ethanolproducer.com/article.jsp?article_id=2621&q=&page=all 
849
 Kevin J. Shinners, Professor of Agricultural Engineering, Ben N. Binversie, Graduate 
Research Assistant, Department of Biological Systems Engineering, University of Wisconsin, 
Madison, WI, Philippe Savoie, Research Scientist, Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, Quebec, 
Canada;  Harvest and Storage Of Wet and Dry Corn Stover As A Biomass Feedstock, Paper 
Number: 036088, 2003 ASAE Annual International Meeting Riviera Hotel and Convention 
Center, Las Vegas, Nevada, USA, 27- 30 July 2003. 
850
 William Edwards, Extension Economist, Estimating Farm Machinery Costs, PM710, 
Machinery Management, University Extension, Iowa State University, revised November 2001 
851
 Renee Sayler & Kenneth Von Bargen, Principal Investigators, Feasibility of Corn Residue 
Collection in Kearney, Nebraska Area, for Western Regional Biomass Energy Program, Report 
of findings, by University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Industrial Agricultural Products Center, Lincoln, 
NE  68583, September 1993. 
852
 Robert D. Grisso , Professor, Virginia Tech, Department of Biological Systems Engineering, 
Blacksburg, Virginia; Paul J. Jasa , Extension Engineer, Biological Systems Engineering 
Department, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, Nebraska; and Dale E. Rolofson , Farm Manager, 
Agri-Cross Farms, Inc. Greenwood, Nebraska. Corresponding author : Paul J. Jasa, Biological 
Systems Engineering Dept., University of Nebraska, Lincoln, Analysis of Traffic Patterns and 
755  
                                                                                                                                                             
Yield Monitor Data for Field Efficiency Determination, Paper No. 011013,  Presented at the 
2000 ASAE Annual Meeting,  Applied Engineering in Agriculture Vol. 18(2): 171-178 ( © 2002 
American Society of Agricultural Engineers ). A contribution of the University of Nebraska 
Agricultural Research Division, Lincoln, Nebraska. Journal Series No. 13335. Mention of trade 
and company names are for the reader and do not infer endorsement or preferential treatment of 
the products by the University of Nebraska, Lincoln.  
 
853
 Robert “Bobby” Grisso, Professor, and John C. Cundiff, Professor; and David H. Vaughan, 
Professor, Department of Biological Systems Engineering, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA., 
Investigating Machinery Management Parameters with Computer Tools, Paper Number: 071030, 
Presented at 2007 ASABE Annual International Meeting, Minneapolis Convention Center, 
Minneapolis, Minnesota, 17 - 20 June 2007.  Mention of trade and company names are for the 
reader and do not infer endorsement or preferential treatment of the products by Virginia Tech. 
854
 Poorna P. Ravula, Robert D. Grisso and John S. Cundiff, Biological Systems Engineering 
Department, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061-0303, Comparison between Two Policy 
Strategies for Scheduling in a Biomass Logistic System, Paper Number: 071095, Presented at the 
2007 ASABE Annual International Meeting, Sponsored by ASABE, Minneapolis Convention 
Center  
855
 International Fire Code 2903.4: Agricultural Products. Hay, straw or similar agricultural 
products shall not be stored adjacent to structures of combustible materials. Storage shall be 
limited to stacks of 100 tons (91 metric tons) each. Stacks shall be separated by a minimum of 20 
feet (6096 mm) of clear space. Quantities of hay, straw and other agricultural products shall not 
be limited where stored in or near farm structures located outside closely built areas. A permit 
shall not be required for agricultural storage. 
856
 Daniel R. Petrolia, Department of Applied Economics, College of Food, Agriculture, and 
Natural Resources Sciences, University of Minnesota, The Economics of Harvesting and 
Transporting Corn Stover for Conversion to Fuel Ethanol: A Case Study for Minnesota,  
Staff Paper P06-12 August 2006 
857
 Robert D. Perlack, Anthony F. Turhollow, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Office of 
Scientific and Technical Information, Oak Ridge, TN 37831, Assessment of Options For The 
Collection, Handling, and Transport of Corn Stover,  ORNL/TM-2002/44, September 2002, 
Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy, Biomass Program, U.S. Department of 
Energy. 
858
 Dr. R.L. (Bob) Nielsen, Agronomy Department, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 
47907-1150; Questions Relative to Harvesting & Storing Corn Stover; Prepared September 
1995. Originally published as Agronomy Extension publication AGRY-95-09. 
859
 Ron Kotrba, staff writer, The Great Biomass Inquisition, Ethanol Producer Magazine. January 
2007 Issue. Reach him at rkotrba@bbibiofuels.com, © 2007 BBI International 
http://ethanolproducer.com/article.jsp?article_id=2621&q=&page=all 
860
 Ron Kotrba, staff writer, The Great Biomass Inquisition, Ethanol Producer Magazine. January 
2007 Issue. Reach him at rkotrba@bbibiofuels.com, © 2007 BBI International 
http://ethanolproducer.com/article.jsp?article_id=2621&q=&page=all 
861
 Graeme R Quick, Single-pass Corn and Stover Harvesters: Development and Performance. 
Proceedings of the International Conference on Crop Harvesting and Processing, 9-11 February 
756  
                                                                                                                                                             
2003, Louisville, Kentucky USA, ASABE, St. Joseph, Mich.; ASAE Publication Number 
701P1103e 
862
 A. Aden, M. Ruth, K. Ibsen, J. Jechura, K. Neeves, J. Sheehan, and B. Wallace  
National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL); L. Montague, A. Slayton, and J. Lukas Harris 
Group, Seattle, Washington, Ethanol Process Design and Economics Utilizing Co-Current Dilute 
Acid Prehydrolysis and Enzymatic Hydrolysis for Corn Stover; June 2002;NREL is a U.S. 
Department of Energy Laboratory Operated by Midwest Research Institute • Battelle • Bechtel; 
Contract No. DE-AC36-99-GO10337 
863
 Robert M. Prewitt, Graduate Research Assistant, Michael D. Montross, Associate Professor, 
Scott A. Shearer, Professor, Timothy S. Stombaugh, Associate Extension Professor, Stephen F. 
Higgins, Research Specialist, Samuel G. McNeill, Associate Extension Professor, Department of 
Biosystems and Agricultural Engineering, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY; Shahab 
Sokhansanj, Professor, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Environmental Sciences Division, Oak 
Ridge, TN, Corn Stover Availability and Collection Efficiency Using Typical Hay Equipment, 
Transactions of the American Society of Agricultural and Biological Engineers (ASABE), Vol. 
50(3): 705−711, 2007, ISSN 0001−2351; Publication of this article approved by the Director of 
the Kentucky Agricultural Experiment Station and designated Paper No. 04-05-066. 
864
 Graeme R Quick, Single-pass Corn and Stover Harvesters: Development and Performance. 
Proceedings of the International Conference on Crop Harvesting and Processing, 9-11 February 
2003, Louisville, Kentucky USA, ASABE, St. Joseph, Mich.; ASAE Publication Number 
701P1103e 
865
 Kevin J. Shinners, Professor of Agricultural Engineering, Graham S. Adsit, Graduate 
Research Assistant, Benjamin N. Binversie, Graduate Research Assistant, Matthew F. Digman, 
Graduate Research Assistant, Department of Biological Systems Engineering, University of 
Wisconsin, Richard E. Muck, Research Scientist, Paul. J. Weimer, Research Scientist, US Dairy 
Forage Research Center – USDA-ARS, Madison, WI, Characteristic Performance and Yields 
using a Single-Pass, Split- Stream Maize Grain and Stover Harvester, Paper Number: 056051, 
presented at the 2004 ASAE/CSAE Annual International and the 2005 ASAE Annual 
International Meeting, Sponsored by ASAE, Tampa Convention Center, Tampa, Florida 17 - 20 
July 2005 
866
 Shahab Sokhansanj, , Anthony Turhollow, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, North Logan, UT 
84341-8804,  Janet Cushman, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN 37831-6422, John 
Cundiff, Biological Systems Engineering, Virginia Technical University, Blacksburg, VA 
24061-0303, Engineering aspects of collecting corn stover for bioenergy, Biomass and 
Bioenergy 23 (2002) 347 – 355; Received 15 October 2001; received in revised form 15 April 
2002; accepted 3 May 2002; 2002 Published by Elsevier Science Ltd. 
867
 Kevin J. Shinners, Professor of Agricultural Engineering, Garrit C. Boettcher, Graduate 
Research Assistant, Jesse T. Munk, Graduate Research Assistant, Matthew F. Digman,  Graduate 
Research Assistant, Department of Biological Systems Engineering, University of Wisconsin; 
Richard E. Muck, Research Engineer, Paul. J. Weimer, Research Scientist, US Dairy Forage 
Research Center, USDA-ARS, Madison, WI, Single-Pass, Split-Stream of Corn Grain and 
Stover: Characteristic Performance of Three Harvester Configurations, Presented at: ASABE 
Annual International Meeting, 2006; Oregon Convention Center, Portland, Oregon, 9 – 12 July 
2006. 
757  
                                                                                                                                                             
868
 W. C. Edens, L. O. Pordesimo, The University of Tennessee, Dept. of Biosystems 
Engineering and Environmental Science, Knoxville, TN, S. Sokhansanj, Oak Ridge National 
Laboratory, Environmental Sciences Division, Oak Ridge, TN, Field Drying Characteristics and 
Mass Relationships of Corn Stover Fractions, Presented at the ASAE Annual International 
Meeting/ CIGR XVth World Congress, 2002, Hyatt Regency Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA, 
July 28-31, 2002. 
869
 Richard Hess, Idaho National Laboratory, Uniform Format Feedstock Supply System Design 
for Lignocellulosic Biomass, Western Region Biomass Workshop August 27, 2007 
http://sungrant.oregonstate.edu/workshop/HESS_Western_RP_workshop.pdf 
870
 Kevin J. Shinners, Professor of Agricultural Engineering, Ben N. Binversie, Graduate 
Research Assistant, Department of Biological Systems Engineering, University of Wisconsin, 
Madison, WI, Philippe Savoie, Research Scientist, Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, Quebec, 
Canada;  Harvest and Storage Of Wet and Dry Corn Stover As A Biomass Feedstock, Paper 
Number: 036088, 2003 ASAE Annual International Meeting Riviera Hotel and Convention 
Center, Las Vegas, Nevada, USA, 27- 30 July 2003. 
871
 Shahab Sokhansanj and Janet Cushman, Bioenergy Feedstock Development Program 
Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL), Feedstock Engineering, Presentation, Lincoln, NB, 
December 12, 2001 ORNL, Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy, US DOE, USA  
872
 Sudhagar Mani, Ph.D. Candidate, Shahab Sokhansanj, Adjunct Professor, Xiaotao Bi, 
Associate Professor, Department of Chemical & Biological Engineering, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, BC CANADA V6T 1Z4, Modeling of Forage Drying in Single and Triple 
Pass Rotary Drum Dryers, Paper Number: 056082, 2005 ASAE Annual International Meeting, 
Tampa Convention Center, Tampa, Florida, 17 - 20 July 2005  
873
 Xianzhe Zheng, Professor, Yiyuan Jiang, Professor, College of Engineering, North East 
Agricultural University, Harbin, China; Yubin Lan, Associate Professor, Agricultural 
Engineering Technology, Fort Valley State University, University Systems of Georgia, Fort 
Valley, GA 31030, Determination of Parameters for an Alfalfa Rotary Dryer, Paper Number: 
056186, 2005 ASAE Annual International Meeting, Tampa Convention Center, Tampa, Florida, 
17 - 20 July 2005 
874
 This information came in a confidential, personal communication. 
875
 Christopher T. Wright , Peter A. Pryfogle, Nathan A. Stevens , J. Richard Hess ,  
Corey W. Radtke , Idaho National Laboratory , Idaho Falls, ID, Value of Distributed 
Preprocessing of Biomass Feedstocks to a Bioenergy Industry, Paper No: 066151  
Presented at the  ASABE Annual International Meeting, 2006, Oregon Convention Center 
Portland, Oregon, 9 - 12 July 2006  
876
 Roger G. Ginder, Professor of Economics, Department of Economics, Iowa State University, 
Ames, Iowa 50011, Potential Infrastructure Constraints on Current Corn Based and Future 
Biomass Based U.S. Ethanol Production, Working Paper # 07018 , July 2007 
877
   E-mailed file from Robert Perlack, U.S. Department of Agriculture, May 2008. 
878
  Conversation with Bryce Stokes, U.S. Forestry Service, May 2008. 
879
 OECD, March 2008. ITF Round Tables No. 138. Biofuels: Linking Support to Performance. 
880
 IEA. 2004.  Biofuels for Transport: An International Perspective.   
881
 Goldemberg, J. as quoted in Rothkopf, Garten. 2006.  A Blueprint for Green Energy in the 
Americas. 
758  
                                                                                                                                                             
882
 OECD, March 2008. ITF Round Tables No. 138. Biofuels: Linking Support to Performance.; 
Unicamp (2006), “A Expansāo do Proalcool como Programa de Desenvolvimento Nacional”. 
Powerpoint presentation at Ethanol Seminar in BNDES 
883
 Ibid. 
884
 Ibid. 
885
 Ibid. 
886
 Macedo. I.C., 2008.  Green house gases emissions in the production and use of ethanol from 
sugarcane in Brazil: The2005/2006 Averages and a Prediction for 2020. Biomass and Bioenergy. 
doi:10.1016/j.biombioe.2007.12.006 
887
 Smeets E, Junginger M, Faaij A, Walter A, Dolzan P, Turkenburg W. The sustainability of 
Brazilian ethanol-An Assessment of the possibilities of certified production. Biomass and 
Bioenergy (2008), doi:10.1016/j.biombioe.2008.01.005 
888
 Official Statistics of the U.S. Department of Commerce, USITC 
889
 Haas, M.J, A process model to estimate biodiesel production costs, Bioresource Technology 
97 (2006) 671-678. 
890
  Wright, Mark M; Brown, Robert C.; Comparative Economics of Biorefineries based on the 
Biochemical and Thermochemical Platforms, May 17, 2007. 
891
 RFS1 final rule regulatory impact analysis, EPA420-R-07-004, April 2007, 
http://epa.gov/otaq/renewablefuels/420r07004.pdf 
892
 Infrastructure Requirements for an Expanded Fuel Ethanol Industry, Downstream 
Alternatives Inc., January 15, 2002. 
893
 RFS1 final rule regulatory impact analysis, EPA420-R-07-004, April 2007, 
http://epa.gov/otaq/renewablefuels/420r07004.pdf 
894
 Tables ES-9 and ES 10, Infrastructure Requirements for an Expanded Fuel Ethanol Industry, 
Downstream Alternatives Inc, January 15, 2002. 
895
 Petroleum Market Model of the National Energy Modeling System, Part 2, March 2006, 
DOE/EIA-059 (2006), http://tonto.eia.doe.gov/FTPROOT/modeldoc/m059(2006)-2.pdf .  
896
 BNSF railway biodiesel freight cost information can be found at 
http://www.bnsf.com/markets/agricultural/bnsf4024/cur/itm31001.txt 
897
 “Cost of Adding E85 Fueling Capability to Existing Gasoline Stations: 
NREL Survey and Literature Search”, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, NREL/FS-540-
42390 
March 2008, http://www.afdc.energy.gov/afdc/pdfs/42390.pdf 
898
 National Petroleum News, fuel retail facility station count, NPN Market Facts 2007, October 
2007, www.npn.web. 
899
 National Petroleum News, Market Facts 2007, October 2007, www.npn.web. 
900
  Modeling the Effect of Renewable Fuels Standards 2, Prepared for the Environmental Protection Agency by 
Jacobs Consultancy under contract with Southwest Research Associates, August 2008. 
901
 U.S. Department of Agriculture,  National Agricultural Statistics Service, “Crop and Plants, 
Field Corn”, http://www.nass.usda.gov. 
 
902
 U.S. Department of Agriculture, “Acreage report”, 2008, 
http://usda.mannlib.cornell.edu/usda/current/Acre/Acre-06-30-2008.pdf   
 
759  
                                                                                                                                                             
903
 Committee on Water Implications of Biofuels Production in the United States, National 
Research Council, Water Implications of Biofuels Production in the United States, The National 
Academies Press, 2008, page 3.    
 
904
 Huang , Wen-yuan, “Tight Supply and Strong Demand May Raise U.S. Nitrogen Fertilizer 
Prices”, Amber Waves, November 2007, page 7, available online at:  
http://www.ers.usda.gov/AmberWaves/November07/PDF/TightSupply.pdf.  
 
905
 U. S. Environmental Protection Agency, EPA Science Advisory Board, “Hypoxia in the 
Northern Gulf of Mexico”, EPA-SAB-08-003, December 2007, available on line at:  
http://yosemite.epa.gov/sab/sabproduct.nsf/C3D2F27094E03F90852573B800601D93/$File/EPA
-SAB-08-003complete.unsigned.pdf.   
 
906U. S. Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service, “U.S. Fertilizer Use and  
Price”, http://www.ers.usda.gov/Data/FertilizerUse, April 2008. 
 
907
 Inhalation health effect concerns for volatilized a.i. compounds are discussed for individual 
products, e.g., oxydimeton-methyl, carbaryl (and carbamates,generally), diazinon, at 
http://www.epa.gov/pesticides/reregistration/status.htm .  A.I. vapor pressure and a discussion of 
product volatilization can be found at http://www.epa.gov/ttn/chief/ap42/ch09/final/c9s02-2.pdf 
 
908
 A discussion of acetochlor toxicity can be found in EPA’s Re-registration Eligibility 
Document (RED) for this product at  http://www.epa.gov/IRIS/subst/0521.htm. 
 
909
 A discussion of carbaryl toxicity can be found in EPA’s Re-registration Eligibility Document 
(RED) for this product at http://www.epa.gov/IRIS/subst/0019.htm. 
 
910
 A discussion of alachlor toxicity can be found in EPA’s Re-registration Eligibility Document 
(RED) for this product at http://www.epa.gov/IRIS/subst/0129.htm 
 
911
 See http://www.irac-online.org/ , Insecticide Resistance Action Committee, for toxicity 
classifications and toxicity mode of action definitions used. 
 
912
 See carcinogen weight of evidence (WoE) determination and description of toxicity for 
methomyl at http://www.epa.gov/pesticides/reregistration/REDs/0028red.pdf   
913
 U. S. Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service, “Farm Income and Costs: 2008 
Farm Sector Income Forecast”, 
http://www.ers.usda.gov/Briefing/FarmIncome/nationalestimates.htm , August 2008. 
 
914U. S. Environmental Protection Agency, EPA Science Advisory Board, op. cit., p. 7. 
 
915
 Secchi, S., J. Tyndall, L. Schulte, and H. Asbjornsen.  “Raising the Stakes”, Journal of Soil 
and Water Conservation, Volume 63, Number. 3, 2008, pages 68A-73A. 
 
760  
                                                                                                                                                             
916
 McLachlan, M., M. Carter, C. Rustay, Effects of the Conservation Reserve Program 
on Priority Mixed-grass Prairie Birds:  A Conservation Effects Assessment Project, 2007, 
available online at:  ftp://ftp-
fc.sc.egov.usda.gov/NHQ/nri/ceap/Final%20BCR19%20CRP%20Report.pdf . 
 
917
 Iowa State University Extension, 2007 Iowa Land Value Survey, 2008, available online at:  
http://www.extension.iastate.edu/Publications/FM1825.pdf. 
 
918
 U. S. Environmental Protection Agency, EPA Science Advisory Board, op. cit., p. 177. 
 
919
 Wilhelm, W. W., J. M. F. Johnson, D. L. Karlen, and D. T. Lightle, “Corn Stover to Sustain 
Soil Organic Carbon Further Constrains Biomass Supply”, Agronomy Journal, Volume 99, 2007, 
pages 1665–1667.    
920
 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Water, Wadeable Streams Assessment: A 
Collaborative Survey of the Nation's Streams, EPA 841-B-06-002, 2006, available online at: 
http://www.epa.gov/owow/streamsurvey.  
921
 U. S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Water, National Water Quality Inventory: 
Report to Congress 2002 Reporting Cycle, U.S. EPA 841-R-07-001, 2007, available online at 
http://www.epa.gov/305b/2002report/. 
 
922
 Paerl, H.W., D. Robin,  D. R. Whitall ,  “Atmospheric Deposition of Nitrogen: Implications 
for Nutrient Over-Enrichment of Coastal Waters”, Estuaries, Volume 25, Number 4B, 2002, 
pages 677-693. 
 
923
 Chesapeake Bay Program,  Sources of Nitrogen Loads to the Bay, available online at: 
http://www.chesapeakebay.net/status_nitrogensources.aspx?menuitem=19797  
 
924
 New York State Department of Environmental Conservation and Connecticut Department of 
Environmental Protection, A Total Maximum Daily Load Analysis to Achieve Water Quality 
Standards for Dissolved Oxygen in Long Island Sound, December 2000, available online at:  
http://www.longislandsoundstudy.net/pubs/reports/Tmdl.pdf . 
 
925
 Roberts, D. M., and J. E. Reuter, DRAFT Lake Tahoe Total Maximum Daily Load Technical 
Report:  California and Nevada, California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Lahontan 
Region and Nevada Division of Environmental Protection,  September 2007, available online at: 
http://www.waterboards.ca.gov/lahontan/water_issues/programs/tmdl/lake_tahoe/docs/laketahoe
_tmdl_techrpt.pdf  .  
 
926
 Chesapeake Bay Program, Science and Technical Advisory Committee,  
Workshop on Atmospheric Deposition of Nitrogen: Media Brief, May 30, 2007, available online 
at: http://www.chesapeake.org/stac/Press/AtmoNmediabrief.pdf  
 
927
 Roberts, D. M., op.cit., page 4-164.  
 
761  
                                                                                                                                                             
928
 Committee on Water Implications of Biofuels Production in the United States, National 
Research Council, op. cit. 
 
929
 Louisiana Universities Marine Consortium, ‘Dead Zone’ Again Rivals Record Size, July 28, 
2008, available online at:                        
http://www.gulfhypoxia.net/research/shelfwidecruises/2008/PressRelease08.pdf 
 
930
 Mississippi River/Gulf of Mexico Watershed Nutrient Task Force, “Gulf Hypoxia Action 
Plan 2008 for Reducing, Mitigating, and Controlling Hypoxia in the Northern Gulf of Mexico 
and Improving Water Quality in the Mississippi River Basin”,  2008, page 22, available online 
at:  http://www.epa.gov/msbasin/actionplan.htm.  
 
931
 U. S. Environmental Protection Agency, EPA Science Advisory Board, op. cit. 
 
932
 Mississippi River/Gulf of Mexico Watershed Nutrient Task Force, op.cit., page 37. 
 
933
 Alexander, R.B., Smith, R.A., Schwarz, G.E., Boyer, E.W., Nolan, J.V., and Brakebill, J.W., 
“Differences in Phosphorus and Nitrogen Delivery to the Gulf of Mexico from the Mississippi 
River Basin”, Environmental Science and Technology, Volume 42, Number 3, 2008, pages 822–
830, available online at: 
http://pubs.acs.org/cgi-bin/abstract.cgi/esthag/2008/42/i03/abs/es0716103.html.  
 
934
 Donner, S. D. and Kucharik, C. J., 2008, “Corn-based Ethanol Production Compromises Goal 
of Reducing Nitrogen Export by the Mississippi River”,  PNAS,  Volume 105,  Number 11, 
2008, pages 4513–4518, available online at:  http://www.pnas.org/content/105/11/4513.full. 
935
 U. S. Environmental Protection Agency, EPA Science Advisory Board, op.cit. page 205. 
 
936
 Institute for Agriculture and Trade Policy, Staying home: How ethanol will change U.S. corn 
exports, 2006, Minneapolis, MN, 26 pages, available online at:  
http://www.agobservatory.org/library.cfm?refid=96658 . 
 
937
 Mississippi River/Gulf of Mexico Watershed Nutrient Task Force, op.cit., page 15.  
 
938Aulenbach, B.T., Buxton, H.T., Battaglin, W.A., and Coupe, R.H., Streamflow and Nutrient 
Fluxes of the Mississippi-Atchafalaya River Basin and Subbasins for the 
Period of Record Through 2005: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 2007-1080, 2007, 
available online at: http://toxics.usgs.gov/pubs/of-2007-1080/index.html. 
 
939
 U. S. Environmental Protection Agency, EPA Science Advisory Board, op. cit., p. 89. 
 
940
 Mississippi River/Gulf of Mexico Watershed Nutrient Task Force, op. cit., page 16. 
 
941
 Gassman, P.W., Reyes, M. R., Green, C. H. , Arnold, J. G. , “The Soil and Water Assessment 
Tool: Historical Development, Applications, and Future Research Directions”,  Transactions of 
the American Society of Agricultural and Biological Engineers, Volume 50, Number 4, 2007, 
762  
                                                                                                                                                             
pages 1211-1240, available online at:.   
http://www.card.iastate.edu/environment/items/asabe_swat.pdf. 
 
942
 Arnold, J. G., R. S. Muttiah, R. Srinivasan, and P. M. Allen, “Regional Estimation of Base 
Flow and Groundwater Recharge in the Upper Mississippi Basin”, Journal of Hydrology, 
Volume 227, 2000, pages 21-40, available online at: 
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science?_ob=ArticleURL&_udi=B6V6C-3YRVDK7-
2&_user=14684&_rdoc=1&_fmt=&_orig=search&_sort=d&view=c&_version=1&_urlVersion=
0&_userid=14684&md5=ede76b4f1132783167d829c06196e66d . 
 
943
 Jha, M., P. W. Gassman, S. Secchi, and J. Arnold, “Upper Mississippi River Basin Modeling 
System Part 2: Baseline Simulation Results”, in: Coastal Hydrology and Processes (Eds. V.P. 
Singh and Y.J. Xu), Water Resources Publications, Highland Ranch, CO, 2006, pages. 117-126. 
 
944
 Homer, C. C. Huang, L. Yang, B. Wylie and M. Coan. “Development of a 2001 National 
Landcover Database for the United States”. Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing, 
Volume 70, Number 7, 2004, pages 829-840, available online at 
http://www.mrlc.gov/pdf/July_PERS.pdf . 
 
945
 U.S. Department of Agriculture, National Agricultural Statistic Service, 
http://www.nass.usda.gov/research/Cropland/SARS1a.htm.  
 
946
 U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service, 
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/techical/NRI . 
 
947
 Conservation Technology Information Center,  http://www.ctic.purdue.edu/. 
 
948
 American Society of Agricultural and Biological Engineers, Manure Production and 
Characteristics. ASAE D384.2 MAR2005. available online at: 
http://asae.frymulti.com/abstract.asp?aid=19432&t=1. 
 
949
 Renewable Fuels Association, “Ethanol Biorefinery Locations,” 
http://www.ethanolrfa.org/industry/locations, April 2008. 
 
950
 Chesapeake Bay Commission,  Biofuels and the Bay:  Getting It Right to Benefit Farms, 
Forests and the Chesapeake, Chesapeake Bay Commission, Annapolis, Maryland, 2007, 32 
pages, available online at:  
http://www.chesbay.state.va.us/Publications/BiofuelsAndTheBay1.pdf  
951
 Simpson, T. W., A. N. Sharpley, R.W. Howarth, H.W. Paerl, and K. R. Mankin, “The New 
Gold Rush: Fueling Ethanol Production while Protecting Water Quality”, Journal of 
Environmental Quality, Volume 37, 2008, pages 318-324. 
 
952
 Chesapeake Bay Foundation, 2007 State of the Bay, 2007, available online at: 
http://www.cbf.org/site/DocServer/2007SOTBReport.pdf?docID=10923. 
763  
                                                                                                                                                             
 
953
 Chesapeake Bay Commission, op. cit., page 11.   
 
954
 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Region 7, Environmental Laws Applicable to 
Construction and Operation of Ethanol Plants, EPA-907-B-07-001,  November 2007,104 pages, 
available online at:    
http://www.epa.gov/region07/priorities/agriculture/ethanol_plants_manual.pdf 
 
955
 Regassa, T., Koelsch, R., Erickson, G., Impact of Feeding Distillers Grains on Nutrient 
Planning for Beef Cattle Systems, University of Nebraska-Lincoln Extension—RP190, 2008, 8 
pages, available online at:  http://www.ianrpubs.unl.edu/epublic/live/rp190/build/rp190.pdf  
 
956
 Jacob, M. D., Fox, J. T., Drouillard, J. S., Renter, D. G., Nagaraja, T. G., “Effects of Dried 
Distillers’grain on Fecal Prevalence and Growth of Escherichia Coli O157 in Batch Culture 
Fermentations from Cattle”, Applied and Environmental Microbiology, Volume 74, Number 1, 
2008, p. 38-43, available online at:  http://aem.asm.org/cgi/content/abstract/74/1/38  
 
957
 U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service, “Comprehensive 
Nutrient Management Planning Technical Guidance”, National Planning Procedures 
Handbook, Part 600.5, available online at:  http://policy.nrcs.usda.gov/17088.wba. 
 
958
 Ruiz-Aguilar, G. M. L.; O’Reilly, K.; Alvarez, P. J. J, “Forum: A Comparison of Benzene and 
Toluene Plume Lengths for Sites Contaminated with Regular vs. Ethanol-amended Gasoline”, 
Ground Water Monitoring and Remediation, Volume 23, 2003, pages 48-53.  
 
959
 Reilly, T.E., Dennehy, K.F., Alley, W.M., and Cunningham, W.L., Ground-Water 
Availability in the United States: U.S. Geological Survey Circular 1323, 2008, page 33, available 
online at http://pubs.usgs.gov/circ/1323/   
 
960
 McGuire, V.L, Changes in Water Level and Storage in the High Plains Aquifer, 
Predevelopment to 2005: U.S. Geological Survey Fact Sheet 2007-3029, 2007, available online 
at http://pubs.usgs.gov/fs/2007/3029/ . 
 
961
 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Consumer Fact Sheet on Nitrates/Nitrites, available 
online at:  http://www.epa.gov/safewater/dwh/c-ioc/nitrates.html  
 
962
 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Water, FACTOIDS: Drinking Water and 
Ground Water Statistics for 2007, EPA 816-K-07-004, 2008, available online at:  
http://www.epa.gov/safewater/data/pdfs/data_factoids_2007.pdf  
 
963
 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Consumer Fact Sheet on Atrazine, available online 
at:  http://www.epa.gov/safewater/contaminants/dw_contamfs/atrazine.html  
 
964
 See 40 CFR, Part 141, Subpart O, App. A. 
 
764  
                                                                                                                                                             
965
 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, A Review of Contaminant Occurrence in Public 
Water Systems, EPA 816-R-99-006, 1999, available online at:  
http://www.epa.gov/OGWDW/occur/nov99_lo.pdf  
 
966
 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, of Occurrence Estimation Methodology and 
Occurrence Findings Report for the Six-Year Review of Existing National Primary Drinking 
Water Regulations, Office of Water, EPA-815-R-03-006, 2003,  pages 38 and 40, available 
online at 
http://epa.gov/OGWDW/standard/review/pdfs/support_6yr_occurancemethods_final.pdf.   
 
967
 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Safe Drinking Water Information System (SDWIS) 
End of Year data for FY 2007, 2007.      
968
 Gilliom, R. J., The Quality of Our Nation's Waters Pesticides in the Nation's Streams and 
Ground Water, 1992-2001:  U.S. Geological Survey Circular 129, 2006, Tables 7A-1 to 7A-4,  
available online at:  http://water.usgs.gov/nawqa/pnsp/pubs/circ1291/appendix7/7a.html  
 
969
 Committee on Water Implications of Biofuels Production in the United States, op. cit. 
 
970
 Great Lakes Commission, The Potential Impacts of Increased Corn Production for Ethanol in 
the Great Lakes-St. Lawrence River Region, 2007, available online at:   
http://www.glc.org/tributary/pubs/documents/EthanolPaper121807FINAL.pdf.  
 
