  
 
U.S. Department 
Of Transportation 
 
PRELIMINARY REGULATORY IMPACT ANALYSIS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Backover Crash Avoidance Technologies 
NPRM 
FMVSS No. 111 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Office of Regulatory Analysis and Evaluation  
National Center for Statistics and Analysis  
November 2010 
 
 Table of Contents 
Executive Summary .............................................................................................................. i 
I. Introduction ............................................................................................................... I-1 
A. Prior Agency Action on Rear Visibility ................................................................... I-1 
B. Possible Technologies for Mitigating Backovers..................................................... I-2 
II. Research Performed ................................................................................................ II-1 
A. Research on Current Technologies for Mitigating Backovers ............................... II-1 
III. Target Population ............................................................................................... III-1 
IV. Rear Visibility Data ........................................................................................... IV-1 
V. Benefits ................................................................................................................... V-1 
A. Probability of a fatal backover being avoided ....................................................... V-1 
B. Benefits Calculations............................................................................................ V-12 
C. Property Damage Only Crashes and Maintenance Costs ..................................... V-14 
VI. Costs ................................................................................................................... VI-1 
VII. Cost Effectiveness & Benefit-Cost Analyses .................................................. VII-1 
A. Fatality and Injury Prevented Benefits: .............................................................. VII-5 
B. Property Damage Prevented Benefits ................................................................. VII-6 
C. Net Cost Per Equivalent Life Saved .................................................................... VII-7 
D. Benefit-Cost Analysis ......................................................................................... VII-9 
E. Sensitivity Analysis ........................................................................................... VII-12 
VIII. Regulatory Flexibility Act and Unfunded Mandates Reform Act Analysis ... VIII-1 
A. Regulatory Flexibility Act ................................................................................. VIII-1 
B. Unfunded Mandates Reform Act .................................................................... VIII-4 
IX. Probabilistic Uncertainty Analysis .................................................................... IX-1 
A. Simulation Models ................................................................................................ IX-2 
B. Uncertainty Factors ............................................................................................... IX-5 
C. Quantifying the Uncertainty Factors ..................................................................... IX-8 
Appendix A ..................................................................................................................... A-1 
Appendix B ..................................................................................................................... B-1 
 
  
i 
Executive Summary 
Vehicles that are backing up have a potential to create a danger to pedestrians and other 
nonoccupants.  Because a number of these injuries and fatalities occur off the roadway or 
on private property, they have been historically difficult to catalogue, and hence, analyze.  
With the advent of the Not-in-Traffic System, NHTSA is able to estimate the number and 
circumstances of these crashes, allowing it to establish more accurate estimates of the 
benefits of potential countermeasures to combat these incidents.  Backover crashes 
involving all vehicles account for an estimated 292 fatalities and about 18,000 injuries 
annually.  Backover crashes involving light vehicles
1
 account for an estimated 228 
fatalities and 17,000 injuries annually.   
Annual Target Population (Light Vehicles) 
     228 Fatalities 
     17,000 Injuries 
 
The agency has conducted research on a variety of technologies to mitigate these types of 
crashes.  This research has focused on determining the ability of the various technologies 
(camera systems, sensor systems, and mirrors) to detect pedestrians, investigating the 
circumstances of backover pedestrian crashes that have occurred, and how drivers would 
use the technologies.  This regulatory impact analysis was generated with the information 
we have to date and a number of assumptions have been made to provide the public with 
additional information about the potential costs and benefits of this rulemaking action.   
System Effectiveness 
Some systems, like airbags, have binary states; that is to say that they are either activated 
or they are not.  Analysis includes a probability of whether or not it was being used, 
followed by a calculation of benefits in cases where it was in use.   
For rear visibility, the analytical challenge is more complicated, but not unmanageable.  
Three conditions must be met for a rear visibility technology to provide a benefit to the 
driver.  First, the crash must be one that is “avoidable” through use of the device; i.e., the 
pedestrian must be within the target range for the sensor, or the viewable area of the 
camera or mirror.  Second, once the pedestrian is within the system‟s range, the device 
must “sense” that fact, i.e., provide the driver with information about the presence and 
location of the pedestrian.  Third, there must be sufficient “driver response,” i.e., before 
impact with the pedestrian, the driver must receive this information and respond 
appropriately by confirming whether someone is or is not behind the vehicle before 
                                                 
1
 Light vehicles includes those vehicles with a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of 4,536 kg or less 
(10,000 pounds or less).  The proposal would officially cover passenger cars, trucks, multipurpose 
passenger vehicles [MPVs] (which include sport utility vehicles [SUVs] and vans), and buses (excluding 
school buses) with a GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less.  For the purposes of this analysis, light vehicles are 
broken into two groups, “passenger cars” and “light trucks”.  The term “light trucks” is meant to cover all 
trucks, MPVs, and buses (excluding school buses) with a GVWR of 10,000 pounds or less.  In some tables 
the shorter term “LT” (light trucks) is used.      
  
ii 
proceeding.  These factors are denoted as fA, fS, and fDR , respectively, in this analysis.  
Below is a table showing these factors and their product, the final system effectiveness. 
 
System FA FS FDR Final 
Effectiveness 
FAxFSxFDR=FE 
180
o
 Camera 90% 100% 55% 49% 
130
o
 Camera 76% 100% 55% 42% 
Ultrasonic 49% 70% 7% 2.5% 
Radar 54% 70% 7% 2.7% 
Mirrors 33%* 100% 0%** 0% 
*FA for mirrors is taken from separate source due to lack of inclusion in the SCI case 
review that generated FA for cameras and sensors. 
** FDR for mirrors is taken from a small sample size of 20 tests.  It is 0% because 
throughout testing, drivers did not take advantage of either cross-view or look-down 
mirrors to avoid the obstacle in the test.   
Costs 
The most expensive technology option that the agency has evaluated is the rearview 
camera.  When installed in a vehicle without any existing adequate display screen, 
rearview camera systems are estimated to cost consumers between $159 and $203 per 
vehicle.  For a vehicle that already has an adequate display, such as one found in 
navigation units, their incremental cost is estimated at $58.  The total incremental cost to 
equip a 16.6 million vehicle fleet with camera systems is estimated to be $1.9 to $2.7 
billion.   
Rear object sensor systems are estimated to cost between $52 and $92 per vehicle.  The 
total incremental cost to equip a 16.6 million vehicle fleet with sensor systems is 
estimated to be $0.3 to $1.2 billion.   
Several different types of mirrors were investigated.  Interior look-down mirrors could be 
mounted on vans and SUVs, but not cars, and are estimated to cost $40 per vehicle.    
We also estimated the net property damage effects to consumers from using a camera or 
sensor system to avoid backing into fixed objects, along with the additional cost when a 
vehicle is struck in the rear and the camera or sensor is destroyed.   
  
  
iii 
Costs (2007 Economics) 
      
Costs  
Per Vehicle $51.49 to $202.94 
Net Costs  - Total Fleet 
Including Property Damage Effects 
 
$723M to $2.4B 
 
Benefits  
As noted above, the agency has spent considerable effort trying to determine the final 
effectiveness of these systems in reducing crashes, injuries and fatalities.  We have 
researched the capabilities of the systems, the crash circumstances, and the percent of 
drivers that would observe and react in time to avoid a collision with a pedestrian or 
pedalcyclist.  The estimated injury and fatality benefits of the various systems, based on 
NHTSA research to date, are shown below.   
 
180
o
 camera view 
130
o
 camera 
view Ultrasonic Radar 
Look-
down 
mirror 
Fatalities 
Reduced 
112 95 3 3 0 
Injuries 
Reduced 
8,374 7,072 233 257 0 
    
Net Benefits 
In addition to the one-time installation costs, and the benefits that occur over the life of 
the vehicle, there would also be maintenance costs as well as repair costs due to rear-end 
collisions and “property damage only crashes” (which, like the benefits, occur over time). 
Below is a table containing lifetime monetized benefits and lifetime costs, and their 
difference, the net benefit.  In this case, the costs outweigh the benefits and therefore the 
final number is a cost.  The primary estimate includes a 130 degree camera system with 
mirror display.  The low estimate includes an ultrasonic system.  The high estimate 
includes a 180 degree camera system with mirror display.   
 
  
  
iv 
Summary Table of Benefits and Costs 
Passenger Cars and Light Trucks (Millions 2007$) 
MY 2015 and Thereafter 
 
Benefits 
Primary 
Estimate 
Low 
Estimate 
High 
Estimate 
Discount 
Rate 
Lifetime Monetized $618.6 $37.1 $732.6 7% 
Lifetime Monetized $777.6 $46.7 $920.8 3% 
     
Costs     
Lifetime Monetized $1,933.3 $722.6 $2,362.4 7% 
Lifetime Monetized $1,861.3 $730.4 $2,296.9 3% 
     
Net Benefits     
Lifetime Monetized -$1,314.7 -$685.5 -$1,629.8 7% 
Lifetime Monetized -$1,083.7 -$683.7 -$1,376.1 3% 
 
Cost Effectiveness 
While we examine several application scenarios (all passenger cars and all light trucks, 
only light trucks, and some combinations) and discount rates of 3 and 7 percent, the net 
cost per equivalent life saved for camera systems ranged from $11.8 to $19.7 million.  
For sensors, it ranged from $95.5 to $192.3 million per life saved.  According to our 
present model, none of the systems are cost effective based on our comprehensive cost 
estimate of the value of a statistical life of $6.1 million. 
Cost per Equivalent Life Saved 
Sensors (Ultrasonic and Radar) $95.5 to $192.3 mill. 
Camera Systems $11.8 to $19.7 mill. 
      The range presented is from a 3% to 7% discount rate. 
 
The agency is proposing requirements that would likely be currently met by using 
cameras for both passenger cars and light trucks.  We also seek comment on an 
alternative aimed at reducing net costs that could be met by requiring having cameras for 
light trucks and either cameras or ultrasonic sensors for passenger cars.  We also request 
comment on the extent to which the effectiveness of sensors and the response of drivers 
to sensor warnings could be improved.  
  
I-1 
I. Introduction 
On February 28, 2008, Congress signed into law the Cameron Gulbransen Kids 
Transportation Safety Act of 2007.
2 
 This Act contains five distinct, substantive 
subsections that require NHTSA to issue regulations to reduce the incidence of child 
injury and death occurring inside or outside of light motor vehicles by: (a) considering 
automatic-reversal systems for power windows; (b) conducting rulemaking to expand the 
required field of view to prevent backover incidents; (c) a requirement for brake 
transmission shift interlock (BTSI) systems for vehicles with automatic transmissions; (d) 
a requirement that NHTSA shall establish and maintain a database on nontraffic, 
noncrash injuries and fatalities; and (e) providing information on vehicle-related hazards 
to children through a consumer information program.  This Preliminary Regulatory 
Impact Analysis specifically addresses section (b).  With regards to timing, the Cameron 
Gulbransen Kids Transportation Safety Act of 2007 specifies an initiation date within 12 
months of the Act (February 28, 2009) signage and a final rule within 36 months of the 
passage of the Act (February 28, 2011).   
The agency has published an Advanced Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (ANPRM)
3
 to 
address subsection (b), which directs the Secretary of Transportation to amend Federal 
Motor Vehicle Safety Standard (FMVSS) No. 111, Rearview Mirrors, to develop a 
rearward visibility standard that expands the required field of view to enable the driver of 
a motor vehicle to detect areas behind the motor vehicle to reduce death and injury 
resulting from backing incidents.  For purposes of this law, “vehicle backover injuries 
and deaths occur when a person is positioned behind a vehicle without a driver's 
knowledge as the driver backs up.”4  This analysis accompanies the Notice of Proposed 
Rulemaking (NPRM).   
With regard to the scope of vehicles covered by the mandate, the statute refers to all 
motor vehicles less than 10,000 pounds (except motorcycles and trailers).    
A. Prior Agency Action on Rear Visibility 
 
On November 27, 2000, NHTSA published an ANPRM (65 FR 70681)
5
 soliciting 
comments on subjects related to rear visibility including, the area to be covered by rear 
detection devices; the effectiveness of mirrors, cameras, and sensor systems; potential 
display requirements; audible backup alarms; equipment damage; test procedures; costs 
and benefits; and the potential preemptive effect of the rulemaking.  Based on its own 
research and the comments received, the agency published a notice of proposed 
rulemaking (NPRM) on September 12, 2005 (70 FR 53753)
6
 proposing to require rear 
object detection systems on straight trucks with a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of 
                                                 
2
 Appendix A. 
3
 The ANPRM was published in the Federal Register on March 4, 2009 (74 FR 9480) with the 
accompanying “Preliminary Regulatory Impact Analysis, Backover Crash Avoidance Technologies, 
FMVSS No. 111,” February 2009, (Docket No. 2009-0041-4).   
4
 S. REP. 110-275, S. Rep. No. 275, March 13, 2008. 
5
 Docket No. NHTSA-2000-7967-1. 
6
 Docket No. NHTSA-2004-19239-1. 
  
I-2 
between 4,536 kilograms (10,000 pounds) and 11,793 kilograms (26,000 pounds).  At the 
time of the notice, NHTSA did not believe that data indicated that lighter vehicles posed 
as great a risk for backover incidents as did trucks, although the agency noted that 
research on the subject was ongoing. 
The purpose of the proposed requirement was to alert drivers of medium straight trucks to 
the presence of persons and objects directly behind the vehicle, thereby reducing 
backing-related deaths and injuries.  This notice specified that manufacturers could 
choose one of two compliance options, either rear cross-view mirrors or rear video 
systems.  The regulation also set minimum specifications for video monitors, if a video 
system was used to comply with the requirement.  However, it did not permit sensor 
systems, such as radar or ultrasonic technology, to meet the standard because NHTSA did 
not believe that those systems provided reliable rear visibility data; but, the proposed 
regulation would not have prohibited vehicle manufacturers from installing these systems 
as a supplement to the requirement. 
On July 21, 2008, NHTSA issued a notice withdrawing the rulemaking on rear visibility 
for medium straight trucks.
7
 The reason for this withdrawal was that further research on 
the subject had shown that the problem posed by the types of vehicles addressed in the 
rulemaking was not as broad as originally believed, and that the proposed 
countermeasures would not result in as large a safety benefit as originally anticipated.   
Ultimately, in February 2009, NHTSA issued its first Preliminary Regulatory Impact 
Analysis (PRIA) for Backover Crash Avoidance Technologies FMVSS 111.  In this 
second PRIA, sales distribution, system effectiveness, and several summary tables were 
updated to reflect the proposal for rulemaking in the NPRM.   
B. Possible Technologies for Mitigating Backovers  
While there are a number of parking assistance systems deployed in the fleet, our 
research indicates that only a few may aid in the mitigation of backover incidents.  At this 
time, the three technological solutions which the agency has evaluated to assist in 
mitigating backovers, are rearview video (RV) systems, sensor-based object detection 
systems (including radar, infrared, or ultrasonic sensors), and mirrors (rear convex and 
look-down mirrors).  Current research has provided some guidance on which 
technologies may best mitigate backover crashes, and while none are cost-effective 
according to this analysis, camera systems are the most promising at approaching that 
status.   
Rear Convex Mirrors 
Rear-mounted convex mirrors are means to view areas behind a vehicle.  When used as a 
single convex mirror with the reflective surface pointing at the ground, these mirrors are 
sometimes referred to as backing mirrors, under mirrors, or look-down mirrors.  When 
provided as a pair of convex mirrors mounted vertically at the rear of the vehicle, they are 
referred to as rear cross-view mirrors.  Rear cross-view mirrors are intended to aid a 
driver when backing into a right-of-way by showing objects approaching on a 
                                                 
7
 Docket No. NHTSA-2006-25017. 
  
I-3 
perpendicular path behind the vehicle.  Rear “cross-view” mirrors have been sold in the 
U.S. as original equipment,
8
 and are also available as aftermarket products (mounted to 
the inside surface of the rear window).   
Rearview Video Systems 
For model year (MY) 2008, 5% of light truck vehicles sold were equipped with a RV 
system.
9
 These systems permit a driver to see the area behind the vehicle via a video 
display showing the image from a video camera mounted on the rear of the vehicle.  The 
images may be presented to the driver using a dedicated video display screen, or an 
existing screen in the vehicle, such as a navigation system, multifunction display screen, 
or a display embedded in the interior rearview mirror.   
Sensor-Based Rear Object Detection Systems 
Sensor-based object detection systems have been available for over 15 years as 
aftermarket products and for a lesser period as original equipment.  Original equipment 
systems have been marketed as a convenience feature or “parking aid” for which the 
vehicle owner‟s manuals and advertisements  sometimes contain language denoting 
sensor performance limitations with respect to detecting children or small moving 
objects.  Aftermarket systems, however, are frequently presented as safety devices for 
warning drivers of the presence of small children behind the vehicle. Object detection 
systems use electronic sensors that transmit a signal which, if an obstacle is present in a 
sensor‟s detection field, bounces the signal back to the sensor producing a positive 
“detection” of the obstacle.  These sensors detect objects in the vicinity of a vehicle at 
varying ranges depending on the technology.  To date, commercially-available object 
detection systems have been based on short-range ultrasonic technology or longer range 
radar technology, although advanced infrared (IR) sensors are under development as 
well.   
Future Technologies  
NHTSA is aware of two additional sensor technologies being considered for 
implementation in rear object detection applications: infrared technology-based systems 
and video-based object recognition.  As with other sensor systems, IR-based systems emit 
a signal, which if an object is within its detection range, will bounce back and be detected 
by a receiver.  Rear object detection via video camera with real-time image processing 
capability is also being investigated for this application.  While these technology 
applications may prove helpful in mitigating backover incidents, because of their early 
stages of development, it is not possible at this time to assess a cost benefit scenario using 
them.   
                                                 
8
 Some Toyota 4-Runner base model vehicles have cross-view mirrors since at least Model Year 2003.  
They are mounted on the interior face of the rearmost structural pillars.   
9
 Wards 2008 Automotive Yearbook. 
  
II-1 
II. Research Performed 
A. Research on Current Technologies for Mitigating Backovers 
Rear Convex Mirrors 
Analysis 
Rear convex mirrors have a low cost and last the life of the vehicle; however, they pose 
potential disadvantages.  Convex mirrors present a wider field of view of unit 
magnification than flat mirrors by compressing the image of reflected objects in their 
field of view.  This compression causes both image distortion and image minification, 
making objects and small-statured pedestrians difficult to discern and identify.   
 
Given that cross-view mirrors are positioned to show an area to the side and rear of the 
vehicle, we also believe they would not provide a significant view of the area directly 
behind the vehicle.  Additionally, NHTSA has learned that rear convex look-down 
mirrors are commonly found on SUVs and vans in Korea and Japan. However, despite 
their prevalence in those countries, NHTSA testing has not shown any positive 
effectiveness of these mirrors in mitigating backover crashes.  Even if the mirrors provide 
an improvement to visibility, agency testing showed not a single participant actually used 
a rear-mounted mirror to survey behind the vehicle and to avoid a collision under test 
conditions.   
 
 
Passenger Vehicle Research  
In response to Section 10304 of the Safe, Accountable, Flexible, Efficient Transportation 
Equity Act: A Legacy for Users (SAFETEA-LU), NHTSA conducted a study to evaluate 
methods to reduce the incidence of injury, death, and property damage caused by backing 
collisions of passenger vehicles.  Available backover avoidance technologies were 
identified and eleven were chosen for examination including two auxiliary convex mirror 
systems designed to augment rear visibility.  The study included assessment of their field 
of view and their potential to provide drivers with information concerning obstacles 
behind the vehicle.   
The examination of rearview auxiliary mirror systems revealed that neither system 
provided full rear visibility, for pedestrians and objects were not visible in substantial 
areas directly behind the vehicle.  Additionally, drivers were challenged to detect a 28-
inch object behind the vehicle while using rearview auxiliary mirrors.  The convexity of 
the mirrors caused significant image distortion, and reflected objects were difficult to 
discern.  As such, concentrated glances were necessary to identify the nature of rear 
obstacles, and a driver making quick glances prior to initiating a backing maneuver may 
not allocate sufficient time to allow recognition of an obstacle presented in the mirror. 
 
  
II-2 
Rearview Video Systems 
Analysis 
RV systems offer the most comprehensive visual coverage of the area behind a vehicle.  
NHTSA has found that RV systems can display areas on the ground almost directly 
adjacent to the bumper of the vehicle.  Furthermore, RV systems offer the possibility of 
an extremely wide field of view, with some systems able to show a 360-degree view 
around the vehicle.  As with mirrors, a concern of RV systems to effectively mitigate 
backover crashes is their passive mode of operation which requires the driver to look at 
the display to assess whether a rear obstacle is present and to take an appropriate action in 
a timely manner.   
 
Testing in Support of SAFETEA-LU Report to Congress 
In response to Section 10304 of SAFETEA-LU, NHTSA examined three rearview video 
systems: One in combination with original equipment rear parking sensors, one 
aftermarket system combining RV and parking sensor technologies, and one original 
equipment RV-only system.  This examination of rearview video systems included 
assessment of their field of view and potential to provide drivers with information about 
obstacles behind the vehicle.   
Through this study, the agency made the following observations.  Rearview video 
systems provided a clear image of the area behind the vehicle in daylight and indoor 
lighting conditions.  RV systems revealed pedestrians or obstacles behind the vehicle 
within approximately 15 feet except for an area within 8-12 inches of the rear bumper at 
ground level.  The rearview video systems also displayed wider visibility areas than the 
sensor-based systems tested in this study.  The range and height of the visibility areas 
differed significantly between the two original equipment systems examined.  In addition 
to limited field of view, limited height seemed to affect rear visibility.    
In order for rearview video systems to assist in preventing backing collisions, the driver 
must look at the video display, perceive the pedestrian or object in the video screen, and 
respond quickly, and with sufficient force applied to the brake pedal, to bring the vehicle 
to a stop.  The true efficacy of RV systems cannot be known without assessing drivers‟ 
use of the systems and how they incorporate the information into their visual scanning 
patterns.  As a result, NHTSA initiated research to investigate how drivers use RV 
systems. 
   
GM Experimental Research on Systems for Reduction of Backing Incidents 
GM conducted research to develop systems intended to assist drivers in recognizing 
people or objects behind their vehicle while performing backing maneuvers.
10
 One study 
compared parking behaviors for rear camera and ultrasonic rear parking assist (URPA) 
systems together, separately, and under traditional parking conditions (i.e., neither 
system).  Additionally, an obstacle was placed unexpectedly behind a driver‟s vehicle 
                                                 
10
 Driver Performance Research into Systems for the Reduction of Backing Incidents at General Motors 
(SAE 2006). 
  
II-3 
prior to the start of a backing maneuver to assess the driver's performance in obstacle 
detection and avoidance.
11
 Twenty-four participants hit the obstacle, while five 
participants avoided the obstacle.  Of those participants who hit the obstacle, three saw 
the obstacle while looking at the RV display,
12
 one saw the obstacle in their mirror 
(URPA and RV system), and one participant noticed the obstacle out of the back window 
(RV system).  These results suggested that participants with an RV system were 
significantly less likely to be involved in a backing incident. 
 
GM also sponsored a second external research study to evaluate driver performance and 
rear camera systems.
13
 In this study, each participant parked their vehicle using a rear 
camera and URPA system more than 30 times including practice trials.  During one 
scenario, participants, unaware that an experimenter placed an obstacle behind the 
vehicle, were asked to perform a backing maneuver to engage the URPA and the rear 
camera system.  In some cases, a flashing symbol was employed in the approximate 
location of the ruse object.  While there were no statistically significant effects of either 
the symbol or the location of the ruse object, 65% of participants avoided the obstacle.  
Greater experience with the camera system and increased sample size may have 
attributed to a higher object avoidance rate in this study than compared to the first study. 
 
Overall, GM‟s research on rearview video systems suggested that RV may provide 
limited benefit in some backing scenarios.  Subsequent research is being undertaken to 
investigate overcoming driver expectancy issues, integration of obstacle warnings with 
video displays, and automated braking.   
 
Research 
NHTSA Experimental Research: On-Road Study of Drivers’ Use of Rearview Video 
Systems 
 (see below, under “Multi-technology (sensor + camera) Systems” – this research 
project included observations from both combined systems that included cameras and 
sensor systems, and camera-only systems) 
 
Sensor-Based Rear Object Detection Systems 
Analysis   
Ultrasonic sensors have detection performance that varies as a function of the degree of 
sonic reflectivity of the surface of the obstacle.  For example, objects with a smooth 
surface such as plastic or metal reflect well, whereas objects with a textured surface, such 
as clothing, may not reflect as well.  Radar sensors, which are able to detect the water in a 
human‟s body, are better able to detect pedestrians, but still demonstrate inconsistent 
detection performance, especially with regard to small children.  It may be possible that 
sensor-based object detection system algorithms could be improved to allow for better 
                                                 
11
 McLaughlin, Hankey, Green and Kiefer, 2003. 
12
 Two participants were equipped with RV-only system and one with the combined URPA and RV system 
13
 Lee, Hankey, Green, 2004.   
  
II-4 
detection of children; however, this modification may result in other less favorable 
aspects of system performance, such as increased false alarms.  While sensor-based 
systems can detect children, NHTSA‟s research indicates that their performance is both 
“poor and inconsistent.”  Given these limitations, the agency is concerned whether 
sensor-based systems can serve as a reliable and effective safety countermeasure to 
mitigate backovers.  
 
Research 
NHTSA Research in Support of SAFETEA-LU 2006 Report to Congress 
NHTSA examined eight sensor-based original equipment and aftermarket rear parking 
systems in response to Section 10304 of the SAFETEA-LU mandate.
14
 NHTSA 
conducted testing to measure the object detection performance of short range sensor-
based systems.  Measurements included static field of view, static field of view 
repeatability, and dynamic detection range for different test objects.  The agency assessed 
the system‟s ability to detect an adult male walking in various directions to the rear of the 
vehicle.  Detection performance was also evaluated in a series of static and dynamic tests 
with 1-year-old and 3-year-old children.  An examination of rear video and auxiliary 
mirror systems was also conducted by measuring field of view and image quality.       
 
Sensor-based systems generally exhibited poor effectiveness (inconsistency and 
unreliability) to detect pedestrians, particularly children, located behind the vehicle.  
Testing showed that, in most cases, pedestrian size affected detection performance, as 
adults elicited better detection response than 1 or 3-year-old children.  Specifically, each 
system could generally detect a moving adult pedestrian (or other objects) behind a 
stationary vehicle; however, each system exhibited some difficulty in detecting moving 
children.  The reliability of the sensor-based systems was good, with the exception of one 
aftermarket ultrasonic system that malfunctioned after only a few weeks, rendering it 
unavailable for use in remaining tests.   
 
While examining the consistency of system detection performance, the agency observed 
that each sensor-based system exhibited some degree of day-to-day variability in their 
detection patterns.  Specifically, detection inconsistencies were generally noticed at the 
periphery of the detection zones and typically for no more than 1 foot in magnitude.  On 
average, these sensor-based systems had detection zones which generally covered an area 
directly behind the vehicle.  The sensor with the longest detection range could detect a 3-
year-old child up to 11 feet (along a 3-5 ft wide strip). The majority of systems were 
unable to detect test objects less than 28 inches in height.    
 
With regards to system response times, ISO 17386 recommends a maximum system 
response time of 0.35 seconds; three of the seven systems tested met this limit.  Overall, 
the response times for this test ranged from 0.18 to 1.01 seconds.  As such, in order for 
sensor-based backover avoidance systems to assist in preventing collisions, warnings 
must be generated by the system and the driver must perceive the warning within 
sufficient time to respond appropriately to avoid a crash.  Based on the response times 
exhibited by these systems there appeared insufficient time for a driver to bring the 
                                                 
14
 One of each of the original equipment and aftermarket sensor systems included rearview video. 
  
II-5 
vehicle to a stop to avoid possible collisions with pedestrians (assuming typical backing 
speeds).     
 
Paine, Macbeth & Henderson Proximity Sensor Research 
Paine, Macbeth & Henderson tested the performance of proximity sensor backing aids.
15
 
Their testing found that proximity sensors exhibited limited effectiveness for vehicles 
traveling at 5 km/h (3.1 mph) or more.  Proximity sensors were prone to produce 
“nuisance alarms” in some driving situations and were deemed an unviable option to 
reduce backing incidents.  This research suggested that a more effective system to 
mitigate backing incidents would incorporate sensors and wide-angle video camera 
technology; however, no data was provided to support this statement.  
 
GM Sensor-Based Research 
GM found that drivers do not always respond to a sensor‟s warning to alert them that an 
object is in the vicinity of the rear of the vehicle.
16
 Often, sensor-based systems, as 
currently designed, do not provide the driver with a visual depiction of the presence of an 
obstacle located to the rear of a vehicle, thereby limiting their effectiveness in mitigating 
backovers incidents.  This seems to imply that drivers are less likely to interrupt their 
actions without visual confirmation of a valid visual cue.  However, GM is also 
investigating automatic vehicle braking and haptic warning strategies for long-range 
backing warning systems. 
 
GM defined parking aid systems to include side-view mirrors which rotate downward 
when the vehicle is placed in the reverse gear position, RV camera systems, and 
ultrasonic rear parking assist systems.  Each of these systems are designed to provide 
supplemental information to the driver to aid in locating and avoiding known fixed 
objects behind the vehicle and near the bumper.  However, GM emphasized that these 
systems are not intended to function as collision warning or avoidance systems. 
 
Unlike parking assistance systems, GM believes that backing warning systems are 
intended to alert drivers to the presence of unexpected or unseen objects behind their 
vehicles.  To be more effective, GM believes that these systems should include a warning 
designed to capture the driver‟s attention with sufficient advance notice to allow the 
driver to stop or otherwise avoid the object.   
 
GM sponsored a study on the effectiveness of backing warnings which indicated 
surprisingly low effectiveness.
17
 The study found that only 13 percent of drivers avoided 
hitting an unexpected obstacle, and over 87 percent of the drivers collided with the 
obstacle following the warning.  Sixty-eight percent of drivers provided with the warning 
demonstrated precautionary behaviors in response to the warning including, covering the 
brake, tapping the brake, or braking completely.  While 44 percent braked, these braking 
levels were generally insufficient to avoid a collision.  Although data provides some 
                                                 
15
 Paine, Macbeth & Henderson (2003). 
16
 SAE Paper 2006-01-1982.  
17
 Llaneras, Green, Chundrlik, Altan, and Singer, 2004. 
  
II-6 
evidence that warnings influenced driver behavior, warnings were unreliable to induce 
drivers to immediately brake to stop the vehicle completely.   
 
This study further suggests that knowledge and experience with the backing warning 
system may not significantly improve immediate driver response to a backing warning.  
While specific training on the warning system was provided to eight drivers, only one 
driver avoided the obstacle. In each case, drivers reported that they did not expect to 
encounter an obstacle in their backing path.  Many drivers also reported that they 
searched for an obstacle following the warning, but “didn‟t see anything” and continued 
their backing maneuver.  These perceptions suggest that driver expectancy is a powerful 
determinant influencing driver behavior.   
 
Although warnings in this study appeared to orient some drivers to search for an obstacle 
and/or take precautionary action (reduce speed, etc.), warnings did not necessarily lead 
drivers to brake sufficiently hard in response to the warning.  Many drivers appeared to 
expect direct sensory confirmation of the existence of an object before initiating 
immediate avoidance behaviors.  Similar behavioral results were observed in response to 
warnings from a rear-end collision avoidance system.
18
 This study found that the primary 
effect of warning systems was redirecting a driver‟s attention, rather than triggering an 
immediate driver response.  However, unlike a forward collision warning situation, where 
drivers can simply look out the forward view and quickly detect an in-path threat, 
detecting rear obstacles presents a difficult challenge. 
 
Research 
NHTSA Experimental Research: On-Road Study of Drivers’ Use of Rearview Video 
Systems 
 (See below, under “Multi-technology (sensor + camera) Systems” – this research 
project included observations from both combined systems that included cameras and 
sensor systems) 
 
 
Multi-technology (sensor + camera) systems 
Description 
Beginning in MY 2008, vehicles were equipped with backing aid systems which 
incorporated multiple technologies, namely RV systems augmented by rear parking 
sensors, where warning information is integrated with the RV visual display.   
 
Research 
NHTSA Experimental Research: On-Road Study of Drivers’ Use of Rearview Video 
Systems  
 
                                                 
18
 Lee et al. (2002). 
  
II-7 
Drivers‟ use of rearview video systems was observed during staged and naturalistic 
backing maneuvers to determine whether drivers look at the RV display during backing 
and whether use of the system affects backing behavior.  Thirty-seven test participants 
aged 25 to 60 years were comprised of twelve drivers of RV-equipped vehicles, thirteen 
drivers of vehicles equipped with an RV system and a rear parking sensor system (RPS), 
and twelve drivers of vehicles with no backing aid.  All participants had driven and 
owned a 2007 Honda Odyssey minivan as their primary vehicle for at least 6 months, and 
participants were told that the purpose of the study was to assess how drivers learn to use 
the features and functions of a new vehicle. 
 
Participants visited the sponsor‟s research lab to have unobtrusive video and other data 
recording equipment installed in their personal vehicles and for a brief test drive.  
Participants then drove their vehicles for a period of four weeks in their normal daily 
activities while backing maneuvers were recorded.  At the end of four weeks, participants 
returned to the research lab to have the recording equipment removed.  Then, participants 
took a second test drive, identical to the first, except that when backing out of the garage 
bay, an unexpected obstacle appeared behind the vehicle.  The results of the naturalistic 
driving and unexpected obstacle scenario are provided below. 
 
Results for naturalistic driving 
 Thirty-seven participants made 6,145 backing maneuvers (at an average backing 
speed of 2.26 miles per hour), none of which resulted in a significant collision; 
however, some minor collisions (i.e., with trash receptacles and other vehicles) 
occurred during routine backing. 
 In real-world backing situations, drivers equipped with RV systems spent 8 to 12 
percent of the time looking at the RV display during backing maneuvers.  
 On average, drivers made 2.17 glances per backing maneuver with the RV-only 
system, and 1.65 glances per maneuver with the RV and RPS system.  
 Overall, drivers looked at least once at the RV display on approximately 65 percent of 
backing events.  Drivers looked more than once at the RV display on only 40 percent 
of backing events. 
Results for unexpected obstacle maneuver 
 Drivers with an RV system made 13 to 14 percent of glances at the RV video display 
during the initial phase of backing in the staged maneuvers, independent of system 
presence. 
 Drivers spent over 25 percent of backing time looking over their right shoulder in the 
staged backing maneuvers.  
 Only participants who looked at the RV display more than once during the maneuver 
avoided a crash during the staged crash-imminent event.  
 Results indicated that the RV system was associated with a statistically significant 
(28%) reduction in crashes with the unexpected obstacle as compared to participants 
without an RV system.  (Data from these tests were combined with later tests and 
appear in Table V-3.)  All participants in the “no system” condition crashed, since the 
staged obstacle event scenario was designed such that drivers without an RV system 
could not see the obstacle.  
  
II-8 
 The addition of RPS provided no additional benefit.  Although statistically not 
significant, more participants equipped with both RV and RPS technologies crashed 
(85%) than did those equipped with the RV-only system (58%).   
 The RPS system only detected the obstacle in 38% of obstacle event trials.  Only 5 of 
13 participants equipped with the combination RV and RPS system received an RPS 
warning indicating the presence of a rear obstacle; of those 5 participants, 4 crashed.   
 It is possible that as sensor-based rear object detection systems are improved to detect 
children, their effectiveness would also improve; however, no data to support this 
assumption yet exists.   
Possible reasons why the RV systems did not produce greater benefits during the obstacle 
event trials include delay associated with the appearance of the image in the RV display 
and drivers‟ inappropriate timing in determining when to look at the RV display.  
Furthermore, drivers‟ expectations to not encounter an obstacle in the research setting 
could have contributed to drivers exhibiting less vigilance than when performing real-
world backing maneuvers.   
 
Results of this study revealed that drivers looked at the RV display in approximately 14 
percent of glances in baseline and obstacle events and 10 percent of glances in 
naturalistic backing maneuvers.  The agency recognized that the timing and frequency of 
drivers‟ glances at the RV display has a noticeable impact on the likelihood of rear 
obstacle detection.  However, making single or multiple glances at the RV display at the 
start of the maneuver does not ensure that the path behind the vehicle will remain clear 
for the entire backing maneuver.  While RV systems offer the driver a useful tool for 
detecting rear obstacles, some guidance may be necessary to educate drivers as to the 
most effective way to incorporate this new visual information source into their glance 
behavior during backing maneuvers so as to increase the benefits attainable with these 
systems.    
 
Future Technologies  
Research 
Additional NHTSA Backing Crash Countermeasure Research 
NHTSA is currently engaged in cooperative research with GM on Advanced Collision 
Avoidance Technology relating to backing incidents.  The ACAT backing systems 
project will assess the ability of advanced technologies to mitigate backing crashes and 
refine a tool to assess the potential safety benefit of these technologies.  The focus of the 
ACAT Backing Crash Countermeasure Program is to characterize backing crashes in the 
U.S. and investigate a set of integrated countermeasures to mitigate them at appropriate 
points along the crash timeline (prior to entering the vehicle and continuing throughout 
the backing sequence).  The objective of this research is to estimate potential safety 
benefits or harm reduction that these countermeasures might provide.  A Safety Impact 
Methodology (SIM), consisting of a software-based simulation model together with a set 
of objective tests for evaluating backing crash countermeasures, will be developed to 
estimate the harm reduction potential of specific countermeasures.  Included in the SIM‟s 
  
II-9 
methods for estimating potential safety benefits will be a consideration of assessing and 
modeling unintentional potential disbenefits that might arise from a countermeasure. 
 
While NHTSA anticipates the results of this advanced research will provide valuable 
information, the completion of this effort will not occur prior to the Congressional 
deadline for this mandate.   
 
  
III-1 
III. Target Population 
Drivers tend to reverse their vehicle when parking or exiting a parking space, and as such 
many of these events can occur off the roadway.  Thus, a number of these cases occur off 
the trafficway and outside the realm of data typically collected by NHTSA. (For example, 
the Fatality Analysis Reporting System (FARS) does not include fatal backing crashes 
occurring off the trafficway.).   
Information on injuries and fatalities in backing crashes occurring on nonpublic roads and 
in most parts of driveways and parking lots is obtained through the Agency‟s Not-in-
Traffic Surveillance (NiTS) system.  The nontraffic crash component of that system was 
designed by using our existing crash data collection infrastructures.  To collect 
information about injuries in nontraffic crashes, NHTSA requested that beginning in 
2007 the NASS researchers, who visit the police jurisdictions that contribute crash 
reports to the NASS-GES sample, send all injury cases that did not qualify for NASS-
GES to a NHTSA contractor for tracking and cataloguing.  The injury crashes that did not 
qualify for the NASS-GES system because they were off of the trafficway (nontraffic) 
were then entered into NiTS.  To collect information on nontraffic crash fatalities, 
NHTSA requested that beginning in 2007 the FARS analysts, who collect and enter the 
fatal traffic crash information into the FARS system for each State, send all cases that did 
not qualify for FARS to the NHTSA contractor.  Similar to the nontraffic injuries, the 
crash fatalities that did not qualify for the FARS system because they were off of the 
trafficway were then entered into NiTS.  NHTSA also supplemented the nontraffic crash 
fatality reports in NiTS with reports of nontraffic crash fatalities submitted by the NASS 
researchers.  While NHTSA did not receive all possible reports through this system, 
NHTSA received a large enough sample to derive a national estimate of the total number 
of nontraffic backover crash fatalities and injuries and to describe the circumstances 
surrounding these crashes.  These estimates were then added to the backing crash 
fatalities from FARS and the backing crash injuries from NASS-GES to produce an 
estimate of the total number of backover fatalities and injuries.  These totals are presented 
in the following tables 
19
 
 
Due to a limitation in the data available, a breakdown of backover crashes by state is not 
available.  Later investigation of SCI crashes found that an estimated 40 percent (35 of 
85) of the victims were related to the driver, and that 95% of SCI backover crashes 
occurred in daylight conditions.  
                                                 
19
 Data produced by the NiTS project can be found in  “FATALITIES AND INJURIES IN MOTOR 
VEHICLE BACKING CRASHES” DOT HS 811 144.   
  
III-2 
Table III-1: Fatalities and Injuries in All Backing Crashes For All Vehicles 
Injury Severity Total Backovers  Other Backing Crashes 
 Estimated 
Total 
Sample Count Estimated 
Total 
Sample 
Count 
Estimated 
Total 
Sample 
Count 
Fatalities 463 929 292 179 171 750 
       
Incapacitating Injury 6,000 304 3,000 131 3,000 173 
Non-incapacitating  
  Injury  12,000 813 7,000 372 5,000 441 
Possible Injury 27,000 929 7,000 179 20,000 750 
Injured Severity  
  Unknown 2,000 48 1,000 23 2,000 25 
Total Injuries 48,000 2,094 18,000 705 30,000 1,389 
Source: FARS 2002-2006, NASS-GES 2002-2006, NiTS 2007 
Note: Estimates may not add up to totals due to independent rounding. 
 
Vehicle Type Involvement in Backing Incidents 
The following table summarizes the estimated fatalities and injuries in backing crashes 
for all vehicles as well as passenger vehicles (passenger cars and light trucks).  Note that 
backover crashes differ from the greater category of backing crashes.  
 
Table III-2: Injuries and Fatalities and Injuries For All Vehicles 
Backing Crash Scenarios All Vehicles Passenger Vehicles 
 Fatalities Injuries Fatalities Injuries 
Backovers: Striking Nonoccupant 292 18,000 228 17,000 
Backing: Striking Fixed Object 33 2,000 33 2,000 
Backing: Noncollision 62 1,000 53 1,000 
Backing: Striking/Struck by Other Vehicle 68 24,000 39 20,000 
Backing: Other 8 3,000 8 3,000 
Total Backing 463 48,000 361 43,000 
 
Among cases where the type of striking vehicle is known, 78 percent of the backover 
fatalities and 95 percent of the backover injuries involved passenger vehicles.  Table 3 
indicates that all major passenger vehicle types (cars, utility vehicles, pickups, and vans) 
are involved in backover fatalities and injuries.  However, understanding the association 
between vehicle type and backover crashes may indicate the vehicle types most likely to 
benefit from rear visibility enhancement countermeasures.  In particular, some vehicles 
may have a greater risk of being in backing crashes than other vehicles.  Table III-3 
illustrates that pickup trucks and utility vehicles are overrepresented in backover fatalities 
and injuries when compared to all non-backing traffic injury crashes and to their 
proportion of the vehicle fleet.  For example, utility vehicles make up 16 percent of the 
on-road fleet, but were involved in 20 percent of the backing injuries and 30 percent of 
the backing fatalities.   
  
III-3 
Table III-3: Passenger Vehicle Backover Fatalities and Injuries by Vehicle Type 
Backing 
Vehicle Type 
Fatalities 
Percent of 
Fatalities 
Estimated 
Injuries 
Estimated 
Percent of 
Injuries 
Percent of 
Vehicles  in Non-
Backing Traffic 
Injury Crashes 
Percent of 
Fleet 
Car 59 26% 9,000 54% 62% 58% 
Utility  
  Vehicle 68 30% 3,000 20% 14% 16% 
Van 29 13% 1,000 6% 8% 8% 
Pickup 72 31% 3,000 18% 15% 17% 
Other Light  
  Vehicle 0 0% * 2% 1% <1% 
Passenger 
Vehicles 228 100% 17,000 100% 100% 100% 
Source: FARS 2002-2006, NASS-GES 2002-2006, NiTS 2007, Polk 2006 
Note: * indicates estimate less than 500, estimates may not add up to totals due to independent rounding. 
 
The search criteria when compiling the target population should take into account a large 
number of vehicle types, not just the typical passenger cars and light trucks, but also an 
“other light vehicles” category which includes Low Speed Vehicles (LSVs).  These 
include vehicles with a maximum speed of up to 25 mph, such as community vehicles, 
security carts, and golf carts.  However, no Low Speed Vehicles were shown to have had 
any backover crashes. 
 
The agency requests comments on why there appears to be a higher fatality rate for light 
trucks than for passenger cars (that is, the percent of fatalities for light trucks is higher 
than the percent of the fleet for light trucks and lower for passenger cars).  And we also 
request comments on why the injury rates for passenger cars and light trucks are 
relatively close.  These data indicate that passenger cars and light trucks have similar 
rates of incidences of backing up into people, but the fatality risk in light trucks is much 
higher than in passenger cars.  The agency would like to know if anyone can determine a 
reason for the dichotomy.   
 
 
  
  
III-4 
Table III-4: Breakdown of Backover Fatalities and Injuries Involving Passenger Vehicles for 
Victims Under Age 5 Years (in %) 
Age of Victim 
(years) 
Number of 
Fatalities 
0 <1 
1 59 
2 23 
3 14 
4 3 
Total 100 
Note:  Estimates may not add to totals due to independent rounding. 
Source: US Census Bureau, Population Estimates Program, 2007 Population 
Estimates;  
FARS 2002-2006, NASS-GES 2002-2006, NiTS 2007 
 
Table III-5. All Backover Fatalities and Injuries by Age of Victim 
Age of 
Victim 
Fatalities Percent 
of 
Fatalities 
Estimated 
Injuries 
Estimated 
Percent of 
Injuries 
Sample 
Count of 
Injuries 
Percent of 
Population 
All Vehicles 
  Under 5 103 35% 2,000 8% 37 7% 
  5-10 13 4% * 3% 33 7% 
  10-19 4 1% 2,000 12% 75 14% 
  20-59 69 24% 9,000 48% 383 55% 
  60-69 28 9% 2,000 8% 54 8% 
  70+ 76 26% 3,000 18% 107 9% 
  
Unknown   * 2% 16  
Total 292 100% 18,000 100% 705 100% 
 
Passenger Vehicles 
  Under 5 100 44% 2,000 9% 35 7% 
  5-10 10 4% 1,000 3% 30 7% 
  10-19 1 1% 2,000 12% 71 14% 
  20-59 29 13% 8,000 46% 319 55% 
  60-69 15 6% 1,000 8% 46 8% 
  70+ 74 33% 3,000 19% 95 9% 
  
Unknown   * 2% 12  
Total 228 100% 17,000 100% 608 100% 
Source: US Census Bureau, Population Estimates Program, 2007 Population Estimates;  
FARS 2002-2006, NASS-GES 2002-2006, NiTS 2007 
 
  
IV-1 
IV. Rear Visibility Data 
While the agency has not determined specific alternatives, one possibility for compliance 
testing (as is done in FMVSS No. 111 right now) would be for the agency to develop a 
test grid that includes an object that must be directly visible or indirectly visible with 
whatever countermeasure is developed by a manufacturer.   Tests of current vehicles have 
been performed to provide information using a generic test grid.  In essence this could be 
a performance test, such that when a driver in a vehicle could see a test grid of objects 
either through direct visibility by the driver, or through a countermeasure.   
 
Rear Visibility of Current Vehicles 
NHTSA found that the area around a vehicle that a driver can directly see without the aid 
of non-required mirrors or other devices (i.e., direct –view rear visibility) can be affected 
by the exterior, structural design of the vehicle.
20
  These structural elements included the 
width of a vehicle‟s structural pillars and the size of its window openings.  Additionally, 
vehicles with greater height and length are likely to have larger blind zone areas than 
vehicles with smaller dimensions.  NHTSA has also found that head restraints can affect 
the direct rear visibility.   
 
In 2007, NHTSA observed the rear visibility characteristics of 44 recent-model light 
vehicles
21
 to assess the range of visible areas in the current fleet and provide information 
that can be used to determine whether a link exists between the rear blind zone area and 
the risk of a backover crash incidence.  The visibility of a visual target was determined 
over a 6300-square-foot area stretching 35 feet to either side of the vehicle‟s centerline 
and 90 feet back from the vehicle‟s rear bumper.  The agency selected a 29.4-inch-tall 
(approximately the height of a 1-year-old child) visual target.  Rear visibility was 
measured for both a 50
th
 percentile adult male driver (69.1 inches tall) and a 5
th
 percentile 
adult female driver (59.8 inches tall).  The areas, over which the visual target was 
visually discernible using direct glances (i.e., looking out vehicle windows) and indirect 
glances (i.e., looking into side or center rearview mirrors), were determined.  
 
Since all passenger vehicles have side mirrors and center rearview mirrors that are 
essentially the same (excluding slight overall size differences), NHTSA determined that a 
key source of variability affecting rear visibility is a vehicle‟s body structure and interior 
components (e.g., rear head restraints).  As such, the direct-view rear visibility metric 
focused on the impact of a vehicle‟s structural characteristics on rear visibility.   
 
Through this study, NHTSA observed that rear blind zones for individual vehicles ranged 
in value from 100 to 1,440 square feet.  When summarized by vehicle category and curb 
weight (as a surrogate indicator for vehicle size), as illustrated in Figure 1, the data shows 
that average direct-view rear blind zone areas varied within these groups.  The greatest 
range of direct-view rear blind zone area size was seen for the 4,000-5,000 lb SUV group.  
Figure 2 illustrates that SUVs (as a whole) were associated with the largest average 
                                                 
20
 Light Vehicle Rear Visibility Assessment, DOT HS 810 909, September 2008. 
21
 Measured vehicles included the ten top-selling passenger cars and light trucks for calendar year 2006. 
  
IV-2 
direct-view rear blind zone area as well as the largest range of values for the four body 
types examined.  Overall, light trucks (segregated here into vans, pickups, and SUVs) as 
a vehicle class were observed to have larger rear blind zone areas than passenger cars, as 
indicated in Figure 2.  While small light pickup trucks had relatively small direct-view 
rear blind zone areas, light trucks were generally overrepresented in backover incidents.  
 
Figure IV-1. Direct-View Rear Blind Zone Area by Vehicle Category for a 
Measurement Field of 50-Foot Long by 60-Foot Wide. 
Source: Light Vehicle Rear Visibility Assessment, DOT HS 810 909. 
Note: Error bars show the range of values for each vehicle category. 
 
 
  
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
1100
1200
1300
1400
PC Light
(2,000-
2,499 lbs)
(N=1)
PC Compact
(2,500-
2,999 lbs)
(N=3)
PC Medium
(3,000-
3,499 lbs)
(N=8)
PC Heavy
(3,500 lbs
and over)
(N=4)
Pickups
<4,000 lbs
(N=3)
Pickups
>4,000 lbs
(N=4)
SUV <4,000
lbs (N=4)
SUV 4,000-
5,000 lbs
(N=5)
SUV 5,000-
6,000 lbs
(N=4)
SUV >6000
lbs (N=1)
Van <5,000
lbs (N=6)
Van
>=5,000 lbs)
(N=1)
Vehicle Category
A
v
e
ra
g
e
 R
e
a
r 
B
li
n
d
 Z
o
n
e
 A
re
a
 (
S
q
. 
F
t.
)
  
IV-3 
Figure IV-2. Direct-View Rear Blind Zone Area by Vehicle Category for a 
Measurement Field of 50-Foot Long by 60-Foot Wide. 
Source: Light Vehicle Rear Visibility Assessment, DOT HS 810 909. 
Note: Error bars show the range of values for each vehicle category. 
 
 
 
Average direct-view rear longitudinal sight distances were acquired by mathematically 
averaging eight longitudinal sight distance measurements taken in 1-foot increments 
across the rear of each vehicle.  As illustrated in Figure 3, generally light trucks had 
longer rear longitudinal sight distances than passenger cars.  Exceptions to this trend 
included a few small pickup trucks for which average direct-view rear sight distance 
values were in the vicinity of those measured for smaller passenger cars, as shown in 
Figure 4.  Average direct-view rear sight distance values were longest for a full-size van, 
SUVs and pickup trucks with a curb weight of 4,000 lbs or greater.  Overall, our rear 
visibility measurements revealed that light trucks exhibited poor rear visibility when 
compared with passenger cars.   
 
  
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
1100
1200
1300
1400
PC All (N=16) Pickups All (N=7) Vans All (N=7) SUVs All (N=14)
Vehicle Category
A
v
e
ra
g
e
 R
e
a
r 
B
li
n
d
 Z
o
n
e
 A
re
a
 (
S
q
. 
F
t.
)
  
IV-4 
Figure IV-3. Direct-View Average Rear Longitudinal Sight Distance by Vehicle 
Category. 
Source: Light Vehicle Rear Visibility Assessment, DOT HS 810 909 
Note: Error bars show the range of values for each vehicle category. 
 
 
Figure IV-4. Direct-View Average Rear Longitudinal Sight Distance by Vehicle 
Category and Curb Weight. 
Source: Light Vehicle Rear Visibility Assessment, DOT HS 810 909 
Note: Error bars show the range of values for each vehicle category. 
 
 
 
0.0
5.0
10.0
15.0
20.0
25.0
30.0
35.0
40.0
45.0
50.0
55.0
60.0
PC All (N=16) Pickups All (N=7) Vans All (N=7) SUV All (N=14)
Vehicle Category
A
v
e
ra
g
e
 S
ig
h
t 
D
is
ta
n
c
e
 (
F
e
e
t)
0.0
5.0
10.0
15.0
20.0
25.0
30.0
35.0
40.0
45.0
50.0
55.0
60.0
PC Light
(2,000-
2,499 lbs)
(N=1)
PC
Compact
(2,500-
2,999 lbs)
(N=3)
PC
Medium
(3,000-
3,499 lbs)
(N=8)
PC Heavy
(3,500 lbs
and over)
(N=4)
Pickups
<4,000 lbs
(N=3)
Pickups
>4,000 lbs
(N=4)
SUV
<4,000 lbs
(N=4)
SUV
4,000-
5,000 lbs
(N=5)
SUV
5,000-
6,000 lbs
(N=4)
SUV
>6000 lbs
(N=1)
Van
<5,000 lbs
(N=6)
Van
>=5,000
lbs)
Vehicle Category
A
v
e
ra
g
e
 S
ig
h
t 
D
is
ta
n
c
e
 (
F
e
e
t)
  
IV-5 
  
Relationship Between Rear Visibility and Backing/Backover Crashes 
Using the rear visibility measurements discussed in the prior section, NHTSA 
investigated whether a statistical relationship could be identified between rear visibility 
and backing crashes and between rear visibility and backover crashes.  For clarification, a 
backover is a specifically-defined type of incident, in which a non-occupant of a vehicle 
(i.e., a pedestrian or cyclist) is struck by a vehicle moving in reverse.  Backing crashes 
include the set of all backover crashes, and involve all crashes when the vehicle is 
moving in reverse.  The implication is if one solves the set of all backing crashes, that 
means they have solved the subset of backing crashes that are backovers.  Rear visibility 
data were used to compute rear visibility metrics which could have a statistical 
relationship with backing and/or backover crashes.  NHTSA assessed the relationship 
between real world backing/backover crashes and rear visibility based on three metrics: 
average rear longitudinal sight distance, direct-view rear visibility measurements for a 50 
feet long by 60 feet wide test area, and direct-view rear visibility for a 50 feet long by 20 
feet wide test area.
22
  
 
Backing risk was estimated from police-reported crashes in the State Data System. 
Backing rates were calculated for 21 vehicle groups with vehicles that had at least 25 
backing crashes to account for statistical variability.  Backing rate data were provided by 
the following states for the specified calendar years: 
 
   Alabama (2000-2003)     Florida (2000-2005) 
   Georgia (2000-2005)     Illinois (2000-2005) 
   Kansas (2001-2006)     Kentucky (2000-2005) 
   Maryland (2000-2005)     Michigan (2004-2006) 
   Missouri (2000-2005)     Nebraska (2000-2004) 
   New Mexico (2001-2006)     New York (2000) 
   North Carolina (2000-2005)    Pennsylvania (2000-2001, 2003-2005) 
   Utah (2000-2004)      Washington (2002-2005) 
   Wisconsin (2000-2005)     Wyoming (2000-2005) 
 
  
 
Simple correlation analysis revealed an association between the two direct-view rear 
blind zone areas and backing crash risk.  Specifically, larger blind zone areas generally 
posed a greater risk of being involved in a backing crash.  A statistically significant 
relationship
23
 between backing crash risk and direct-view rear blind zone area was 
discovered for both test areas.  However, in this analysis, an association between average 
rear longitudinal sight distance and backing risk was found to be weaker and not 
statistically significant.
24
 
                                                 
22
 Light Vehicle Rear Visibility Assessment, DOT HS 810 909, September 2008 and an unpublished report 
by  NHTSA‟s Mathematical Analysis Division “Rear Visibility and Backing Risk in Crashes,” December 
2008.  
23
 r=0.51, p=0.02. 
24
 r=0.26. 
  
IV-6 
 
A multivariate logistic analysis to control for potentially confounding factors produced a 
statistically significant
25
 relationship between backing crash risk and direct-view rear 
blind zone area was established for the 50-feet long by 60-feet wide area but not for the 
50 feet long by 20 feet wide test area.  These calculations suggest that larger blind zone 
areas as measured by the wide area are associated with a higher backing crash risk.  
Estimated results for the risk of backover crashes using rear longitudinal sight distance 
were not statistically significant.  Based on the results of the logistic analysis, NHTSA 
believes that rear blind zone area measured over a test area 50-feet long by 60-feet wide, 
would provide some indication of a vehicle‟s backing crash risk, but may be larger than 
needed for a backover rulemaking.  This makes some logical sense, since some of the 
backing crashes include backing out of a driveway into traffic, and the wider view 
available of traffic at speed, the better chance of seeing traffic and not backing into the 
street.     
 
In this analysis, the agency examines the costs and benefits of two camera systems - 130 
degree and 180 degree cameras.  In essence a wider zone would require a 180 degree 
camera, rather than a 130 degree camera.  While it is enticing to mandate the widest lens 
camera and largest display, the SCI data shows that most (85 percent) backovers occur 
within a length of 20ft of the starting position, and NHTSA‟s Monte Carlo analysis 
suggests a 10 foot wide area.  This strongly suggests that a good test requirement for 
backover would examine the visibility provided to the driver covering specifically the 10 
foot wide by 20 foot long area behind the vehicle.  Both the 130 and 180 degree cameras 
cover this same space, so either would be appropriate.  For perspective, the average blind 
zone area for vehicles with no countermeasures extends from the rear of the vehicle, back 
over 30 feet.   
 
When examining all backing crashes (including backing into traffic from a driveway), a 
wider view of the area behind the vehicle is useful.  The length of the view of the 
distance directly behind the vehicle is not statistically significantly different between 
vehicles.  Our theory is that to reduce pedestrian crashes, one needs to see or be able to 
sense areas relatively close to the vehicle.  For most vehicles we tested, a young child 
could not be seen within 12 feet of any of the vehicles, with most having sight distances 
beyond 20 feet.  We could not find a statistically significant difference in crashes with 
vehicles with sight distances 20 to 50 feet back, since most of the need to see is in areas 
smaller than that, close to the rear of the vehicle.  There were too few vehicles with sight 
distance less than 20 feet to determine whether there was a statistically significant 
difference between vehicles with a 12 to 20 foot sight distance.  Rear visibility data for 
over seventy models is available in Appendix B.   
 
For comparison, the following table provides a simplified detection range and the 
applicable countermeasures from those examined.  It should be noted that the sight 
distances in the above tables denote how many feet from the vehicle‟s rear until vision 
begins, whereas the numbers below are the distances from the vehicle‟s rear up to the 
edge of the vehicle‟s visible range or system detection range.  Note that the difference in 
                                                 
25
 Chi-square=127, P=<0.001; chi-square=15, P=0.001 respectively. 
  
IV-7 
range between 20 feet and 35 feet is not in the camera itself, but in the size of the display 
to allow image clarity.  
 
Table IV-1 – Technologies Evaluated, with their Coverage Range 
Coverage 
Range 
Technologies that Could Meet this Range 
6 ft range  
Rear-mounted convex mirror,  
ultrasonic or radar sensors,  
rearview video system with in-rearview-mirror or in-dash display 
16 ft range  
Radar sensor(s),  
rearview video system with in-rearview-mirror or in-dash display 
20 ft range  Rearview video system with in-rearview-mirror or in-dash display 
35 ft range  Rearview video system with in-dash display 
 
 
  
V-1 
V. Benefits 
A. Probability of a fatal backover being avoided 
SCI Case Report Review Background 
While a current annual estimate of backover crash fatalities and injuries can be pieced 
together from databases such as NiTS, FARS, and NASS-GES, the effectiveness of these 
backover methods needs to be created from a source with much more detailed 
information.  In order to closely examine backover cases, Special Crash Investigations 
(SCI) were initiated.   By collecting and analyzing a set of in-depth SCI cases, an 
estimate of the portion of backover crashes that are avoidable can be made.  Test data 
from a study about backing aid usage, provides an estimate how many of those avoidable 
cases could be avoided.  In short the fatalities calculation uses four parts; the target 
population of fatalities, F, the percentage of cases found to be “avoidable,” avoidability 
(factor fA), the percentage of cases in which the system performs and provides the needed 
information (factor fS), and the percentage of cases where drivers will recognize the 
information from the system and act appropriately to actually avoid a crash (factor fDR), 
and calculate ( F * fA * fS* fDR ), to estimate the potential benefits of different backover 
crash countermeasures.   Injuries will be calculated similarly. 
In order to better understand how avoidable these situations are, a few NHTSA analysts 
reviewed 50 available SCI case reports.  The Special Crash Investigations are a collection 
of in-depth reports made soon after a crash and are not nationally representative, but they 
were chosen due to their detail and immediate availability.  These are also cases where 
investigators had a chance to record volunteered reports and testimonies from police and 
those involved in the crash.  A team of NHTSA analysts read the case reports, and based 
upon that information, decided whether or not the victim was moving at the time of the 
backing maneuver, if the victim was detectable given vision, mirrors, cameras, or sensor 
systems, and created an estimated, qualitative view of how avoidable the crash was with 
the given technologies.  Some of the decisions from the team conflict with the coding 
from the SCI report, but these differences are mainly regarding whether or not the victim 
was moving, and are a product of the team trying to deduce the situation regarding the 
crash, rather than to code with certainty what precisely happened.   
 
Pedestrian movement 
Before making judgments regarding the ability of the sensors and driver, one single 
determination was made that wound up pinning down the nature of the pedestrian case; 
was the pedestrian moving?  Due to the nature of the SCI investigations, an exact location 
for the pedestrians was not available, but many times a description of what the pedestrian 
was doing before or during the backing maneuver was available.  While determining 
pedestrian movement, the team formed one or more sets of scenarios for how the crash 
occurred, because precise locations for person and vehicle were not available.  Thus, 
instead of the single presentation of a court-room style simulation, the team would 
sometimes consider multiple such re-enactments per case depending upon the inherent 
  
V-2 
ambiguity of the SCI reports.  If a pedestrian was moving during the crash, this has a 
negative impact on the sensor systems.  Examples of phrases within the report that hinted 
whether the pedestrian was moving include “riding a bike” and “sitting and playing.”  
Also, “moving” is slightly a misnomer as it is a term used to specifically denote a case in 
which the pedestrian was not stationary at the beginning of the backing maneuver.  
Driver visibility through line-of-sight 
The driver‟s visibility is the key to these cases, and despite the results of these cases, a 
determination was made based on the supposed pedestrian location (as determined by the 
narrative made by the SCI case author), and the visibility profile of the vehicle as laid out 
in the blind spot diagrams in the report.  The two types of visibility catalogued in the 
evaluation were direct vision and visibility using mirrors. A pedestrian was visible using 
direct vision if they were visible by direct line-of-sight (no mirrors) to an average driver 
in the driver‟s seat.  This visual data is expected to be collected starting ten seconds prior 
to and throughout the backing motion.  Thus, the pedestrian was “directly visible” if the 
driver would have seen them within or entering the upcoming backing trajectory of the 
vehicle, even before the vehicle was put into its rearward motion.  This definition 
eliminates cases where a person is known to be within the vicinity of the vehicle, but the 
driver does not have recent or current line-of-sight to that person.  With regard to 
“meaningful” amounts of data, the analysts attempted to assess the cases so that a “split 
second” view or obstructed view would not be coded as “visible,” as it would be too 
difficult to ascertain visually that there was a pedestrian in the way, nor would cases with 
insufficient reaction time given the circumstances be coded as “visible.”  “Visible using 
mirrors” refers to the same constraints, excepting of course that the pedestrian had to be 
visible within the mirrors (any of the side and center rear view mirrors) rather than by 
direct line-of-sight.   
 
Ability to Detect Pedestrians 
A large part in the determination of whether a certain case could have been avoided was 
to determine in every case if the situation was one that could have been averted with the 
aid of certain technologies; in a word, whether the pedestrian was “detectable.”  This is 
completely separate from the human factor of what the particular driver in the case was 
doing, as well as what an ideal driver would have been able to do.  Simply put, would the 
countermeasure in question show or display any sign of the pedestrian whatsoever, 
regardless of how much time was left to the driver?  After determining whether the 
technology would have detected the pedestrian, the next step is to ascertain if a prudent 
driver (as opposed to the driver of the case vehicle) would have been able to use such a 
technology in order to avoid the crash.   
The driver‟s ability to perceive objects behind the vehicle can be aided by various sensor 
technologies.  The two considered were ultrasonic and radar systems, which can sense 1 
year old children within these detection zones below as in Figure 5.  These systems, 
especially ultrasonics, are known to be unreliable at picking up small objects, such as 
children, and have difficulty picking up objects that pass into the detection zone laterally.  
Stationary pedestrians that are larger in size or are as high as the bumper have an 
  
V-3 
increased chance of being detected reliably.  Sensor systems were assumed to cutoff 
above 3 mph.  Radar systems perform better than ultrasonic systems in detecting distance 
to and recognition of people.  Infra-red systems and composite systems used to 
differentiate human beings from their environment are available or theoretically possible, 
but were not considered in these case reviews.   
 
*Figure V-1 – Ultrasonic and Radar Sensor Detection Area* 
 
  
V-4 
Camera systems were also evaluated by the team.  The display is assumed to be active 
immediately (a fraction of a second at most) after the vehicle is engaged in reverse 
(therefore, before and during the backing motion). However, the expectation is that a 
conscientious driver will look in the display before backing up, just as a conscientious 
driver is told to look behind them using mirrors or over their shoulder.  Cameras have a 
single cone of visibility, and as such will not be able to see directly beneath the bumper, 
depending on practical placement and vehicle design.  It was assumed that the camera 
would be placed aiming downward, and above the license plate, rendering it useless if a 
rear hatch (or other license fixture) was raised, or if the pedestrian was already fully 
underneath the car.  Both 180 degree and 130 degree camera models were used in the 
evaluation.  The 130 degree cameras were assumed to have slightly less ability at picking 
up pedestrians entering the viewing area laterally than the 180 degree camera.  A good 
indication that a pedestrian was visible to the camera was if the report stated the 
pedestrian moved from one side of the vehicle and was struck by the rear of the vehicle 
on the other side.  This does not necessarily mean that the crash was avoidable, merely 
that the pedestrian was visible (the wide angle of view assures that even a pedestrian 
running laterally towards the rear of the vehicle would be seen for a significant amount of 
time, barring viewing obstructions)   Generally, if the pedestrian hit the center of the 
bumper it was assumed that the crash was visible from either type of camera.  Figure 6 
below shows the field of view for the two hypothetical camera systems used by the team. 
  
V-5 
Figure V-2 – Visible display area for camera systems 
 
 
Crash Avoidability 
It was estimated whether or not the pedestrian crash was “avoidable” using each 
of the different technologies by assuming a prudent driver is either looking at the 
technology and/or reacting to the technology at all of these times: 
a) before putting the vehicle in reverse  
b) after shifting into reverse, but before removing pressure to the brake 
c) while moving the vehicle in reverse 
d) at the time that the pedestrian enters into the space behind the vehicle and is 
threatened by its rearward motion. 
e) at the time that the vehicle turned to put the pedestrian within a collision course  
 
This means that the driver would not begin backing, or alternatively, stop backing 
immediately and fully, if they are given a sensor based warning or a camera based visual 
identification of a hazard.  The goal of the analysts reading the SCI Reports was to 
establish an “avoidability” criterion, and this was done through a series of judgments 
regarding the crash situation.  For example, was the victim moving?  Was the victim 
visible using direct vision, mirrors, or cameras?  Was the victim detectible using sensor 
systems?  These questions were answered with yes, no, or unknown.  All of these factors 
contributed to the final answers for the four final columns in Table 1 below, the 
  
V-6 
avoidability for given technologies.  However, there is no algorithm that translates from a 
case‟s disparate elements to its likelihood to be avoided.  The possibility of avoidance 
was defined with the following statement: “Given your understanding of the 
circumstances presented in the case, would a prudent driver properly utilizing their 
vehicle and the backing technology in question be very likely, likely, unlikely, or very 
unlikely to avoid the pedestrian?  Answer Yes, Probably Yes, Probably No, No 
respectively, or “unknown” if not enough information was available to make a judgment 
on the case.  Cases in which there was a relative lack of knowledge, and cases which 
evoked weaker, less confident answers were marked as “probably.”  If the pedestrian was 
not “detectable” as determined earlier, no information gets passed onto the driver, which 
means the driver then has no reason to halt the backing maneuver.  Below is by no means 
a comprehensive list of reasons for cases not being avoidable, but simply serve as a list of 
indicators guiding the reviewers‟ opinions. No single reason is ever given per case to 
describe why it was not avoidable, but rather the avoidability criterion is an inseparable 
amalgam of multiple factors.   
 
1. Victim moving into path – If a pedestrian enters the path of the backing vehicle 
laterally, not giving enough time for the driver to react, that decreases the chance 
of avoidance. 
2. Vehicle turning while backing – The team assumed that in most cases, when a 
vehicle was turning, their camera would continue to capture the majority of the 
event as it transpires as the image is captured from a wide-angle source, but 
would possibly suffer a small decrease in avoidance capability.  As for sensors, 
this decrease in avoidance capability was greater, as the sensors would be 
sweeping out into a new area behind the vehicle, decreasing the time the 
pedestrian was detectable before impact.   
3. If the pedestrian was low to the ground or was a small child, but the team decided 
it was still “detected” earlier in the case analysis, the avoidability would most 
likely be decreased slightly due to the fact that the sensor system would take 
longer to detect the pedestrian.   
4. Increased relative vehicle speed – Faster vehicle backing speeds and faster 
pedestrian movement towards the vehicle both decrease the reaction time 
available for all systems.   
5. Obfuscation and atmospheric conditions – Poor visibility (trees, shrubberies, 
snow, glare, fog, etc.) can impair the driver recognizing the pedestrian within the 
display.  This was not a factor in most cases.   
6. Incline of the road – Backing down a decline decreases the effectiveness of 
sensors the further away from the car the pedestrian is. 
7. Pedestrian position – If it was difficult to determine where the pedestrian was, if 
they moved, or when they moved (in other words, if there were some level of 
uncertainty), that would negatively impact the likelihood that the crash could have 
been avoided, in order to keep our estimation of system performance a 
conservative one.  This means that uncertainty regarding pedestrian position and 
movement affects both the visibility or detectability and the avoidability.    
 
  
V-7 
It is also worth noting that no effort was taken to account for recklessness, inebriation, or 
fatigue.  All discussions of cases included a theoretical „perfect‟ driver, and assumed that 
the technology was working as intended.  No evidence was found within the cases to 
identify driver impairment as a significant cause of backover crashes.  An estimation of 
the human part of the equation will be shown later on, and will be derived from human 
factors testing.   
 
SCI Case Report Review Procedure and Results 
Cases were reviewed individually, and the group met several times to reach a 
consensus that all members were satisfied best explained the situations.  If no consensus 
could be made by the group, the results were averaged into one response.  In the case of 
the “Possibility of Avoidance,” the group would consider the scenario, taking into 
consideration the factors above and any special factors unique to the case.  In one report, 
the driver reported that their parking space existed on a hill that required a significant 
amount of throttle to be used while backing up.  It was then assumed that a reasonable 
driver in such a situation would indeed be driving at such an increased speed.  Although 
there was no strict formula as to how avoidability was determined, a general guideline 
was to look at the detection zone, blind spots, and visibility areas.  If the pedestrian was 
detectable, then what followed was a cataloguing of all the impediments to a reasonable 
driver reacting in time after receiving a warning or recognizing a pedestrian on a display.  
The most sensitive part of the study was most likely the pedestrian‟s position and actions 
during the event.  When the team disagreed on nuances of the pedestrian‟s role in the 
crash, the possibility of avoidance would most likely be arbitrated to an average value.  
The complete results of the evaluation are shown in Table 2. 
 
  
  
V-8 
Table V-1:  Evaluation Team‟s Judgments regarding Movement, Detection, and 
Avoidability of 2007 SCI Backover Cases 
  
Victim 
moving? 
  
Victim path 
passed 
through 
sensor 
detection 
zone? 
(Y/N/Unk) 
Possibility of Avoidance 
  (Y/N/ Victim Visible? Y=Yes 
  Unk) (Y/N/Unk) PY=Possibly Yes 
      PN=Possibly NO  
      N=No   Unk = Unknown 
    Using 
direct 
vision 
Using 
mirrors 
in 180
o
  
camera 
view 
in 130
o
 
camera 
view 
Ultra-
sonic  Radar 
in 180
o
  
camera 
view 
in 130
o
 
camera 
view 
Ultra-
sonic  Radar     
Y 32 21 27 47 44 45 45 33 25 10 12 
PY               12 13 14 15 
PN               2 5 10 10 
N 10 23 18 3 5 3 3 3 7 15 12 
UNK 8 6 5 0 1 2 2 0 0 1 1 
Y 64% 42% 54% 94% 88% 90% 90% 66% 50% 20% 24% 
PY               24% 26% 28% 30% 
PN               4% 10% 20% 20% 
N 20% 46% 36% 6% 10% 6% 6% 6% 14% 30% 24% 
UNK 16% 12% 10% 0% 2% 4% 4% 0% 0% 2% 2% 
            
(Y) as 
% of  
Known 76% 48% 60% 94% 90% 94% 94% 66% 50% 20% 24% 
(Y) or 
(PY) 
as % 
of 
Known        90% 76% 49% 54% 
  
It should be restated that these results are the product of a team of analysts working to 
determine a clear vision of each SCI case, and as such are do not carry the precision 
found in the FARS files or even the very SCI cases from which they are gleaned.  
However, it represents our best estimate of the possibility of avoidance given the 
currently available data. The majority of cases involved moving pedestrians.  Of the 
known cases, 76 percent (32/42) of the victims were moving.  In just under half of the 
known cases (21/44), victims were visible using direct vision at some time slightly before 
or during the maneuver.  However, in at least 90 percent of all known cases (44/48 to 
47/50), for all four technologies considered, the pedestrian was at some point in a zone 
that was detectable by the sensors or visible by cameras.  As for avoidability, 90 percent 
of cases were flagged as “yes” or “probably yes” for the 180 degree camera, compared 
with 76 percent for 130 degrees.  The sensor systems did not fare as well as the camera 
systems, as they have a 49 and 54 percent avoidability estimate for ultrasonic and radar 
systems, respectively. 
Human Factors 
NHTSA performed a number of research projects on drivers after they had been driving 
for a few months in vehicles with either: 
  
V-9 
1)  No backup system 
2)  Camera systems (Rear Video = RV)  
3)  A Camera system (RV) and a Sensor System (Rear Parking Sensor System = RPS)  
 
One of the aspects of this testing was a staged event, where a cardboard child size object 
with a picture of a child on it popped up from the ground directly behind the vehicle as 
they were backing up in a spot where they would have no notion or idea that a child could 
be anywhere in the vicinity.  At that time, cameras recorded their head and eye 
movements to see how they backed up, whether they looked at the mirrors or video 
displays from the camera, whether they paid attention to warnings provided by the rear 
parking sensor system, and other related information.     
 
Table 3 shows the results of that staged event.  All of the drivers with no backup system 
hit the cardboard child, 58 percent with a camera system only hit the cardboard child and 
85 percent of those with a camera and rear parking sensor system hit the cardboard child.  
The results of the staged event might be considered somewhat counter-intuitive – the 
camera systems (RV) and rear parking sensor systems Sensor Systems (RPS) together 
were less effective than just a camera system, although this distinction was not 
statistically significant.  From that same report, driver glances at the camera display were 
fewer when the vehicle was equipped with both systems – however, it should be noted 
that the sensor was located in the instrument panel, not integrated with or near the camera 
display.  Also, the camera in this study had a long delay (6 seconds) before turning on, 
but this delay was ignored within the constraints of the SCI case review.   
 
In the PRIA accompanying the ANPRM, we made the following statements relating to 
the effectiveness of camera systems and driver response.  These data and later collected 
data have been combined into Table V-3.    
 
  
V-10 
Table V-2: Staged Obstacle Event Outcomes26 
System N Number that Crashed Percent Crashed 
No system 12 12 100% 
RV only 12 7 58% 
RV & RPS 13 11 85% 
Total 37 30 81% 
 
In that same event, 15 of the 25 drivers glanced at their mirrors at least once during the 
event, and 9 of those 15 looked multiple times.  This data represents the human factor.  
Thus, it is assumed that 9/15 = 60 percent of cases involve drivers that are the 
hypothetical prudent drivers that are constantly aware while backing up, using the 
camera.  All 7 of the drivers that avoided hitting the cardboard child looked multiple 
times.  In the end, the number that counts is (5+2)/25 = 28 percent of cases with both RV 
only and RV & RPS in which the driver avoided the staged obstacle event.  Since both 
systems had cameras, it was appropriate to try to estimate different effectiveness 
estimates for different countermeasures from this data.  This represents the percentage of 
times that a driver will correctly respond in an avoidable situation.   
This is a small experiment with 25 drivers.  While it is likely that the camera‟s 
effectiveness estimate is somewhere in the area around 28 percent, there is uncertainty 
around that estimate and a reasonable range of effectiveness might be 15 to 40 percent.   
 
In a similar fashion, we must estimate likely driver reaction to sensors.  The ORSDURVS 
report provides a machine detection factor of 39 percent for the sensors (an ultrasonic 
system was used).  This is an additional factor that must be considered when calculating 
benefits, as the system and the human driver need to both correctly respond to the 
pedestrian.  After the system provides a warning, regardless of the driver‟s glance pattern 
their attention would be drawn to the threat of collision, providing an estimated 15 
percent improvement in driver reaction over the camera system.  Thus, it is likely that the 
effectiveness estimate is somewhere in the area around 43 percent, and a reasonable 
range of effectiveness might be 30 to 55 percent.  Again, this was the logic presented in 
the February 2009 PRIA accompanying the ANPRM.  For this PRIA, we combined the 
RV data with more recent testing, but decided against combining the RV & RPS system 
data with the RV only data (see Table V-3).    
Human Factors 2009 Update 
In 2009, VRTC performed additional testing with various backover avoidance 
technologies.  This was done to improve the available knowledge of driver behavior.  The 
new data was added to the previous set of Staged Obstacle Event Outcomes, and a 
combined table of both data sets follows.   
                                                 
26
 Table 6 from On-Road Study of Drivers‟ Use of Rearview Video Systems (ORSDURVS) – Elizabeth 
Mazzae 
  
V-11 
Table V-3: Staged Obstacle Event Outcomes 
 N 
System 
Use 
% Used 
Number 
that 
Crashed 
% 
Crashed 
% 
Avoided 
% Sensor 
Detections 
Driver 
Braked in 
Response 
to 
Warning? 
  0 Used 0.0%           
Look-down 
mirror 
13 
Didn't 
Use 
  13 100.0% 0.0%     
  13 Total   13 100.0% 0.0%      
  0 Used 0.0%           
Cross-view 
mirrors 
7 
Didn't 
Use 
  7 100.0% 0.0%     
  7 Total   7 100.0% 0.0%     
  14 Used 100.0% 13 92.9% 7.1%    
RPS only 0 
Didn't 
Use 
        100.0% 100.0% 
  14 Total   13 92.9% 7.1%     
  8 Used 66.7% 4 50.0% 50.0%     
RV in Mirror: 
2.4" 
4 
Didn't 
Use 
  4 100.0% 0.0%     
  12 Total   8 66.7% 33.3%     
  8 Used 80.0% 1 12.5% 87.5%     
RV in Mirror: 
3.5" 
2 
Didn't 
Use 
  2 100.0% 0.0%     
  10 Total   3 30.0% 70.0%     
  9 Used 75.0% 4 44.4% 55.6%     
RV in dash 
7.8" 
3 
Didn't 
Use 
  3 100.0% 0.0%     
  12 Total   7 58.3% 41.7%     
  7 Used RV 58.3% 5 71.4% 28.6%     
  6 
Didn't 
Use RV 
  6 100.0% 0.0%     
RV & RPS 5 
Sensor 
Warning 
38.5% 4 80.0% 20.0% 38.5%   
  8 
No 
sensor 
warning 
  7 87.5% 12.5%     
  13 Total 58.3% 11 85.0% 15.0%     
No system 12 N/A N/A 12 100.0% 0.0%     
 
Due to their lower driver factor, 2.4" mirrors are not being considered for this 
rulemaking, and the effectiveness for Rear Video will be combined from “RV in Mirror 
3.5"” and “RV in Dash 7.8"” to form an fDR of 55 percent (12/22).  Likewise, the “RPS 
only” system had a driver factor of 7.1 percent.  The system response factor (fS) of RPS 
systems is assumed to be 19/27 = 70.4 percent, derived from both sets of RPS data.     
 
Look-down mirrors and cross-view mirrors are assumed to have near 0% (fDR) and are 
therefore excluded from inclusion in the list of appropriate countermeasures as there 
exists little evidence suggesting their ability to provide benefits in improving visibility in 
  
V-12 
certain areas behind the vehicle.  Some evidence exists to show that cross-view mirrors 
may produce a 33.4% potential backover crash reduction if a driver looks at a mirror once 
prior to the start of a backing maneuver.
27
  Achieving this potential reduction is 
dependent upon drivers actually using the mirrors, but the above research summarized in 
Table 4 shows that even drivers familiar with the mirrors failed to use them.   
 
It is worthwhile to mention that in all cases where the “RPS only” system provided an 
alert, all drivers reacted in some way, and no drivers were able to avoid a collision.  The 
RPS systems used in these cases were both ultrasonic systems, and due to no similar 
available data regarding radar systems, the fDR and fS for radar systems will be assumed to 
be equal to that of ultrasonic systems, while the SCI case review accounted for the 
increased range of the radar, reflected in a higher fA for radar.  In general, drivers that 
received a warning from a sensor (RPS), sometimes stopped the vehicle and then looked 
out the rear window.  When they were unable to visually see an obstruction, they 
continued on and ran over the cardboard child figure.  Participants‟ comments following 
the conflict scenario were collected, confirming this progression of events.  We assume 
that this same driver reaction would have taken place regardless of whether the sensor 
was ultrasonic or radar.  That is to say that most drivers tend not to fully believe the 
information provided by sensor systems.      
 
Before proceeding into the calculation of benefits, one final note must be made.  In all 20 
cases, using either cross-view mirrors or look-down mirrors, the driver failed to avoid the 
test object.  The human factors testing provides our only information regarding the 
driver‟s willingness to use the technology available to them.  While, as mentioned earlier 
in Chapter II, other sources may claim that “when drivers use them, mirrors provide 
benefits,” there is no indication that even drivers familiar with the systems will decide to 
use them.  Finally, by concluding that fDR is 0% for mirrors, the overall effectiveness 
given by (fA * fS* fDR ) must also equal 0%.  In other words, no matter how many 
backover cases are avoidable (fA) using mirrors, and despite even an assumption that the 
system (fS) performs perfectly 100% of the time, if nobody‟s looking carefully at the 
mirror while performing a backing maneuver, the system provides no benefits.  For this 
reason only, analysis of mirrors has been set aside for the remainder of the document.  If 
evidence of increased driver acceptance of this system is provided, mirrors will be 
reintroduced to the benefits discussion, but as of right now, there is no evidence that they 
will provide any benefits at all.       
B. Benefits Calculations 
 Previous sections established the backover fatalities, F, which are comprised of an 
estimated 228 light vehicles, (59 passenger cars, 68 sport utility vehicles, 29 vans, and 72 
pickups).  Applied next is the 55 percent estimate for successful driver reaction with 
cameras and the 7 percent estimate for sensors, as fDR.  Sensors also apply the 70 percent 
detection rating for fS whereas Cameras are assumed to have fS = 100 percent.  Finally, 
                                                 
27
 Garrot, “The Ability of Rear-mounted Convex Mirrors to Improve Rear Visibility”  http://www-
nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/pdf/esv/esv21/09-0558.pdf 
  
V-13 
for the various systems, the avoidability percentages from the SCI case investigations are 
used, selecting the cases marked “Yes” or “Possibly Yes” from the total number of cases.   
 
Table V-4:  Avoidability and Potential Lives Saved by Technology after Successful 
Driver Reaction 
Successful 
Driver 
Camera 
Reaction  
(fDR) 
 in 180
o
  
camera 
view 
in 130
o
 
camera 
view 
Ultra-
sonic  
Radar Sensor 
Picks Up 
Pedestrian 
(Detection 
Rating) 
Successful 
Driver 
Sensor 
Reaction  
(fDR) 
 Avoidable (Y) 66% 50% 20% 24%   
 Avoidable (Y, PY) 90% 76% 49% 54%   
55% Avoided (Y) 36% 27% 1% 1% 70% 7% 
 Avoided (Y, PY) 49% 41% 1% 2%   
55% Lives Saved (Y) 82 62 1 2 70% 7% 
 Lives Saved (Y, PY) 112 95 3 3   
 
In the lower portion of the above table, ( F * fA * fS * fDR ), has been calculated to 
estimate the potential benefits of the different backover crash countermeasures.  Below, 
these numbers have been further broken down by using the same factors, but examining 
the distribution of passenger cars and light trucks found in the fatality target population.  
 
  
  
V-14 
Table V-5: Estimated Lives Saved by Vehicle Type 
55% for camera 
OR 
 7%*for sensor 
180
o
  camera 130o camera Ultrasonic Radar 
Pass Car (Y) 21 16 0 0 
LT (Y) 61 46 1 1 
Total (Y) 82 62 1 2 
Pass Car (Y,PY) 29 25 1 1 
LT (Y,PY) 83 70 2 3 
Total (Y,PY) 112 95 3 3 
Table 6: Estimated Injuries Avoided by Vehicle Type 
55% for camera 
OR 
 7%*for sensor 
180
o
  camera 130o camera Ultrasonic Radar 
Pass Car (Y) 3,290
28
 2,492 51 61 
LT (Y) 2,852 2,160 44 53 
Total (Y) 6,141 4,652 95 114 
Pass Car (Y,PY) 4,486 3,788 125 137 
LT (Y,PY) 3,888 3,284 108 119 
Total (Y,PY) 8,374 7,072 233 257 
*55% refers to successful driver reaction for cameras, 7% refers to successful driver 
reaction to ultrasonic or radar sensors.  Note, some numbers are off by one, due to 
rounding 
 
Thus, the total number of lives saved from camera systems could be between 62 and 112, 
and from sensor systems between 1 and 3.  We assume the same effectiveness for injury 
cases as we do for fatalities.  Injury reduction would be between 4,652 and 8,374 for 
cameras and between 95 and 257 for sensors.   
 
C. Property Damage Only Crashes and Maintenance Costs 
In a Preliminary Cost-Benefit Analysis of Ultrasonic and Camera Backup Systems
29
, 
NHTSA modeled benefits and costs (excluding injuries and fatality benefits) from a 
societal perspective to determine cost effectiveness of such systems with regard to only 
installation, and maintenance and repair costs, and the benefits derived from backing 
avoidance.  This model establishes that although benefits are generated when the driver 
successfully avoids a crash, unexpected costs arise when the system is damaged or 
destroyed in non-backing crashes, namely struck-from-the-rear collisions.   
 
The findings of that analysis were that for a range of crash distributions (10 to 25 percent 
of rear-damaged vehicles were backing, as opposed to 75 to 90 percent of rear-damages 
vehicles were struck-from-the-rear), and for a range of driver factors (50% to 80% 
successful driver reaction), none of the systems were nearly cost-effective.  Overall, the 
net costs with the old figures ranged from $45 to $468 per vehicle.   
 
                                                 
28
 Calculated for example:  9138 Injuries * 54.54% driver factor * 66% camera avoidance factor  
29
 See NHTSA docket 2006-25579-2. 
  
V-15 
For purposes of this analysis, the Property Damage & Repair (PDR) model was updated 
in the following ways:  Initial system cost is not included as it is considered elsewhere in 
this report.  Repair costs for the camera were updated to reflect the $58 and $88 camera 
costs, while the original labor costs remained the same.  Repair costs in the model used 
assume that the a new bumper and fascia would be required with the replacement of a 
destroyed camera, but the further adoption of camera systems has shown us these can 
easily be added without requiring the camera to be built into the bumper.  The Driver 
Reaction ratio of 80% was replaced with the ORSDURVS value of 55%.  All other 
values, including distribution of crash severity and effectiveness of any camera system on 
detecting large stationary objects were kept constant.  Sensors were similarly updated to 
include a 7% driver reaction factor.  Additionally, to simplify inclusion in this report, the 
range of 10% to 25% rear-end collisions propagating through backing crashes as opposed 
to struck-from-the-rear collisions was simplified to 17.5%. 
 
Table V-6: Net Impacts per Vehicle from Property Damage and  
Repair and Maintenance Costs ($2006) 
 55% fDR  
17.5%  
Backing 
130 
Camera 
180 
Camera 
3% discount -$31.43 -$28.56 
7% discount -$25.96 -$23.59 
 43% fDR  
17.5%  
Backing Ultrasonic Radar 
3% discount $3.35 $5.50 
7% discount $2.76 $4.54 
 
These values are benefits and costs for the combination of property damage only crashes 
and rear-end collisions.  They detail the net discounted impact due to crashes avoided, 
after incremental repair costs.  These numbers will be applied later to the cost-benefit 
evaluation in this report.  In cases where the values are negative, the result is a benefit 
discounted over the life of the vehicle.  Thus, property damage only crashes have a 
relatively large positive effect on the cost effectiveness of cameras, and a relatively small 
negative effect on sensors.  So, cameras are estimated to reduce the net present value of 
lifetime property damage costs by $23.59 to $31.43, while sensors are anticipated to 
increase lifetime property damage costs by $2.76 to $5.50.    
 
D. Non-quantified Benefits 
The following segment is only concerned with benefits that are extremely difficult or 
impossible to quantify.  The primary discussion of benefits concerns itself with familiar 
components of cost-benefit analysis: injuries, fatalities, and property damage.  However, 
the introduction of both detection systems and display systems leads to changes that 
might not be suited to inclusion in formal benefits conversation, but are worth mentioning 
in an abstract, qualitative manner.   
 
For example, there exists a certain convenience/comfort factor in being able to see 
directly behind the vehicle while backing up.  There is the additional convenience 
  
V-16 
distinct from and beyond the potential fatalities, injuries, and property damage.  This 
convenience/comfort factor is a reduction in anxiety or apprehension while backing up.  
Similarly, the improved ability to parallel park (whose property damage benefits are 
already discussed) may provide a decreased delay in traffic while a driver cautiously 
parallel parks in one attempt rather than in multiple attempts.   
 
If a display is used in the dash, other information could be provided, not only navigation, 
but potentially safety warnings.  It seems that the first rulemaking to introduce a display 
suffers the installation cost, and subsequent rulemakings piggyback on the mandated 
display to provide context-sensitive safety benefits.  The display for a camera system has 
the additional “benefit” of facilitating the introduction of other safety systems.  The 
incremental cost of installing those “other” systems will not take into account the cost of 
the display, because they were already accounted for via the rear visibility rulemaking.  
In this way, the non-quantifiable impact of mandating displays leads to the possibility of 
the introduction of other safety mechanisms, or decreased costs in deploying said 
mechanisms.  All the preceding conversation regarding possible consequences is not 
typical of cost-benefit analysis, is completely qualitative, and merely should be taken as a 
simple reminder.  The display unit in question will doubtless have purposes other than to 
provide a display when the vehicle is in reverse and remain dormant and inactive 
otherwise, and any other safety technology to use the display will not include display cost 
in its analysis.   
 
The comprehensive cost of an injury/fatality includes time lost on the job, and time lost at 
home, but only for the case of the injured.  The emotional well-being of the extended 
family members, friends, and other associates of the injured is not included in cost-
benefit analysis.  Even non-injured drivers in pedestrian crashes are not given injury 
costs.  Above and beyond the physical injuries sustained by the pedestrian victim, it can 
be argued that the emotional distress of the driver should be counted, especially in cases 
where the driver injures a child, and even more so when the child is their own.  Cost data 
for driver distress due to such “perceived guilt” or “shock” is not available for crashes, let 
alone for crashes involving family member fatalities.  More information would be 
required for rigorous inclusion in a formal analysis, but this emotional response is 
potentially one of the results of a backover crash, and its personal nature may place more 
emotional weight behind it than an accident involving a total stranger to the driver.   
 
The agency requests comments on these non-quantified benefits.   
 
 
     
  
VI-1 
VI. Costs 
The costs for improving rear visibility are found in both the installation and 
maintenance/repair of the various parts for a variety of technological options.  Systems 
are comprised of some sort of sensing apparatus almost exclusively found in the rear of 
the vehicle, usually located in the bumper or directly above the license plate.  This is 
important because some rear-end collisions (when the vehicle is struck in the rear by 
another vehicle) will impact the backover avoidance system, possibly requiring 
recalibration, repair, or replacement.  In the report “Preliminary Cost-Benefit Analysis of 
Ultrasonic and Camera Backup Systems” these costs were detailed, based upon a 
methodology of “lifetime crashes.”  The repair costs for cameras, when combined with 
their benefits from avoiding property damage only crashes are evaluated in the previous 
section, as they provide a net benefit.   
 
The cost of installing one of these systems varies greatly with the type of system being 
installed.  Initial vehicle part costs (or manufacturer costs) were multiplied by 1.51 to find 
the cost to consumers on a per-vehicle basis.  The sensor systems (including a warning 
buzzer) are less expensive than a camera system.  We estimate the cost of an ultrasonic 
system at $51-$89, an infrared system at $47, and a radar system at $92.  For camera 
systems, the display method is the primary discerning factor; a system with a camera and 
a dashboard display may cost up to $189, but a vehicle that‟s already equipped with a 
navigational device already has a screen and the total cost comes to $88.18.
30
  The 
incremental cost for installing any system (sensor or camera) is decreased if the sensor‟s 
warning or the camera‟s image is routed through an already present display or speaker 
system.  Thus, if a vehicle is already equipped with an in-dash navigation unit, no extra 
display would be required, eliminating the cost of the display.  Because estimated prices 
for these systems have decreased over time, further comments for the proposed 
installation rate, current availability, and cost of these systems will continue to be 
welcomed, as are comments regarding alternative systems that would cost less and meet 
the proposed statutory requirement.    
 
Each camera system cost was estimated based on a collection of confidential industry 
estimates and internal NHTSA estimates for small parts and the assembly process.  
Camera prices (for the lens and light sensing apparatus) are estimated to average $30 for 
130 degree cameras and $50 for 180 degree cameras.  Wiring for dash display systems 
was set to $8, but $11 for rear mirror display systems due to the wire navigating the A 
pillar and climbing forward to the rear view mirror.  Assembly labor was estimated at 
$23.69/hr, and applied to a 3 minute installation time for a dash display system and 
camera for an assembly cost of $1.20.  Alternatively, the 3.5 minute installation time for 
a mirror system, including the time to run the wire up the A pillar and around the 
windshield, comes to $1.40.  Supposing the vehicle was already equipped with a display 
unit from a navigation system, the labor to simply install the camera would be 1 minute, 
or $0.40.  Estimates from various manufacturers and parts suppliers were submitted, 
                                                 
30
 All cost numbers for these systems are comprised of confidential data from vehicle manufacturers, data 
from dealerships, and data from system manufacturers.  Teardown analysis of backover avoidance 
technologies is forthcoming as of November 2010.   
  
VI-2 
however the costs for these systems seemed inflated to the price of large retail display 
units and were therefore brought back to a manufacturer costs by division by a factor of 
1.51.  From this we estimate mirror displays cost at $73, and dash displays at $66.  A 
camera system with a rear-view mirror display costs between $173 and $203.  
 
Table VI-1 
Estimated Consumer Costs ($2007) 
 
 130 Mirror 180 Mirror 130 Dash 180 Dash 
Entire Camera System Required $172.74 $202.94 $158.85 $189.05 
Nav Unit Present, Cam & Wires needed    $57.98 $88.18 
 Ultrasonic Radar   
Sensor System $51.49 $92.26   
 
For the purpose of this analysis, the number of vehicles equipped with cameras needed to 
be compiled from a variety of sources.  The 2008 Wards Automotive Yearbook provides 
detailed sales for certain equipment for all 2007 cars.  This, combined with comments 
from the industry, led us to assume the following current distribution of cars sold.  We 
assumed that the distribution of the 22% of light trucks equipped with “rear object 
detection” are 5% camera, 18% sensor, and 1% combined systems.  We also assumed 
that all camera-equipped systems already were equipped with a navigational unit in the 
dash. 
 
Table VI-2a 
Estimated MY 2007 Backover Systems 
Cars need display & Camera 93% 
Cars w/ nav, no camera 7% 
Cars fully equipped already 0% 
Light Trucks need display & Camera* 82% 
Light Trucks w/ nav, no camera* 13% 
Light Trucks fully equipped already* 5% 
*Assumes that the 22% trucks equipped with "rear object detection" are 5% 
camera, 18% sensor, and 1% overlap 
*Assumes that all camera-equipped systems have navigation units in the dash 
 
Regarding sensors, the installation rates were also taken from Wards, using the above 
assumption to arrive at 4 percent of passenger cars and 18 percent of light truck vehicles 
equipped with some sort of sensor system.   
 
  
  
VI-3 
 
Table VI-2b 
Projected MY 2010 Backover Systems 
Distribution 
Estimate: 2010 
Compliance Data Cameras Sensors 
PC 10.5% 9.1% 
LTs 30.1% 29.7% 
Truck 43.5% 35.7% 
Van 44.6% 44.3% 
SUV 18.3% 22.7% 
Sum 19.8% 18.9% 
 
Table IV-2b above contains the results of confidential compliance data NHTSA gathered 
in 2009.  System availability was coded uniquely for each manufacturer, as was whether 
or not a system was optional or standard on certain models.  This compliance data did not 
state the availability of navigation units, and for the purposes of this analysis, that number 
was assumed to be constant from the 2007 sales data.  When a system was optional, the 
percentage of 2007 sales with cameras was used (5 percent).  Even with this low 
percentage of vehicles to be equipped with optional cameras, the total number of cameras 
in the fleet will increase dramatically from 2007 to 2010.  Sales Projections for the next 5 
years, specifically regarding backover systems installation rates, are being requested from 
the manufacturers.   
 
The following table shows the installation cost for a regulation requiring 100% of 
passenger cars and light trucks to have backover systems, assuming no vehicles were 
equipped with cameras, but accounting for those with navigational units.  In other words, 
if all passenger cars and light trucks were suddenly equipped with 130 degree cameras, 
the total costs would be $2,868 million.  Or if all passenger cars and light trucks were 
suddenly equipped with radar systems, the total costs would be $1,532 million.   
   
Table VI-3 
Total Installation Costs (in $M) for Backover systems, Assuming 0% install rate 
  Mirror  Dash    
 
Sales 
(in M) 
130d 
camera 
180d$ 
camera 
130d 
camera 
180d 
 camera 
UItra-
sonic Radar 
Passenger Car 
 8.0 $1,382 $1,624 $1,212 $1,454 $412 $738 
Light Trucks 
 8.6 $1,486 $1,745 $1,252 $1,511 $443 $793 
Total  $2,868 $3,369 $2,464 $2,965 $855 $1,532 
 
The table below provides estimates for the cost of this regulation, taking into account the 
MY 2010 distribution of cameras and navigation units in sales.   
 
  
  
VI-4 
Table VI-4 
Total Incremental Installation Costs (in $M) for Backover systems 
 
  Mirror  Dash    
 
Sales 
(in M) 
130d 
camera 
180d$ 
camera 
130d 
camera 
180d 
 camera 
UItra-
sonic Radar 
Passenger Car 
 8.0 $1,237 $1,453 $1,078 $1,295 $375 $671 
Light Trucks 
 8.6 $1,039 $1,220 $841 $1,022 $311 $558 
Total  $2,275 $2,673 $1,919 $2,317 $686 $1,229 
 
With a Pedestrian Detection add-on, camera systems can differentiate a human being 
from the rest of its environment.  An estimated additional $75, including the price of the 
hardware and software is involved.  These systems are in the prototype phase and not 
installed on many vehicles – they are a very new technology and extremely little data is 
available on them, but it is theoretically possible for such systems to have access to the 
vehicle‟s braking controls, eliminating the human element from backover avoidance.  
This could also be true of purely sensor-based systems.   
 
These numbers are very different from the FMVSS No. 111 Preliminary Regulatory 
Evaluation
31
 regarding rear detection systems on single-unit trucks, wherein a camera 
system used to cost $326 to install.  The technology has matured to the point where some 
vehicles may be fully equipped with cameras for a little more than half that cost, or 
simply have a camera added when a navigational unit is present for nearly one fourth of 
that cost.  Backover sensors have a much lower driver reaction factor than NHTSA 
previously anticipated.  This has greatly reduced their effectiveness and will increase 
their cost/benefit ratio into triple digits.   
 
                                                 
31
 Preliminary Regulatory Evaluation, FMVSS No. 111, NPRM to Require a Rear Detection System for 
Single-Unit Trucks, August 2005,  (Docket No. 19239-2) 
  
VII-1 
VII.  Cost Effectiveness & Benefit-Cost Analyses  
 
The intent of the final rulemaking is to mitigate pedestrian backover crashes.  This 
section estimates the number of lives to be saved and injuries to be prevented per dollar 
spent for the reduction in equivalent lives lost due to backover crashes.  It should be 
noted that the costs of the equipment needed to meet the requirements are incurred when 
the vehicles are purchased, but the injury benefits and the property damage impacts of 
rear visibility will accrue over the lifetime of the fleet.  Therefore, discount factors are 
applied to estimate the present value of injury benefits and property damage for a 
meaningful comparison to costs.   
 
     
Cost Effectiveness: 
With respect to reduction in the number of fatalities and injuries, the agency estimates the 
number of “equivalent fatalities” that would be prevented, or “equivalent lives saved,” a 
concept that incorporates a reduction in both the number of fatalities and injuries.  The 
estimated equivalent lives saved and property damages prevented are discounted.  The 
costs are reduced by the amount of discounted property damage prevented to derive “net 
costs.”  These “net costs” are then compared to the estimated equivalent lives saved.   
 
There is general agreement within the economic community that the appropriate basis for 
determining discount rates is the marginal opportunity costs of lost or displaced funds.  
When these funds involve capital investment, the marginal, real rate of return on capital 
must be considered.  However, when these funds represent lost consumption, the 
appropriate measure is the rate at which society is willing to trade-off future for current 
consumption.  This is referred to as the "social rate of time preference," and it is generally 
assumed that the consumption rate of interest, i.e., the real, after-tax rate of return on 
widely available savings instruments or investment opportunities, is the appropriate 
measure of its value.  
 
Estimates of the social rate of time preference have been made by a number of authors.  
Robert Lind TP
32
PT estimated that the social rate of time preference is between zero and six 
percent, reflecting the rates of return on Treasury bills and stock market portfolios.  Kolb 
and SheragaTP
33
PT put the rate at between one and five percent, based on returns to stocks and 
three-month Treasury bills.  Moore and Viscusi TP
34
PT calculated a two percent real time rate 
of time preference for health, which they characterize as being consistent with financial 
market rates for the period covered by their study.  Moore and Viscusi's estimate was 
                                                 
TP
32
PTLind, R.C., "A Primer on the Major Issues Relating to the Discount Rate for Evaluating National Energy 
Options," in UDiscounting for Time and Risks in Energy Policy U, 1982, (Washington, D.C., Resources for the 
Future, Inc.) 
TP
33
PTJ. Kolb and J.D. Sheraga, "A Suggested Approach for Discounting the Benefits and Costs of 
Environmental Regulations,: unpublished working papers. 
 TP
34
PTMoore, M.J. and Viscusi, W.K., "Discounting Environmental Health Risks: New Evidence and Policy 
Implications," Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, V. 18, No. 2, March 1990, part 2 of 
2. 
  
VII-2 
derived by estimating the implicit discount rate for deferred health benefits exhibited by 
workers in their choice of job risk. 
 
OMB Circular A-4 recommends agencies use both three percent and seven percent as the 
“social rate of time preference”.   
 
In the context of this particular regulatory evaluation of the efforts to improve rear 
visibility in light vehicles, safety benefits occur when there is a potential crash severe 
enough to result in occupant death or injury that would predictably be prevented by the 
required technology.  The benefits could occur at any time over the vehicle‟s lifetime.  
This analysis assumes that crashes over the vehicle fleet‟s lifetime will occur in 
proportion to the number of miles a given year‟s new vehicle fleet will be driven from 
year to year as it ages.  Tables VI-1a and VI-1b contain the vehicle miles of traveled 
(VMT) by vehicle age and the survival probability schedules used in calculating age and 
survival factors.  The values in the column indicating the percentage of fleet travel that 
would occur each year, i.e., weighted yearly travel, are used to distribute savings by year 
of vehicle operation.  The vehicle miles traveled (VMT) by vehicle age distribution is 
used to determine the percentage of lifetime mileage that occurs each year that in turn is 
used to calculate the discount factors by year for the three and seven percent discount 
rates.  The two right-hand columns show the weighted values for these discount factors.  
These values are derived by multiplying the yearly discount factors by the share of 
lifetime travel that occurs in the respective years and summing these factors over the 25 
or 36 years.  The values in the two columns are then summed to produce the following 
multipliers for the respective discount rates: 
 
For passenger cars, 0.8304 for a three percent discount rate and 0.6700 for a seven 
percent discount rate, as shown in Table VII-1a.  
For light trucks, 0.8022 for a three percent discount rate and 0.6303 for a seven percent 
discount rate, as shown in Table VII-1b.  
  
  
VII-3 
Table VII-1a 
Mid-Year Discount Factors, Passenger Cars 
Age VMT (a) 
Survival 
(b) 
(a) * 
(b) 
% of 
VMT 3% 7% 
Weighted 
3% 
Weighted 
7% 
1 14,231 0.99 14089 0.0926 0.9853 0.9667 0.0912 0.089518 
2 13,961 0.9831 13725 0.0902 0.9566 0.9035 0.0863 0.0815 
3 13,669 0.9731 13301 0.0874 0.9288 0.8444 0.0812 0.0738 
4 13,357 0.9593 12813 0.0842 0.9017 0.7891 0.0759 0.0665 
5 13,028 0.9413 12263 0.0806 0.8755 0.7375 0.0706 0.0594 
6 12,683 0.9188 11653 0.0766 0.85 0.6893 0.0651 0.0528 
7 12,325 0.8918 10991 0.0722 0.8252 0.6442 0.0596 0.0465 
8 11,956 0.8604 10287 0.0676 0.8012 0.602 0.0542 0.0407 
9 11,578 0.8252 9554 0.0628 0.7778 0.5626 0.0488 0.0353 
10 11,193 0.7866 8804 0.0579 0.7552 0.5258 0.0437 0.0304 
11 10,804 0.717 7746 0.0509 0.7332 0.4914 0.0373 0.0250 
12 10,413 0.6125 6378 0.0419 0.7118 0.4593 0.0298 0.0193 
13 10,022 0.5094 5105 0.0336 0.6911 0.4292 0.0232 0.0144 
14 9,633 0.4142 3990 0.0262 0.671 0.4012 0.0176 0.0105 
15 9,249 0.3308 3060 0.0201 0.6514 0.3749 0.0131 0.0075 
16 8,871 0.2604 2310 0.0152 0.6324 0.3504 0.0096 0.0053 
17 8,502 0.2028 1724 0.0113 0.614 0.3275 0.0070 0.0037 
18 8,144 0.1565 1275 0.0084 0.5961 0.306 0.0050 0.0026 
19 7,799 0.12 936 0.0062 0.5788 0.286 0.0036 0.0018 
20 7,469 0.0916 684 0.0045 0.5619 0.2673 0.0025 0.0012 
21 7,157 0.0696 498 0.0033 0.5456 0.2498 0.0018 0.0008 
22 6,866 0.0527 362 0.0024 0.5297 0.2335 0.0013 0.0006 
23 6,596 0.0399 263 0.0017 0.5142 0.2182 0.0009 0.0004 
24 6,350 0.0301 191 0.0013 0.4993 0.2039 0.0006 0.0003 
25 6,131 0.0227 139 0.0009 0.4847 0.1906 0.0004 0.0002 
    Total 152143       0.8304 0.6700 
 
PT 
  
VII-4 
Table VII-1b 
Mid-Year Discount Factors, Light Trucks T  
 
 
Age VMT (a) Survival (b) (a) * (b) % of VMT 3% 7% Weighted 3% Weighted 7% 
1 16,085 0.9741 15668 0.0871 0.9853 0.9667 0.0858 0.0842 
2 15,782 0.9603 15155 0.0842 0.9566 0.9035 0.0806 0.0761 
3 15,442 0.942 14546 0.0808 0.9288 0.8444 0.0751 0.0683 
4 15,069 0.919 13848 0.0770 0.9017 0.7891 0.0694 0.0607 
5 14,667 0.8913 13073 0.0726 0.8755 0.7375 0.0636 0.0536 
6 14,239 0.859 12231 0.0680 0.85 0.6893 0.0578 0.0468 
7 13,790 0.8226 11344 0.0630 0.8252 0.6442 0.0520 0.0406 
8 13,323 0.7827 10428 0.0579 0.8012 0.602 0.0464 0.0349 
9 12,844 0.7401 9506 0.0528 0.7778 0.5626 0.0411 0.0297 
10 12,356 0.6956 8595 0.0478 0.7552 0.5258 0.0361 0.0251 
11 11,863 0.6501 7712 0.0429 0.7332 0.4914 0.0314 0.0211 
12 11,369 0.6042 6869 0.0382 0.7118 0.4593 0.0272 0.0175 
13 10,879 0.5517 6002 0.0334 0.6911 0.4292 0.0230 0.0143 
14 10,396 0.5009 5207 0.0289 0.671 0.4012 0.0194 0.0116 
15 9,924 0.4522 4488 0.0249 0.6514 0.3749 0.0162 0.0093 
16 9,468 0.4062 3846 0.0214 0.6324 0.3504 0.0135 0.0075 
17 9,032 0.3633 3281 0.0182 0.614 0.3275 0.0112 0.0060 
18 8,619 0.3236 2789 0.0155 0.5961 0.306 0.0092 0.0047 
19 8,234 0.2873 2366 0.0131 0.5788 0.286 0.0076 0.0038 
20 7,881 0.2542 2003 0.0111 0.5619 0.2673 0.0063 0.0030 
21 7,565 0.2244 1698 0.0094 0.5456 0.2498 0.0051 0.0024 
22 7,288 0.1975 1439 0.0080 0.5297 0.2335 0.0042 0.0019 
23 7,055 0.1735 1224 0.0068 0.5142 0.2182 0.0035 0.0015 
24 6,871 0.1522 1046 0.0058 0.4993 0.2039 0.0029 0.0012 
25 6,739 0.1332 898 0.0050 0.4847 0.1906 0.0024 0.0010 
26 6,663 0.1165 776 0.0043 0.4706 0.1781 0.0020 0.0008 
27 6,648 0.1017 676 0.0038 0.4569 0.1665 0.0017 0.0006 
28 6,648 0.0887 590 0.0033 0.4436 0.1556 0.0015 0.0005 
29 6,648 0.0773 514 0.0029 0.4307 0.1454 0.0012 0.0004 
30 6,648 0.0673 447 0.0025 0.4181 0.1359 0.0010 0.0003 
31 6,648 0.0586 390 0.0022 0.4059 0.127 0.0009 0.0003 
32 6,648 0.0509 338 0.0019 0.3941 0.1187 0.0007 0.0002 
33 6,648 0.0443 295 0.0016 0.3826 0.1109 0.0006 0.0002 
34 6,648 0.0385 256 0.0014 0.3715 0.1037 0.0005 0.0001 
  
VII-5 
35 6,648 0.0334 222 0.0012 0.3607 0.0969 0.0004 0.0001 
36 6,648 0.029 193 0.0011 0.3502 0.0905 0.0004 0.0001 
    Total 179959       0.8022 0.6303 
 
These multipliers are applied to the estimated number of equivalent fatalities prevented to 
give the present values of estimated safety benefits for the respective discount rates.     
A. Fatality and Injury Prevented Benefits:    
 
As a primary measure of the impact of the rear visibility standard, this analysis will 
measure the cost per equivalent life saved and also benefits in preventing property 
damage involved in the crashes.  In order to calculate a cost per equivalent fatality, 
nonfatal injuries must be expressed in terms of fatalities.  This is done by comparing the 
value of preventing nonfatal injuries to the value of preventing a fatality.  Comprehensive 
values, which include both economic impacts and lost quality (or value) of life 
considerations will be used to determine the relative values of fatalities and nonfatal 
injuries.  In the past, these values were taken from a study published by NHTSA when 
the estimated economic value of preventing a human fatality was $3.0 million. TP
35
PT  In 2008, 
the Department of Transportation has determined that the best current estimate of the 
economic value of preventing a human fatality is $5.8 million in $2007.  However, 
relative value coefficients for preventing injuries of different severity have not been 
developed.  NHTSA is conducting research to revise the previously developed estimates.  
The revised estimates will be published when they become available.  In the interim, we 
have adjusted the current estimates to reflect the revised $5.8 million statistical life for 
both crash avoidance and crashworthiness Federal motor vehicle safety standards (see 
Appendix A).  Tables VII-2a and VII-2b show an example of how the comprehensive 
values are used for each injury severity level, as well as the relative incident-based 
weights for nonfatal injuries, AIS 1-5.   
 
Table VII-2a 
Process of Converting Nonfatal Injuries to Equivalent Fatalities 
(Resulted from Rear Visibility Standard applied to Passenger Cars) 
Injury Severity No. of Fatalities and 
Injuries 
Conversion Factor  Equivalent Fatalities 
(Undiscounted) 
Fatalities 59 1.0000 59 
AIS 5 29 0.6656 19 
AIS 4 60 0.1998 12 
AIS 3 420 0.0804 34 
AIS 2 1162 0.0436 51 
AIS 1 6,497 0.0028 18 
Total   193 
 
                                                 
TP
35
PT See Table A-1, The Economic Impact of Motor Vehicle Crashes 2000, DOT HS 809 446, NHTSA/DOT, 
L. Blincoe, A. Seay, E. Zaloshnja, T. Miller, E.Romano, S. Luchter, R. Spicer, May, 2002.  
  
VII-6 
Table VII-2b 
Process of Converting Nonfatal Injuries to Equivalent Fatalities 
(Resulted from Rear Visibility Standard applied to Light Truck Vehicles) 
Injury Severity No. of Fatalities and 
Injuries 
Conversion Factor Equivalent Fatalities 
(Undiscounted) 
Fatalities 169 1.0000 169 
AIS 5 28 0.6656 19 
AIS 4 57 0.1998 11 
AIS 3 395 0.0804 32 
AIS 2 1051 0.0436 46 
AIS 1 5,589 0.0028 15 
Total   292 
 
The results in Tables VII-2a and -2b show that the installation of camera systems in 
passenger cars would apply to a target population of 193 equivalent fatalities, whereas in 
light truck vehicles it would apply to 292 equivalent fatalities.
 
PT   
 
In Table VII-3, the safety benefits from Tables VII-2 have been discounted at three and 
seven percent rates to express their present values over the lifetime of one model year‟s 
production.  The discount factors and the discounted target population fatal equivalents 
are summarized in Table VII-3. 
 
 
Table VII-3 
Present Discounted Value of Fatalities within Target Population TP
36
PT 
(For equipping light vehicles with camera systems) 
Fatal Equivalent Discount Rate Discounted Fatal Equivalent  
193 (Pass. Cars) 0.8304 at 3% 160 
0.6700 at 7% 129 
292 (Light Trucks) 0.8022 at 3% 234 
0.6303 at 7% 184 
 
The discounted fatal equivalents in Tables VII-3 show that passenger car target 
population is 129 equivalent lives discounted at seven percent and 160 equivalent lives 
discounted at three percent. 
B. Property Damage Prevented Benefits 
 
Table VII-4, identical to Table VI-4 from the Cost section, presents the discounted values 
of the estimated property damage prevented that the requirement would have on a per-
vehicle basis at the respective discount rates.  As in the case for discounting the 
equivalent fatality benefits, the numbers were derived by multiplying the estimated 
amount of property damage prevented by the discount factors that were shown in Table 
VII-3.  
                                                 
TP
36
PT The discounted fatality numbers were rounded to the nearest integer.    
  
VII-7 
 
Table VII-4 
Net Impacts per Vehicle from Property Damage and  
Repair and Maintenance Costs ($2006) 
 55% fDR  
17.5%  
Backing 
130 
Camera 
180 
Camera 
3% discount -$31.43 -$28.56 
7% discount -$25.96 -$23.59 
 43% fDR  
17.5%  
Backing Ultrasonic Radar 
3% discount $3.35 $5.50 
7% discount $2.76 $4.54 
 
C. Net Cost Per Equivalent Life Saved 
The costs per equivalent life saved for light vehicles are computed using the annual net 
cost figures (the sum of the installation costs from Chapter VI plus the discounted 
property damage impacts above) and the discounted equivalent lives saved.  All of the 
calculations take into account the current installation rate, and thus benefits and costs are 
both reduced to those generated by the rulemaking itself.  These installation rates were 
already produced for Table VI-2b, and the percentage of vehicles that need equipment are 
multiplied by the appropriate sales numbers, and then these products (in “number of 
cars”) is multiplied by either the installation cost (per car) or the per-car impact from 
Property Damage to generate the corresponding values.  Calculations have been made for 
the various technologies at the 3% and 7% discount factor.  The following tables detail 
the equivalent lives saved, installation cost (the cost to implement the rulemaking by 
installing the devices), lifetime cost (installation costs plus the impacts from Property 
Damage and Repair and Maintenance, found in table VII-4 above), and cost per 
equivalent life saved for all considered.   
 
  
VII-8 
Table VII-5a 
  Equivalent Lives Saved, Net Cost, and Cost per Equivalent Life Saved for Backover 
Systems at the 3% and 7% Discount Rate 
Passenger Cars and Light Trucks 
 
 
Equivalent 
Lives Saved 
3% discount 
rate 
Installation Costs 
(in $M) 
Lifetime Costs  
(incl. PDO crashes) 
(in $M) 
3% discount rate 
Net Cost/EQ Life Saved 
(in $M) 
130 Mirror 127.4 $2,275.3 $1,861.3 14.6 
130 Dash 127.4 $1,919.2 $1,505.1 11.8 
180 Mirror  150.8 $2,673.1 $2,296.9 15.2 
180 Dash 150.8 $2,316.9 $1,940.7 12.9 
Ultrasonic 7.6 $685.8 $730.4 95.5 
Radar 8.4 $1,228.8 $1,302.1 154.5 
 
Equivalent 
Lives Saved 
7% discount 
rate 
Installation Costs 
(in $M) 
Lifetime Costs  
(incl. PDO crashes) 
(in $M) 
7% discount rate 
Net Cost/EQ Life Saved 
(in $M) 
130 Mirror 101.3 $2,275.3 $1,933.3 19.1 
130 Dash 101.3 $1,919.2 $1,577.2 15.6 
180 Mirror  120.0 $2,673.1 $2,362.4 19.7 
180 Dash 120.0 $2,316.9 $2,006.2 16.7 
Ultrasonic 6.1 $685.8 $722.6 118.8 
Radar 6.7 $1,228.8 $1,289.4 192.3 
 
From all of these values, we find that the lowest estimated cost per equivalent life saved 
for cameras requires a 130 degree dash-display camera system, at the 3 percent discount 
level, and would cost an approximate $11.8 million per equivalent life saved.  The 
highest camera estimate requires a 180 degree mirror-display camera system, at the 7 
percent discount level, and would cost an approximate $19.7 million per equivalent life 
saved.  The lowest cost per equivalent life saved for sensor systems was $86.7 per life 
saved, equipping ultrasonic systems at the 3 percent discount level.  However, the highest 
cost per equivalent lives saved for sensors was the radar system at the 7% discount level, 
providing a cost of $211.9 million per life saved.  For perspective, NHTSA estimates a 
cost of $6.1 million per statistical life when valuing a reduction in premature fatalities, so 
none of these systems are cost effective.     
 
While a rulemaking that only requires light trucks to be equipped is within scope, 
NHTSA is not proposing at this time that the fleet be equipped based on vehicle type.   
Below are the costs and benefits for such an alternative.   
  
  
VII-9 
 
Table VII-5b 
  Equivalent Lives Saved, Net Cost, and Cost per Equivalent Life Saved for Backover 
Systems at the 3% and 7% Discount Rate, by Vehicle Type 
 Equivalent Lives Saved 
Lifetime Costs, including PDO crashes (in 
$M) 
PC Only 
3% discount 
rate 
Installation Costs (in 
$M) 
3% discount 
rate 
Net Cost/EQ Life Saved 
(in $M) 
130 Mirror 59.4 $1,236.6 $1,011.6 $17.0 
130 Dash 59.4 $1,078.4 $853.4 $14.4 
180 Mirror  70.3 $1,452.8 $1,248.3 $17.7 
180 Dash 70.3 $1,294.6 $1,090.2 $15.5 
Ultrasonic 3.6 374.5 398.9 $111.2 
Radar 4.0 671.1 711.1 $180.0 
LT Only     
130 Mirror 68.0 $1,038.7 $849.7 $12.5 
130 Dash 68.0 $840.7 $651.7 $9.6 
180 Mirror  80.5 $1,220.3 $1,048.6 $13.0 
180 Dash 80.5 $1,022.3 $850.6 $10.6 
Ultrasonic 4.1 $311.3 $331.5 $81.6 
Radar 4.5 $557.8 $591.0 $132.1 
 Equivalent Lives Saved 
Lifetime Costs, including PDO crashes (in 
$M) 
PC Only 
7% discount 
rate 
Installation Costs (in 
$M) 
7% discount 
rate 
Net Cost/EQ Life Saved 
(in $M) 
130 Mirror 47.9 $1,236.6 $1,050.8 $21.9 
130 Dash 47.9 $1,078.4 $892.6 $18.6 
180 Mirror  56.7 $1,452.8 $1,283.9 $22.6 
180 Dash 56.7 $1,294.6 $1,125.8 $19.8 
Ultrasonic 2.9 374.5 394.6 $136.4 
Radar 3.2 671.1 704.1 $220.9 
LT Only     
130 Mirror 53.4 $1,038.7 $882.6 $16.5 
130 Dash 53.4 $840.7 $684.6 $12.8 
180 Mirror  63.3 $1,220.3 $1,078.4 $17.0 
180 Dash 63.3 $1,022.3 $880.5 $13.9 
Ultrasonic 3.2 $311.3 $328.0 $102.8 
Radar 3.5 $557.8 $585.2 $166.4 
 
D. Benefit-Cost Analysis 
Effective January 1, 2004, OMB Circular A-4 requires that analyses performed in support 
of final rules must include both cost effectiveness and benefit-cost analysis.  Benefit-cost 
analysis differs from cost effectiveness analysis in that it requires that benefits be 
assigned a monetary value, and that this value be compared to the monetary values of 
costs to derive an estimate of net benefit.  In valuing reductions in premature fatalities, 
we used a NHTSA value of $6.1 million based on a value of $5.8 million per statistical 
  
VII-10 
life from the most current DOT guidance on valuing fatalities TP
37
PT.  This value represents an 
updated version of a meta-analysis of studies that were conducted prior to 1993.   
 
When accounting for the benefits of safety measures, cost savings not included in value 
of life measurements must also be accounted for.  Value of life measurements inherently 
include a value for lost quality of life, plus a valuation of lost material consumption that 
is represented by measuring consumer‟s after-tax lost productivity.  In addition to these 
factors, preventing a motor vehicle fatality will reduce costs for medical care, emergency 
services, insurance administrative costs, workplace costs, and legal costs.  If the 
countermeasure is one that also prevents a crash from occurring, property damage and 
travel delay would be prevented as well.  The sum of both value of life and economic cost 
impacts is referred to as the comprehensive cost savings from reducing fatalities.  For the 
analysis, as shown in Appendix A, we used $6.1 million comprehensive cost per 
statistical life.   
 
Total costs were derived by multiplying the value of life by the equivalent lives saved, as 
shown in Tables VII-6. 
Table VII-6 
  Monetized Benefits and Net Costs for Backover Systems at the 3% and 7% Discount 
Rates with a Value of $6.1M per Equivalent Life 
 
Equivalent 
Lives Saved 
3% discount 
rate 
Monetized 
Benefits 
(in $M) 
3% discount 
rate 
Installation Costs 
(in $M) 
Lifetime Costs  
(incl. PDO 
crashes) 
(in $M) 
3% discount rate 
Net Costs 
(Lifetime Costs 
– Monetized 
Benefits) 
(in $M) 
130 Mirror 127.4 $777.6 $2,275.3 $1,861.3 $1,083.7 
130 Dash 127.4 $777.6 $1,919.2 $1,505.1 $727.6 
180 Mirror  150.8 $920.8 $2,673.1 $2,296.9 $1,376.1 
180 Dash 150.8 $920.8 $2,316.9 $1,940.7 $1,019.9 
Ultrasonic 7.6 $46.7 $685.8 $730.4 $683.7 
Radar 8.4 $51.4 $1,228.8 $1,302.1 $1,250.7 
 
Equivalent 
Lives Saved 
7% discount 
rate 
Monetized 
Benefits 
(in $M) 
7% discount 
rate 
Installation Costs 
(in $M) 
Lifetime Costs  
(incl. PDO 
crashes) 
(in $M) 
7% discount rate 
Net Costs 
(Lifetime Costs 
– Monetized 
Benefits) 
(in $M) 
130 Mirror 101.3 $618.6 $2,275.3 $1,933.3 $1,314.7 
130 Dash 101.3 $618.6 $1,919.2 $1,577.2 $958.6 
180 Mirror  120.0 $732.6 $2,673.1 $2,362.4 $1,629.8 
180 Dash 120.0 $732.6 $2,316.9 $2,006.2 $1,273.7 
Ultrasonic 6.1 $37.1 $685.8 $722.6 $685.5 
Radar 6.7 $40.9 $1,228.8 $1,289.4 $1,248.4 
                                                 
TP
37
PT “Revised Departmental Guidance, Treatment of Value of Preventing Fatalities and Injuries in Preparing 
Economic Analyses”, Memorandum from D. J. Gribbin, General Counsel and Tyler D. Duval, Assistant 
Secretary for Transportation Policy, February 5, 2008. 
  
VII-11 
Our analysis of rear visibility results in costs that outweigh the benefits given the current 
technology and our understanding of the target population and installation rates.  A 
reduction in lives lost to and injuries caused by backover accidents, in addition to benefits 
from property damage only crashes, are expected, but the combination of the monetized 
benefits and the cost of implementation and maintenance are a net cost between $236 
million and $1.6 billion.  
 
E. Potential Alternatives 
In order to explore fully other possible rulemaking options, a variety of combinations of 
technology were examined, specifically, ones in which light trucks were equipped with a 
camera system, and passenger cars were given no extra equipment, a similar camera, 
radar, or ultrasonic systems.  The results of examining such combinations are available 
below.  Note the camera/radar and camera/ultrasonic options have decreased costs 
compared to mandating cameras for both vehicle types, but have a higher cost per life 
saved.  It would not fulfill the requirements of the statute to require cameras for light 
trucks and nothing for passenger cars; those numbers are provided only as a point of 
comparison.  Also, the camera/radar option has a higher net cost associated with it than 
simply mandating cameras for both, and will most likely not be viable on those grounds.  
Comments on these alternatives and suggestions of others are welcome.   
 
Rear Visibility Options 
Discounted at 3% 
($Millions of 2007) 
 Installation 
Costs* 
Monetized 
Benefits 
Property 
Damage 
Costs 
Net 
Costs 
Net Cost per 
Equivalent 
Life Saved 
LT Camera 
PC Camera 
$1,919 to 
$2,275 
$778 $ -414    $727 to   
$1,084 
$11.8 to   
$14.6 
LT Camera 
PC Radar 
$1,512 to 
$1,710 
$439 $ -149    $924 to  
$1,122 
$18.9 to   
$21.7 
LT Camera 
PC Ultrasonic 
$1,215 to 
$1,413 
$437 $ -165 $613 to     
$811 
$14.7 to   
$17.4 
LT Camera 
PC Nothing 
$841 to  
$1,039 
$415 $ -189 $237 to 
$435 
$9.6 to      
$12.5 
*The range of camera costs assumes 130 degree camera with the display in the dash (lower cost) 
to the display in the mirror (higher cost)  
  
 
  
VII-12 
F. Sensitivity Analysis 
To better understand the impact in choosing a value for a statistical life, a sensitivity 
analysis is helpful.  A low and high range estimate of $3.5 and $8.7 million were 
substituted in place of $6.1 million as the value of a statistical life.  In addition, adjusted 
relative cost numbers for injuries MAIS 1 to 5 were determined to remain consistent with 
the low and high values of a statistical life.  A table with the pertinent information 
follows.   
Table VII-7 
Monetization of Injury Subtotals, with Comprehensive Relatives 
for $3.5, $6.1, and $8.7 million per life saved 
  MAIS1 MAIS2 MAIS3 MAIS4 MAIS5 Fatal 
$3.5M 
Injury 
Subtotal $11,951 $166,759 $351,246 $802,496 $2,640,937 $3,504,610 
Comprehensive 
Relatives 0.0034 0.0476 0.1002 0.2290 0.7536 1.0000 
$6.1M 
Injury 
Subtotal $16,799 $265,938 $490,657 $1,219,777 $4,063,088 $6,104,610 
Comprehensive 
Relatives 0.0028 0.0436 0.0804 0.1998 0.6656 1.0000 
$8.7M 
Injury 
Subtotal $21,647 $365,117 $630,069 $1,637,059 $5,485,239 $8,704,610 
Comprehensive 
Relatives 0.0025 0.0419 0.0724 0.1881 0.6302 1.0000 
 
The very same process used to generate Tables VII-5a and VII-6 was applied using these 
new fatality and injury costs.  The range of values for cost per life saved and net cost 
(total costs minus monetized benefits) are provided in the table below. 
 
Table VII-8 
Range for Cost per Equivalent Life saved and Net Costs minus Monetized Benefits, 
across 3% and 7% discount factors, by Value of a Statistical Life (in $M) 
  $3.5M per life $6.1M per life $8.7M per life 
Cost per 
Equivalent Life 
Saved 
Cameras 10.9 18.1 11.8 19.7 12.3 20.4 
Ultrasonic 87.7 109.1 95.5 118.8 99.1 123.2 
Radar 141.9 176.6 154.5 192.3 160.2 199.5 
            
Net Cost 
Cameras $1,019.2 $1,904.4 $727.6 $1,629.8 $435.9 $1,355.2 
Ultrasonic $699.4 $701.2 $683.7 $685.5 $666.2 $671.6 
Radar $1,263.8 $1,270.0 $1,248.4 $1,250.7 $1,231.4 $1,233.1 
  
VIII-1 
VIII. Regulatory Flexibility Act and Unfunded Mandates 
Reform Act Analysis 
A. Regulatory Flexibility Act 
 
The Regulatory Flexibility Act of 1980 (5 U.S.C §601 et seq.) requires agencies to 
evaluate the potential effects of their proposed and final rules on small business, small 
organizations and small Government jurisdictions. 
 
5 U.S.C §603 requires agencies to prepare and make available for public comments initial 
and final regulatory flexibility analysis (RFA) describing the impact of proposed and 
final rules on small entities.  Section 603(b) of the Act specifies the content of a RFA.  
Each RFA must contain: 
 
1. A description of the reasons why action by the agency is being considered; 
2. A succinct statement of the objectives of, and legal basis for a final rule; 
3. A description of and, where feasible, an estimate of the number of small entities 
to which the final rule will apply; 
4. A description of the projected reporting, recording keeping and other compliance 
requirements of a final rule including an estimate of the classes of small entities 
which will be subject to the requirement and the type of professional skills 
necessary for preparation of the report or record; 
5. An identification, to the extent practicable, of all relevant Federal rules which 
may duplicate, overlap or conflict with the final rule; 
6. Each regulatory flexibility analysis shall also contain a description of any 
significant alternatives which accomplish the stated objectives of applicable 
statutes and which minimize any significant economic impact on small entities. 
 
1.  Description of the reason why action by the agency is being considered 
NHTSA is proposing this action to carry out the requirements of the Cameron 
Gulbransen Kids Transportation Safety Act of 2007. 
 
2. Objectives of, and legal basis for, the final rule 
The Act requires the agency to conduct rulemaking to expand the required field of view 
to prevent backover incidents.   
   
3. Description and estimate of the number of small entities to which the final rule will 
apply 
The final rule will affect motor vehicle manufacturers.  There are no light truck 
manufacturers that are small businesses.  However, there are six domestically owned 
small passenger car manufacturers.    
  
Business entities are defined as small business using the North American Industry 
Classification System (NAICS) code, for the purpose of receiving Small Business 
Administration assistance.  One of the criteria for determining size, as stated in 13 CFR 
121.201, is the number of employees in the firm.  For establishments primarily engaged 
  
VIII-2 
in manufacturing or assembling automobiles, light and heavy duty trucks, buses, motor 
homes, or motor vehicle body manufacturing, the firm must have less than 1,000 
employees to be classified as a small business.   
 
We believe that the rulemaking would not have a significant economic impact on the 
small vehicle manufacturers because the systems are not technically hard to develop or 
install and the cost of the systems ($160 to $200) is a small proportion (less than half of 
one percent) of the overall vehicle cost for most of these specialty cars.  The exception is 
Standard Taxi ($200/$25,000 = 0.8 percent of the sales price).  Since every manufacturer 
needs to meet the standard, the proposal would have no effect on competition.  However, 
it does raise the overall cost, and could affect sales in a small way.   
 
Currently, there are six small passenger car motor vehicle manufacturers in the United 
States.   Table VIII-1 provides information about the 6 small domestic manufacturers in 
MY 2007.  All are small manufacturers, having much less than 1,000 employees.   
  
  
VIII-3 
Table VIII-1 
Small Vehicle Manufacturers 
 
 
 
Manufacturer 
 
 
 
Employees 
 
 
 
Estimated Sales 
 
 
 
Sale Price Range 
 
 
 
Est. Revenues* 
 
 
Fisker 
Automotive** 
 
 
 
N/A 
 
 
15,000 
projected 
 
 
 
$80,000   
 
 
 
N/A 
Mosler 
Automotive 
 
25 
 
20 
 
$189,000 
 
$2,000,000 
Panoz Auto 
Development 
Company 
 
 
50 
 
 
150 
 
$90,000 to 
$125,000 
 
 
$16,125,000 
 
Saleen Inc. 
 
170 
 
1,000
#
 
$39,000 to 
$59,000 
 
$49,000,000 
 
Saleen Inc. 
 
170 
 
16
##
 
 
$585,000 
 
$9,000,000 
Standard 
Taxi*** 
 
35 
 
N/A 
 
$25,000 
 
$2,000,000 
Tesla  Motors, 
Inc. 
 
250 
 
2,000 
$65,000 to 
$100,000 
 
N/A 
*    Assuming an average sales price from the sales price range. 
**   Fisker Automotive is a joint venture of Quantum Fuel Systems Technologies 
Worldwide, Inc. and Fisker Coachbuild, LLC. 
*** Standard Taxi is a subsidiary of the Vehicle Production Group LLC.  35 employees 
is the total for VPG LLC.   
#
  Ford Mustang Conversions  
 
The agency has not analyzed the impact of the proposal on these small manufacturers 
individually.   
 
4. A description of the projected reporting, record keeping and other compliance 
requirements of a final rule including an estimate of the classes of small entities which 
will be subject to the requirement and the type of professional skills necessary for 
preparation of the report or record.   
This proposal includes no new requirements for reporting, record keeping of other 
compliance requirements.   
 
5. An identification, to the extent practicable, of all relevant Federal rules which may 
duplicate, overlap, or conflict with the final rule   
We know of no Federal rules which duplicate, overlap, or conflict with the final rule. 
 
  
VIII-4 
6. A description of any significant alternatives to the final rule which accomplish the 
stated objectives of applicable statutes and which minimize any significant economic 
impact of the proposal on small entities. 
The agency is considering a variety of alternatives and knows of no other alternatives that 
can achieve the stated objectives and minimize the impacts on small entities.     
 
 
B. Unfunded Mandates Reform Act 
 
The Unfunded Mandates Reform Act of 1995 (Public Law 104-4) requires agencies to 
prepare a written assessment of the costs, benefits, and other effects of proposed or final 
rules that include a Federal mandate likely to result in the expenditures by States, local or 
tribal governments, in the aggregate, or by the private sector, of more than $100 million 
annually (adjusted annually for inflation with base year of 1995).  Adjusting this amount 
by the implicit gross domestic product price deflator for 2007 results in $130 million 
(119.816/92.106 = 1.30).  The assessment may be included in conjunction with other 
assessments, as it is here. 
 
 
  
IX-1 
IX. Probabilistic Uncertainty Analysis 
 
This chapter identifies and quantifies the major uncertainties in the cost-effectiveness and 
net benefit analyses and examines the impacts of these uncertainties.  Throughout the 
course of these analyses, many assumptions were made, diverse data sources were used, 
and different statistical processes were applied.  The variability of these assumptions, 
data sources, and statistical processes potentially would influence the estimated 
regulatory outcomes.  Thus, all these assumptions, data sources, and derived statistics can 
be considered as uncertainty factors for the regulatory analysis.  The purpose of this 
uncertainty analysis is to identify the uncertainty factors with appreciable variability, 
quantify these uncertainty factors by appropriate probability distributions, and induce the 
probabilistic outcomes accompanied with degrees of probability or plausibility.  This 
facilitates a more informed decision-making process.   
 
A Monte Carlo statistical simulation technique
38
 is used to accomplish the process.  The 
technique is to first randomly select values for those uncertainty factors from their pre-
established probability distributions.  The selected values then are fed back to the cost-
effectiveness and net benefit analysis process to generate all possible outcomes.  The 
process is run repeatedly.  Each complete run is a trial.  Crystal Ball®
39
, a spreadsheet-
based risk analysis and forecasting software package which includes the Monte Carlo 
simulation technique tool, was chosen to automate the process.  In addition to simulation 
results, Crystal Ball® also provides the degree of certainty (or confidence, or credibility) 
that is associated with the simulated results.  The degree of certainty provides the 
decision-makers an additional piece of important information to evaluate the outcomes.  
 
The analysis starts by establishing mathematical models that imitate the actual processes 
in deriving cost-effectiveness and net benefits, as shown in previous chapters.  The 
formulation of the models also allows analysts to conveniently identify and categorize 
uncertainty factors.  In the mathematical model, each variable (e.g., cost of technology) 
represents an uncertainty factor that would potentially alter the model outcomes if its 
value were changed.  Variations of these uncertainty factors are described by appropriate 
probability distribution functions.  These probability distributions are established based 
on available data.  If data are not sufficient or not available, professional judgments are 
used to estimate the distribution of these uncertainty factors. 
 
After defining and quantifying the uncertainty factors, the next step is to simulate the 
model to obtain probabilistic results rather than single-value estimates.  The simulation 
                                                 
38
 See a: Robert, C.P. & Casella, G., Monte Carlo Statistical Methods, Springer-Verlag New York, Inc., 
1999, and 
b: Liu, J.S., Monte Carlo Strategies in Scientific Computing, Springer-Verlag New York, Inc., 2001 
(Or any statistics books describing the Monte Carlo simulation theory are good references for 
understanding the technique).  
 
39
 A registered trademark of Decisioneering, Inc. (now a unit of Oracle company) 
  
IX-2 
repeats the trials until certain pre-defined criteria
40
 are met and a probability distribution 
of results is generated.  Note that the uncertainty analysis did not examine the technology 
“look-down mirrors” since the mean benefit estimated in the previous chapter is 0. 
   
A. Simulation Models 
 
Mathematical models were built to imitate the process used in deriving cost-effectiveness 
and net benefits as developed in previous chapters.  Both the cost-effectiveness and net 
benefit models comprise three principal components: injury benefits, property damage 
savings/costs, and vehicle technology costs.  These three components are discussed 
separately in the following sections.   
 
A.1 Injury Benefit Component 
 
In the cost-effectiveness model, injury benefits are represented by fatal equivalents (FEs) 
reduced.  In the net benefit model, injury benefits are represented by their monetary 
value, which is the product of comprehensive cost per life saved and FEs.  Since benefits 
(fatalities and injuries reduced) were already expressed as FEs in the cost-effectiveness 
model, the net benefit model is just one step removed from the cost-effectiveness model.  
Therefore, the FE model is discussed first. 
 
FEs is derived through the following steps: 
1. Establishing baseline fatal and injury populations 
2. Deriving  initial injury benefits (i.e., fatalities and MAIS 1-5 injuries eliminated 
by the proposal), 
3. Adjusting the initial injury benefits to account for technology installation rate for 
MY 2010 fleet passenger vehicles (2010-based adjustment factor) 
4. Deriving FEs by multiplying the injury benefits by their corresponding injury-to-
fatality ratios, and 
5. Discounting FEs to derive the discounted net benefits over the vehicle‟s life. 
 
Therefore, FEs can be represented by the following mathematical formula for each of the 
technologies examined in the PRIA: 
                                                 
40
 The pre-defined criteria may change with each uncertainty analysis.  In this case, we require a 99 percent 
precision in mean for each simulated outcome such as total costs, cost-effectiveness, and net benefits as 
described later. 
  
IX-3 
(1) ----- d*a*]r *e*T[FEs ii
6
1j
jij
2
1i
 
Where, 
  Tij = target population, i=1 for PCs and i=2 for LTVs; j=1 as MAIS j injuries with 
j=6 as fatalities  
e = effectiveness of the technology against the target population 
rj = MAIS j injury-to-fatality ratio with j=6 as fatalities 
ai = 2010-based adjustment factor 
di = cumulative lifetime discount factor, either at 3 or 7 percent discount rate. 
 
The effectiveness “e” defined here is essentially the product of three independent factors:  
(1) the percentage of cases that were found to be “avoidable”, i.e., avoidability ( fA), the 
percentage of cases in which the system performs and provides the needed information 
(fS), and the percentage of cases where drivers will recognize the information from the 
system and act appropriately to actually avoid a crash (fDR).   Therefore, e can be further 
expanded as: 
e = fA * fS * fDR 
Also, ai, the 2010-based adjustment factor is basically equal to 1 minus the technology 
installation rate in MY 2010 passenger vehicle fleet.  
 
The product of the target population (Tij) and the corresponding technology effectiveness 
rate (e) represents the initial injury severity j benefits for the i
th
 vehicle type (= Tij*e = 
Tij* fA * fS * fDR).  Multiplying the injury severity j benefits by its corresponding injury-
to-fatality ratio [= Tij*e * ri]) derives its FEs.  Summed over the injury severity (index j) 
thus derives the total FEs for the i
th
 vehicle type type (=
6
1j
jij r *e*T ).  The initial FEs 
then were adjusted to 2010 level to account for technology installation rate by 
multiplying it by the 2010-based adjustment factor ai [=
6
1j
jij r *e*T * ai)].  Finally, the 
total FEs are discounted either at a 3 or 7 percent rate to reflect the net benefits of the rule 
over a vehicle‟s life.  
 
FEs is the basic benefit measurement for estimating cost-effectiveness.  For net benefits, 
FEs are translated into monetary value.  If M denotes the cost per fatality, benefit in the 
net benefit calculation is equal to M*FEs.  Hence, the benefit component for net benefits 
is: 
ii
6
1j
jDRSAij
2
1i
ii
6
1j
jij
2
1i
d*a*]r*f*f*f*T[*M
d*a*]r*e*T[*MFEs*M
 
 
  
  
IX-4 
A.2 Lifetime Property Damage Savings (S) 
 
Property damage savings include the benefits of eliminating backing over crashes and the 
costs for technology repair/maintenance from property damage only and rear-end crashes.   
Property damage savings are realized over a vehicle‟s life and would be discounted at 3 
and 7 percent.  Therefore, S can be represented by the following mathematical formula: 
  
2
1i
iii a * v*uS  
Where,  
ui = discounted (at 3 or 7 percent) unit lifetime property damage savings for 
affected 
       vehicles, with i=1 as PCs and j=2 as LTVs 
vi = number of new vehicles 
ai = 2010-based adjustment factor. 
 
   
A.3 Vehicle Technology Cost Component 
 
Vehicle technology cost (VC) is the product of technology cost per affected vehicle and 
the number of affected vehicles.  The number of affected vehicles can be derived by 
multiplying the total number of new vehicles and the proportion of vehicles that need to 
install the technology (i.e., number of new vehicles * 2010-based adjustment factor).   
The 2010-based adjustment factor used in the cost component is further segregated by 
implementation options (full or partial system).  The vehicle technology cost of the 
proposal can be represented as: 
2
1i
2
1j
ijiij a *v*cVC  
Where, VC = vehicle technology cost 
cij = technology cost per affected vehicle, i=1 for PCs and i=2 for LTVs; 
        j=1 for full system and j=2 for partial system 
vi = number of new vehicles 
aij = 2010-based adjustment factor. 
 
Note that, the 2010-based adjustment factor ai used in the FE model is the sum of 
corresponding full (ai1) and partial system adjustment factor (ai2), i.e., ai = ai1 + ai2.  The 
full and partial systems primarily are for camera systems.   A full system includes a 
camera and a display system.  A partial system only includes a camera.  The partial 
system would be required for vehicles that already are equipped with an in-dash 
navigation unit.    
 
A.4 Cost-Effectiveness Model and Net Benefit Model 
 
After the fatal equivalents, property damage savings/costs, and vehicle technology cost 
were established, the cost-effectiveness model (CE) is calculated as the ratio of net costs 
  
IX-5 
(NC) to fatal equivalents (FEs) where NC is equal to vehicle technology cost (VC) minus 
lifetime property damage savings (S).  The cost-effectiveness model (CE) has the format:  
FEs
SVC
FEs
NC
CE
 
 
The net benefit is the difference between benefits expressed in monetary value and the 
net cost.  Thus, the net benefit model (NB) has the format:  
 VCSFEs*M
NCFEs*MNB
 
Where, M is the cost per fatality. 
 
B. Uncertainty Factors 
 
Each parameter in the above cost-effectiveness and net benefit model represents a major 
category of uncertainty factors.  Therefore, there are ten major categories of uncertainty 
factors that would impact the cost-effectiveness: (1) target crash population, Tij, (2) 
avoidability, fA, (3) system performance factor, fS, (4) driver factor, fDR, (5) 2010-based 
adjustment factors aij, (6) injury-to-fatality ratios, ri, (7) cumulative lifetime discount 
factors, di, (8) discounted unit lifetime property damage savings, ui, (9) technology cost 
per affected vehicle, ci, and (10) number of new vehicles, vi.  The net benefit model has 
one additional uncertainty factor (11) cost per life, M, in addition to ten for the cost-
effectiveness model.   
 
Target population, Tij, is important to benefit estimates because it defines the crash 
population of risk without the proposal.  Fatal and injury target populations were derived 
from three data systems: FARS, GES, and NiTS.  The major uncertainties in this factor 
arise from reporting errors in NiTS and survey errors in GES.  The reporting errors in 
NiTS are not available due to the lack of an established off-roadway crash baseline to 
which NiTS can be compared.  Consequently, the overall variation of the target 
population is unknown.  However, given that NiTS has sufficient sample and that 
sampling systems including GES generally allow a 5 percent sampling error, a normal 
distribution with a standard error as 10 percent of the mean is considered sufficient to 
describe variations of the target populations. 
 
Note that probability functions for target fatal and MAIS injury populations cannot be 
established independently because their relative ratios are expected to regress to the mean 
relative ratios as reported in the crash databases.  To address this interdependency issue, 
the analysis first established the variation for the overall target population (i.e., all injury 
and fatalities).  After establishing the variation (i.e., a normal distribution with 10 percent 
of the mean as one standard deviation), the overall target population was distributed into 
fatalities and MAIS injuries.  The distribution was based on their mean proportions.  
These mean proportions are treated as constants. 
  
IX-6 
 
Avoidability fA, is significant since it would affect the effectiveness of the proposed 
technology.   The sources of its uncertainty include the bias inherent in the expert 
judgments and the representativeness of cases where fA were derived from.   Since a team 
of reviewers first accessed the value of fA independently for each of the selected cases 
and then they jointly resolved any discrepancies, the point estimate of fA for each case is 
considered to be a fair assessment.  Furthermore, the sample cases that were reviewed by 
the team are adequate to represent backing over crashes.  Therefore, the agency believes 
that the range between the avoidable percentage and the combined percentage of 
“avoidable”, “possibly avoidable”, and “possibly not avoidable” is sufficient to capture 
the variation for fA.  In order words, for each technology examined by the PRIA, the 
value of fA would fall between these two percentages.   
 
Due to the range constraint, beta probability distributions are chosen to describe the 
variations for fA for its flexibility and capability of setting distribution boundary.   In 
addition to lower and higher bounds, a beta distribution has two more parameters, α and 
β, that determine the shape of the beta distribution.  The values of α and β were 
established by setting the mean of the distribution as the combined percentage of 
“avoidable” and “possibly avoidable” cases.  
 
System performance factor, fS, addresses the limitation of the technologies and would 
also affect the effectiveness of technologies.   However, this factor is primarily used in  
determining the reliability of sensor-based systems such as ultrasonic and radar systems.   
It would not affect the camera systems.   Sources of uncertainty for fS include 
experimental errors and production variation.  Based on expert assessment and the 
agency‟s experience with manufacturers‟ production reliability of vehicle safety systems, 
a 10 percent performance variation is considered to be sufficient to account for the 
majority of the uncertainties associated with fS.  Any value within this range is expected 
to have an equal chance to be the true system performance.  Thus, the analysis treats fS as 
uniformly distributed for the ultrasonic and radar systems.  It is treated as constant with 
value of 1 since it does not impact the camera systems.   
 
Driver factor, fDR, also affects the effectiveness of the technologies examined in the 
PRIA. The sources of its uncertainty include, but are not limited to, experimental errors, 
representativeness of drivers used for the experiment, driving environment, and driver 
conditions.  Variations for these uncertainty sources are unknown.  Nevertheless, the 
analysis treats the values of fDR as normally distributed to account for the impact of this 
factor.   One standard deviation is set to be 10 percent of the mean. 
2010-based adjustment factors, aij, are used to adjust the initial benefits and costs to 2010 
level.  The source of its uncertainty primarily is from projection errors.  Since, aij would 
impact both benefits and costs of the proposal in similar magnitude.  Variations for these 
factors thus would not be expected to increase the uncertainty level for cost-effectiveness 
and net benefit measurements.   Therefore, this factor is treated as a constant. 
  
Injury-to-fatality ratios, rj, reflect the relative economic impact of injuries compared to 
fatalities based on their estimated comprehensive unit costs.  They were derived based on 
  
IX-7 
the 2007 update of the most current 2002 crash cost assessment
41
.  The crash cost 
assessment itself is a complex analysis with an associated degree of uncertainty.  At this 
time, these uncertainties are also unknowns.  Thus, the variation in these ratios is 
unknown and the analysis treats these ratios as constants.  
 
Cumulative lifetime discount factors, di, represent the present discount factor over the 
vehicle‟s life.  These factors are derived based on the agency study on vehicle miles 
traveled and vehicle survivability
42
.  Variation of these factors comes from vehicle 
mileage surveys, national vehicle population, and statistical process.  These uncertainties 
cannot be quantified at this time.  Thus, the analysis treats these factors as constants.  
 
Discounted unit lifetime property damage savings, ui, is expected to have certain level of 
variability.  Its variations come from many sources: the probability that a vehicle over its 
lifespan would be involved in property damage only or rear-end crashes, the cost of 
repairing/replacing the proposed technology, annual vehicle miles traveled, survival 
probability of the vehicle, and the discount rate.  Variations for these sources are 
unknown at this time.  Given its impact on the overall cost of the proposal, the 
uncertainty analysis treats the distribution of ui similar to that of the technology cost 
which is treated as uniformly distributed (see below).  In other words, the value of ui is 
treated as uniformly distributed with a 10 percent deviation from the mean, i.e., 0.9*mean 
≤ ui ≤ 1.1*mean. 
 
Technology cost per affected vehicle, ci, is a concern.  The sources of cost uncertainties 
arise from, but are not limited to, maturity of the technologies/countermeasures and 
potential fluctuation in labor and material costs (e.g., due to economics from production 
volume).  According to professional judgments of NHTSA cost analysts and contractors, 
the cost generally will fall within 10 percent of the point estimate shown in the cost 
chapter.  Any cost within this range would have equal chance to be the true cost.  Thus, 
the analysis treats the cost as uniformly distributed.  
 
Number of new vehicles, vi, is an uncertainty factor that would impact the cost estimates.  
Although, vehicle sales have gradually increased over time, they are subject to annual 
variation due to changes in economic conditions, which are difficult to predict as 
evidenced in 2007-2009 recession. Thus, vi is treated as a constant.    
 
The ten factors discussed above would impact the cost-effectiveness outcome.  The net 
benefit model has an additional factor, the cost of statistical life, M. 
 
Cost per statistical life, M, is an uncertainty factor for net benefits.  The cost is based on 
recent meta-analyses of the wage-risk value of statistical life (VSL).  These meta-
analyses deployed different statistical methodologies and assumptions.  But, generally, 
these studies show that an individual‟s willingness-to-pay (WTP) for reduction in 
                                                 
41
 The Economic Impact of Motor Vehicle Crashes 2000, NHTSA DOT HS 809 446, May 2002 
42
 Vehicle Survivability and Travel Mileage Schedules, Technical Report, DOT HS 809 952, January 2006 
(Docket No. 22223-2218)  
  
IX-8 
premature fatalities is from $1 million to $10 million
43
.  After adjusted to 2007 value, 
WTP is ranged from $1.6 to $10.6 million.  The agency assumes the value of M is 
normally distributed with mean $6.1 million and its three standard deviations were 
between the mean and the updated range.  
 
C. Quantifying the Uncertainty Factors 
 
This section establishes the appropriate probability distributions for the uncertainty 
factors that come with appreciable variations (i.e., target crash population and 
effectiveness) and quantifies the constant values for other factors.  
 
Target Crashes, Tij.  As previously described, probability distributions for fatal and MAIS 
injury target populations are not established independently due to interdependency of 
their relative size.  A normal probability distribution for the overall target population was 
established first.  The mean of the normal distribution is the overall mean population 
reported in the target population section.  One standard deviation is set to be 10 percent 
of the mean.  The established variations then were distributed to fatalities and injuries 
based on their relative mean ratios.  Thus, probability distributions for fatal and 
individual MAIS injury population were actually generated through the simulation 
process. 
 
The overall target population is 15,117 (non-fatal and fatal injuries combined).  
Therefore, the mean of the normal distribution is 15,117 and one standard deviation is 
1,512.  After the variation for the overall target population was established, Tij for each i 
and j, was derived by applying their respective proportion to the overall target population.  
Basically, each Tij is a product of the overall target population and a constant (i.e., its 
proportion).   As a result, each Tij also is normally distributed with 10 percent of its mean 
as one standard deviation.  Figure IX-1 depicts the simulated probability distributions for 
fatal and MAIS injury target population.   The proportions used to derive the fatal and 
MAIS injury target populations are treated as constants.  They are represented by their 
respective mean proportions shown in the initial target population.   Table IX-1 shows 
these proportions.  
                                                 
43
 See a:  Mrozek, J.R. and L.O. Taylor, What determines the value of a life? A Meta Analysis, Journal of 
Policy Analysis and Management 21 (2), pp. 253-270,  
 
b: Viscusi , W. K., The Value of Life: Estimates with Risks by Occupation and Industry, Economic Inquiry, 
Oxford University Press, vol. 42(1), pages 29-48, January, 2004, and 
 
c: Viscusi, W. K. & Aldy, J.E., The Value of a Statistical Life: A Critical Review of Market Estimates 
through Out the World, Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, Kluwer Academic Publishers, vol. 27(1), pages 5-
76, August, 2003.  
 
  
IX-9 
Figure IX-1 
Simulated Normal Probability Distributions for Target Population (Tij) 
PCs LTVs 
 
 
MAIS 1 Injuries (T11) 
 
Mean: 6,497; SD: 650 
 
 
MAIS 1 Injuries (T21) 
 
Mean: 5,588; SD: 559 
 
 
MAIS 2 Injuries (T12) 
 
Mean: 1,162; SD: 116 
 
 
MAIS 2 Injuries (T22) 
 
Mean: 1,051; SD: 105 
 
 
MAIS 3 Injuries (T13) 
 
Mean: 420; SD: 42 
 
 
MAIS 3 Injuries (T23) 
 
Mean: 395; SD:40 
PCs: passenger cars, LTVs: light trucks/vans 
  
  
IX-10 
Figure IX-1 - Continued 
Simulated Normal Probability Distributions for Target Population (Tij) 
 
 
MAIS 4 Injuries (T14) 
 
Mean: 60; SD: 6 
 
 
MAIS 4 Injuries (T24) 
 
Mean: 57; SD: 6 
 
 
MAIS 5 Injuries (T15) 
 
Mean: 29; SD: 3 
 
 
MAIS 5 Injuries (T25) 
 
Mean: 28; SD: 3 
 
 
Fatalities (T16) 
 
Mean: 59; SD: 6 
 
 
Fatalities (T26) 
 
Mean: 169; SD: 17 
PCs: passenger cars, LTVs: light trucks/vans  
  
IX-11 
Table IX-1 
Constant Values for Distributing Target Population 
 PCs LTVs 
MAIS 1 0.4187 0.3602 
MAIS 2 0.0749 0.0677 
MAIS 3 0.0271 0.0255 
MAIS 4 0.0039 0.0037 
MAIS 5 0.0019 0.0018 
Fatalities 0.0038 0.0109 
Column Total 0.5302 0.4698 
 
  
Avoidability fA.. Values of fA are assumed to be beta distributed and bounded by the 
percentage of avoidable cases and the combined percentage of “avoidable”, “possibly 
avoidable”, and “possibly not avoidable” cases.   The shape parameters α and β of the 
beta distribution function were determined by ensuring that the mean of the distribution is 
equal to the percentage of avoidable and possible avoidable cases.   Figure IX-2 depicts 
the beta distribution for each of the technologies examined in the PRIA.  Due to the range 
and mean constraints, as shown, these distributions tend to be negatively skewed, i.e., a 
distribution with a relatively longer tail towards the lower end of values.   
 
System performance factor, fS.  The system performance factor represents the average 
performance of sensors.  Thus, it only impacts sensor-based ultrasonic and radar systems. 
Its effect on these two systems is assumed to be identical.  Values of fS are treated as 
uniformly distributed.   Since the factor does not apply to the camera systems, it is set to 
be 1.  
 
Two parameters maximum (fSMax) and minimum (fSMin) are required to establish a 
uniform distribution for fs.  With these two parameters, the uniform distribution can be 
represented as: 
The mean of the distribution is set to be the point estimate presented in the previous 
chapter.  The maximum and minimum of fs are assumed to be a 10 percent deviation from 
the mean, i.e., 0.9*mean ≤ fs ≤ 1.1*mean.  Therefore, for ultrasonic and radar systems, 
the mean of fs is 70.37 percent, fSMin = 63.33 percent, and fSMax = 77.41 percent. 
  
  
IX-12 
Figure IX-2 
Beta Distributions for Avoidability Factor (fA) 
by Technology 
 
 
180
o
  View Camera 
 
Minimum: 66%;  Maximum: 94% 
Mean: 90% 
α = 11; β = 2 
 
 
130
o
  View Camera 
 
Minimum: 50%;  Maximum: 86% 
Mean: 76% 
α = 5.5; β = 2 
 
 
Ultrasonic 
 
Minimum: 20%;  Maximum: 68% 
Mean: 49% 
α = 3; β = 2 
 
 
Radar 
 
Minimum: 24%;  Maximum: 74% 
Mean: 54% 
α = 3; β = 2 
 
 
  
Driver factor, fDR.  This factor varies depending on whether the technology of interest is a 
camera- or sensor-based system.  Values for this factor are assumed to be normally 
distributed for both systems.  One standard deviation is set to be the 10 percent of the 
mean.  Figure IX-3 depicts the normal distribution for fDR.   
  
  
IX-13 
Figure IX-3 
Normal Distribution for Driver Factor (fDR) 
 
 
Camera Systems 
(180
o
  and 130
o
 View) 
 
Mean: 55%;  SD: 6% 
 
 
Sensor-Based Systems 
(Ultrasonic and Radar) 
 
Mean: 7%; SD: 1% 
 
 
 
2010-based adjustment factors, aij.  The analysis treats these factors as constant.  They 
vary by vehicle types (i.e., PCs and LTVs) and technology types.  Table IX-2 lists these 
constants.  As shown, for camera systems, a11 = 82.2%, a12 = 7.3%, a21 = 56.7%, and a22 
= 13.2%.   For sensor-based systems, a11 = 90.9%, a12 = 0.0%, a21 = 70.3%, and a22 = 
0.0%.  Note that the factor ai used in the FE model is the sum of full and partial system 
factors as shown in the table.  For example, a1 = 89.5% and a2 = 69.9% for camera 
systems and a1 = 90.9% and a2 = 70.3% for sensor-based systems.  
 
  
IX-14 
Table IX-2 
Constant Values for 2010-Based Adjustment Factors (aij) by Technology and 
Vehicle Type 
Detection Technology  PCs LTVs 
Camera Systems 
(180
o
  and 130
o
 View) 
Full System 
Partial System* 
Total 
82.2%  
7.3% 
89.5% 
56.7%  
13.2%  
69.9% 
Sensor-Based Systems 
(Ultrasonic and Radar) 
Full System 
Partial System* 
Total 
90.9% 
0.0% 
90.9% 
70.3%  
0.0%  
70.3% 
*Needed only the camera, only applicable to camera-based systems 
 
Injury-to-fatality equivalent ratios (ri).  These factors are treated as constants.  Table IX-3 
lists the injury-to-fatality equivalent ratios which are used to translate non-fatal injuries to 
fatal equivalents.   
Table IX-3 
Injury-To-Fatality Equivalence Ratios (rj)* 
 Injury-To-Fatality Equivalence Ratios 
MAIS 1 (r1) 0.00275 
MAIS 2 (r2) 0.04356 
MAIS 3 (r3) 0.08037 
MAIS 4 (r4) 0.19981 
MAIS 5 (r5) 0.66558 
Fatality (r6) 1.00000 
 
 
Cumulative lifetime discount factors (di).  These factors are treated as constants.  At a 3 
percent discount, d1 = 0.8304 for PCs and d2 = 0.8022 for LTVs.  At 7 percent discount, 
d1 = 0.6700 for PCs and d2 = 0.6303 for LTVs. 
 
Unit lifetime property damage savings, ui. The analysis treats these factors as uniformly 
distributed.   Table IX-4 lists the maximum and minimum values that are used to 
establish the uniform distribution.  The mean values are also presented in the table.  Note 
that negative values represent cost.   As shown, both cameras systems would save 
property damage costs at both discount rates.  In contrast, the ultrasonic and radar 
systems would not.     
  
  
IX-15 
Table IX-4 
Discounted Unit Lifetime Property Damage Savings Per Vehicle (ui) 
Parameters for Uniform Distribution by Technology Type and Discount Rate 
(2007 Dollar) 
 
@3% Discount 
 Mean Minimum Maximum 
180
o
  View Camera $28.56 $25.70 $31.42 
130
o
  View Camera $31.43 $28.29 $34.57 
Ultrasonic -$3.35 -$3.69 $-3.02 
Radar -$5.50 -$6.05 -$4.95 
 
@7% Discount 
 Mean Minimum Maximum 
180
o
  View Camera $23.59 $21.23 $25.95 
130
o
  View Camera $25.96 $23.36 $28.56 
Ultrasonic -$2.76 -$3.04 $-2.48 
Radar -$4.54 -$4.99 -$4.09 
Note: negative numbers represent cost 
 
Technology cost per affected vehicle, ci.  The analysis assumes the cost factors are 
uniformly distributed.  As described earlier, a uniform distribution would be established 
by a maximum and a minimum value.  Based on expert judgment and the agency‟s 
experience with cost assessment, a 10 percent cost fluctuation from the mean cost is 
believed to be sufficient to describe the overall technology cost variation.  The cost varies 
by technology and its installation options.   Table IX-5 lists the cost per affected vehicle 
by technology and installation options.  These costs represent the investments paid now 
for future benefits and thus no discounting is needed. 
  
  
IX-16 
Table IX-5 
Parameters for Uniform Distribution for Technology Cost per Affected Vehicle (ci) 
by Technology Type and Installation Option 
(2007 Dollar) 
Technology – Installation Mean Minimum Maximum 
180
o
  View Camera – Mirror $202.94 $182.65 $223.24 
130
o
 View Camera – Mirror $172.74 $155.47 $190.02 
180
o
  View Camera – Dashboard 
Full System 
Camera Only (Partial System) 
 
$189.05 
$88.18 
 
$170.15 
$79.37 
 
$207.96 
$97.00 
130
o
  View Camera – Dashboard 
Full System 
Camera Only (Partial System) 
 
$158.85 
$57.98 
 
$142.97 
$52.19 
 
$174.74 
$63.78 
Ultrasonic $51.49 $46.34 $56.64 
Radar $92.26 $83.03 $101.49 
 
Number of new vehicles, vi,.  These factors are constant.  The total number of passenger 
vehicles is 16.6 million.  Of these, 8,000,000 are PCs, and 8,600,000 are LTVs.  In other 
words, v1 = 8,000,000 and v2 = 8,600,000 
 
Cost per fatality, M, is an uncertainty factor for net benefits.  The value of M largely 
depends on the value of statistical life (VSL).  The cost is based on recent meta-analyses 
of the wage-risk value of VSL.  These meta-analyses deployed different statistical 
methodologies and assumptions.  But, generally, these studies show that an individual‟s 
willingness-to-pay (WTP) for reduction in premature fatalities is from $1 million to $10 
million
44
.  In the past, when a $3.0 million VSL was the DOT guideline for cost-benefit 
analysis, the agency used this $1-$10 million as the range for M and assumed the value of 
M is normally distributed with its mean equal to $5.5.million.  However, in 2008 DOT 
has issued a new guideline requiring a $5.8 million VSL to be used for cost-benefit 
analysis.  The corresponding comprehensive cost is estimated to be $6.1 million in 2007 
dollars.  To reflect this change and to be consistent with the cost-benefit analysis 
described in the previous chapters, the normal distribution for M has been revised to 
reflect the comprehensive cost per fatality.  Thus, the distribution for M has a mean of 
                                                 
44 See a:  Mrozek, J.R. and L.O. Taylor, What determines the value of a life? A Meta 
Analysis, Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 21 (2), pp. 253-270,  
b: Viscusi , W. K., The Value of Life: Estimates with Risks by Occupation and Industry, Economic Inquiry, 
Oxford University Press, vol. 42(1), pages 29-48, January, 2004, and 
c: Viscusi, W. K. & Aldy, J.E., The Value of a Statistical Life: A Critical Review of Market Estimates 
through Out the World, Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, Kluwer Academic Publishers, vol. 27(1), pages 5-
76, August, 2003.  
 
  
IX-17 
$6.1 million.  The range of this factor also shifts rightwards from 1 to 10 million to $1.6 
to $10.6 million. 
 
Figure IX-4 
Normal Distribution for Cost Per Fatalities (M) 
(2007 Dollar in Millions) 
 
 
 
D. Simulation Results 
 
The Monte Carlo simulation first randomly selects a value for each of the significant 
factors based on their probability distributions.  Then, the selected values are fed into the 
model to forecast the results.  Each process is a trial.  The simulation repeats the process 
until a pre-defined accuracy has been accomplished.  Since Crystal Ball is a spreadsheet-
based simulation software, the simulation model actually is a step-wise process, i.e., the 
simulation estimates gross benefits, the net benefits (after redistribution of gross benefits 
through the injury redistribution process), fatal equivalents, cost-effectiveness, and net 
benefits.  Therefore, each of these forecasted results had certainty bounds.  This 
uncertainty analysis conducted a total of 10,000 trials before the forecasted mean results 
reached 99 percent precision.  Even if the later criterion was reached first, the trial 
numbers generally are very close to 10,000.  These criteria were chosen to ensure the 
simulation errors (
000,10
1
) would be very close to 0.  Therefore, the results would truly 
reflect the probabilistic nature of the uncertainty factors. 
Table XI-6 summarizes the simulated injury benefit results at no discount level after 
about 10,000 trials.  As shown, undiscounted, the 180
o
 view cameras would eliminate 40 
to 144 fatalities and 2,908 to 10,369 MAIS 1-5 injuries.  These fatalities and injuries 
equate to 89 – 318 equivalent lives.   The 130o view cameras would eliminate 31 to 126 
fatalities and 2,233 to 9,037 MAIS 1-5 injuries.  This indicates that 130
o
 view cameras 
would save 68 – 277 equivalent lives.  By contrast, ultrasonic systems would eliminate 1 
to 9 fatalities and 89 to 632 MAIS 1-5 injuries.  These fatalities and injuries equate to 3 – 
19 equivalent lives.   Radar systems would eliminate 1 to 11 fatalities and 98 to 756 
MAIS 1-5 injuries.  These benefits are equivalent to 3 – 23 lives saved.   
  
  
IX-18 
Table IX-6 
Simulated Injury Benefits (No Discount) 
 180
o
 View 
Camera 
130
o
 View 
Camera 
Ultrasonic Radar                                                        
Fatalities Reduced     
    Mean 84 71 4 5 
    Range 40 – 144 31 – 126 1 – 9 1 – 11 
    90% Certainty  64 – 104 53 – 90 3 – 6 3 – 7 
MAIS Injuries Eliminated     
    Mean 5,998 5,107 299 331 
    Range 2,908 – 10,369 2,233 – 9,037 89 – 632 98 – 756 
    90% Certainty 4,626 – 7,480 3,831 – 6,500 181 – 428 205 – 469 
Equivalent Lives Saved     
    Mean 184 157 9 10 
    Range 89 – 318 68 – 277 3 – 19 3 – 23 
    90% Certainty 142 – 229  117 – 199 6 – 13 6 – 14 
 
Tables IX-7 and IX-8 summarize the simulated cost-effectiveness and net benefit results 
at 3 and 7 percent discount, respectively.  As shown in Table IX-7, at a 3 percent discount 
rate, the 180
o
 view camera systems would save 116 - 187 equivalent lives with a 90 
percent certainty.  With the same level of certainty, the 130
o
 view camera systems would 
save 96 - 162 equivalent lives, the ultrasonic systems would save 5 - 11 equivalent lives, 
and the radar systems would save 5 - 12 equivalent lives. 
 
With the same 90 percent certainty, the net cost would range from $1.7 (dashboard 
systems) to $2.5 billion (mirror systems) for the 180
o
 view camera systems, $1.3 to $2.1 
billion for the 130
o
 view camera systems, $0.7 to $0.8 billion for the ultrasonic systems, 
and $1.2 to $1.4 billion for the radar systems.      
   
 At a 7 percent discount rate, as shown in Table IX-8, the 180
o
 view camera systems 
would save 92 - 149 equivalent lives with a 90 percent certainty.   At this certainty level, 
the 130
o
 view camera systems would save 76 - 129 equivalent lives.   Both ultrasonic and 
radar systems each would save 4 - 9 equivalent lives.  
 
The net cost would range from $1.8 to $2.6 billion for the 180
o
 view camera systems, 
$1.4 to $2.1 billion for the 130
o
 view camera systems, $0.7 to $0.9 billion for the 
ultrasonic systems, and $1.2 to $1.4 billion for the radar systems (cost ranges are similar 
to those at 3% discount rate due to rounding).      
 
  
IX-19 
All four technologies examined in the PRIA are not cost effective based on the $6.1 
million per fatality and $0 net benefit measurements.  At both discount rates, none of the 
four technologies would have chance to produce a cost per equivalent fatality of no more 
than $6.1 million.  Also, none of these technologies would generate a positive net benefit.   
  
  
IX-20 
Table IX-7 
Simulated Cost-Effectiveness and Net Benefits 
(2007 Dollar) 
 
@3% Discount 
 Camera Systems 
Technology Costs* 
180
o 
 View 
Mirror 
130
o 
 View 
Mirror 
180
o 
 View 
Dashboard 
130
o 
 View 
Dashboard 
 Mean  $2,673 M $2,276 M $2,317 M $1,919 M 
 Total Range $2,406 – $2,940 M $2,048 – $2,503 M $2,085 – $2,548 M $1,728 – $2,111 M 
 90% Certainty Range $2,433 – $2,914 M $2,070 – $2,480 M $2,122 – $2,512 M $1,756 – $2,083 M 
Equivalent Lives Saved     
 Mean 150 128 150 128 
 Total Range 73 – 259 56 – 226 73 – 259 56 – 226 
 90% Certainty Range 116 – 187 96 – 162 116 – 187 96 – 162 
Lifetime Property Damage 
Savings 
  
  
 Mean $376 M $414 M $376 M $414 M 
 Total Range $339 – $414 M $373 – $455 M $339 – $414 M $373 – $455 M 
 90% Certainty Range $342 – $410 M $377 – $451 M $342 – $410 M $377 – $451 M 
Net Cost**      
       Mean $2,297 M $1,862 M $1,941 M $1,505 M 
       Total Range $1,993 – $2,600 M $1,593 – $2,130 M $1,678 – $2,208 M $1,275 – $1,737 M 
       90% Certainty Range $2,056 – $2,539 M $1,654 – $2,069 M $1,743 – $2,138 M $1,336 – $1,674 M 
Lifetime Property Damage Cost      
Cost-Effectiveness (CE)     
 Mean $15.7 M $15.0 M $13.2 M $12.1 M 
 Total Range $8.2 – $33.1 M $7.6 – $36.4 M $6.8 – $27.2 M $6.0 – $29.4 M 
 90% Certainty Range $11.9 – $20.3 M $11.1 – $19.9 M $10.1 – $17.2 M  $9.0 – $16.1 M  
 Certainty that CE ≤ $6.1 M 0% 0% 0% 0% 
Net Benefit (NB)     
 Mean -$1,383 M -$1,083 M $-1,029 M $-727 M 
 Total Range -$2,248 to -$93 M -$1,873 to $21 M -$1,874 to $359 M -$1,457 to $420 M 
 90% Certainty Range -$1,825 to -$909 M -$1,469 to -$667 M -$1,441 to -$578M -$1,086 to -$333M 
 Certainty that NB > $0 0% 0% 0% 0.2% 
M: million  
* No discount required, same for all discount rates 
** = Technology Cost – Lifetime Property Damage Savings 
  
IX-21 
Table IX-7 - Continued 
Simulated Cost-Effectiveness and Net Benefits 
(2007 Dollar) 
 
@3% Discount 
 Sensor Systems 
Technology Costs* Ultrasonic Radar 
 Mean  $686 M $1,229 M 
 Total Range $617 – $754 $1,106 – $1,352 
 90% Certainty Range $524 – $747 $1,118 – $1,339 
Equivalent Lives Saved   
 Mean 7 8 
 Total Range 2 – 16 2 – 19 
 90% Certainty Range 5 – 11 5 – 12 
Lifetime Property Damage Savings    
 Mean -$45 M -$73 M 
 Total Range -$49 to -$40 M -$81 to -$66 M 
 90% Certainty Range -$49 to -$41 M -$80 to -$67 M 
Net Cost**   
 Mean $731 M $1,302 M 
 Total Range $657 – $803 M $1,172 – $1,432 M 
 90% Certainty Range $669 – $792 M $1,191 – $1,413 M 
Cost-Effectiveness (CE)   
 Mean $104.8 M $168.0 M 
 Total Range $44.1 – $349.3 M $63.1 – $574.0 M 
 90% Certainty Range $67.5 – $162.7 M $109.8 – $255.5 M 
 Certainty that CE ≤ $6.1 M 0% 0% 
Net Benefit (NB)   
 Mean -$585 M -$1,252 M 
 Total Range -$786 to -$555 M -$1,410 to -$1,063 M 
 90% Certainty Range -$752 to -$618 M -$1,366 to -$1,139 M 
 Certainty that NB > $0 0% 0% 
M: million  
* No discount required, same for all discount rates 
** = Technology Cost – Lifetime Property Damage Savings 
 
  
IX-22 
Table IX-8 
Simulated Cost-Effectiveness and Net Benefits 
(2007 Dollar) 
 
@7% Discount 
 Camera Systems 
Technology Costs* 
180
o 
 View 
Mirror 
130
o 
 View 
Mirror 
180
o 
 View 
Dashboard 
130
o 
 View 
Dashboard 
 Mean  $2,673 M $2,276 M $2,317 M $1,919 M 
 Total Range $2,406 – $2,940 M $2,048 – $2,503 M $2,085 – $2,548 M $1,728 – $2,111 M 
 90% Certainty Range $2,433 – $2,914 M $2,070 – $2,480 M $2,122 – $2,512 M $1,756 – $2,083 M 
Equivalent Lives Saved     
 Mean 119 102 119 102 
 Total Range 58 – 206 44 – 180 58 – 206 44 – 180 
 90% Certainty Range 92 – 149 76 – 129 92 – 149 76 – 129 
Lifetime Property Damage 
Savings 
  
  
 Mean $311 M $342 M $311 M $342 M 
 Total Range $280 – $342 M $308 – $376 M $280 – $342 M $308 – $376 M 
 90% Certainty Range $283 – $339 M $311 – $373 M $283 – $339 M $311 – $373 M 
Net Cost**     
 Mean $2,363 M $1,934 M $2,006 M $1,577 M 
 Total Range $2,065 – $2,660 M $1,672 – $2,194 M $1,750 – $2,266 M $1,354 – $1,800 M 
 90% Certainty Range $2,122 – $2,603 M $1,727 – $2,140 M $1,810 – $2,203 M $1,411 – $1,744 M 
Cost-Effectiveness (CE)     
 Mean $20.2 M $19.6 M $17.2 M $15.9 M 
 Total Range $10.8 – $43.3 M $9.9 – $47.5 M $9.0 – $35.2 M $7.8 – $38.7 M 
 90% Certainty Range $15.5 – $26.2 M $14.6 – $25.9 M $13.2 – $22.0 M  $11.9 – $21.1 M  
 Certainty that CE ≤ $6.1 M 0% 0% 0% 0% 
Net Benefit (NB)     
 Mean -$1,635 M -$1,314 M -$1,279 M $-958 M 
 Total Range -$2,397 to -$607 M -$1,955 to -$391 M -$1,983 to -$155 M -$1,559 to -$29 M 
 90% Certainty Range -$2,020 to -$1,231 M -$1,648 to -$960 M -$1,634 to -$902 M -$1,264 to -$628 M 
 Certainty that NB > $0 0% 0% 0% 0% 
M: million  
* No discount required, same for all discount rates 
** = Technology Cost – Lifetime Property Damage Savings 
  
IX-23 
Table IX-8 - Continued 
Simulated Cost-Effectiveness and Net Benefits 
(2007 Dollar) 
 
@7% Discount 
 Sensor Systems 
Technology Costs* Ultrasonic Radar 
 Mean  $686 M $1,229 M 
 Total Range $617 – $754 $1,106 – $1,352 
 90% Certainty Range $524 – $747 $1,118 – $1,339 
Equivalent Lives Saved   
 Mean 6 7 
 Total Range 2 – 13 2 – 15 
 90% Certainty Range 4 – 9 4 – 9 
Lifetime Property Damage Savings    
 Mean -$37 M -$60 M 
 Total Range -$40 to -$33 M -$67 to -$54 M 
 90% Certainty Range -$40 to -$33 M -$66 to -$55 M 
Net Cost**   
 Mean $723 M $1,289 M 
 Total Range $651 – $795 M $1,161 – $1,418 M 
 90% Certainty Range $661 – $784 M $1,179 – $1,400 M 
Cost-Effectiveness (CE)   
 Mean $130.3 M $209.1 M 
 Total Range $54.8 – $435.6 M $78.6 – $718.8 M 
 90% Certainty Range $83.9 – $202.3 M $136.7 – $318.0 M 
 Certainty that CE ≤ $6.1 M 0% 0% 
Net Benefit (NB)   
 Mean -$686 M -$1,249 M 
 Total Range -$782 to -$568 M -$1,401 to -$1,068 M 
 90% Certainty Range -$751 to -$622 M -$1,362 to -$1,137 M 
 Certainty that NB > $0 0% 0% 
M: million  
* No discount required, same for all discount rates 
** = Technology Cost – Lifetime Property Damage Savings 
  
A-1 
Appendix A 
 
Comprehensive Costs and Relative Value Factors Reflecting $5.8 million  
Value of a Statistical Life (VSL), in 2007 Economics 
CPI Factor MAIS 1 MAIS 2 MAIS 3 MAIS 4 MAIS 5 Fatal 
1.346066 Medical $3,204 $21,032 $62,585 $176,747 $447,509 $29,741 
1.204077 EMS $117 $255 $443 $999 $1,026 $1,003 
1.277512 Market Prod $2,234 $31,960 $91,283 $135,977 $560,451 $760,577 
1.277512 Household Produce $731 $9,354 $26,924 $35,782 $190,743 $244,696 
1.204077 Ins. Adm. $892 $8,319 $22,749 $38,934 $82,114 $44,695 
1.277512 Workplace $322 $2,495 $5,450 $6,002 $10,464 $11,117 
1.204077 Legal $181 $5,998 $19,034 $40,559 $96,153 $122,982 
1.277512 Travel Delay $993 $1,081 $1,201 $1,276 $11,697 $11,687 
1.204077 Property Damage $4,628 $4,761 $8,187 $11,840 $11,374 $12,369 
1.277512 QALYs $9,118 $186,525 $262,189 $784,777 $2,674,628 $4,889,799 
New Comprehensive Costs $22,420 $271,780 $500,045 $1,232,893 $4,086,149 $6,128,666 
Injury Subtotal $16,799 $265,938 $490,657 $1,219,777 $4,063,088 $6,104,610 
QALY Relatives 0.0019 0.0381 0.0536 0.1605 0.5470 1.0000 
Comprehensive relatives  (Crash 
Avoidance) 
0.0037 0.0443 0.0816 0.2012 0.6667 1.0000 
Comprehensive relatives 
(Crashworthiness) 
0.0028 0.0436 0.0804 0.1998 0.6656 1.0000 
QALYs: Quality-Adjusted Life-Years 
 
Note that the $5.8 million value of a statistical life contains elements found in 3 of the 
factors in the above table (QALY‟s, household productivity, and the after-tax portion of 
market productivity).  The value of statistical life is thus represented within these 3 
factors and is not shown separately. 
 
In Chapter V, we estimated “property damage” benefits separately.  Thus, the 
comprehensive relatives for crash avoidance above should not include the property 
damage related costs.  For the estimates of the “property damage” related to vehicles 
involved in crashes, property damage and travel delay costs that resulted from the crash 
were included.  When the property damage and travel delay costs were excluded from the 
new comprehensive costs in the table above, the comprehensive relatives for crash 
avoidance became the same as the comprehensive relatives for crashworthiness crashes, 
as shown below: 
Relative Value Factors Used in Analysis 
 MAIS 1 MAIS 2 MAIS 3 MAIS 4 MAIS 5 Fatal 
Comprehensive  
Relatives 
0.0028 0.0436 0.0804 0.1998 0.6656 1.000 
  
B-1 
Appendix B 
 
Year/Make/Model 
Vehicle 
Type 
Laser 
BZ50x
50 
Laser 
BZ50x
20 
Laser 
BZ50x
8 
Laser 
BZ50x
6 
Laser 
Sight 
Dist 
Back
ing 
Risk 
2008 Mazda Mazda6 4-door Car 932 376 164 123 21.0 1.5 
2008 Hyundai Accent 4-door Car 938 391 198 141 25.3   
2003 Nissan Sentra 4-door Car 974 344 154 104 17.4 1.6 
2008 Hyundai Azera 4-door Car 1167 494 233 173 29.6   
2008 Nissan Versa 5-door Car 1184 435 144 99 17.4   
2005 Volkswagen Jetta 4-door Car 1227 666 249 179 31.6 1.6 
2008 Dodge Caliber 4-door Car 1253 652 249 159 31.6   
2009 Hyundai Sonata 4-door Car 1299 631 281 207 29.4   
2007 Chevrolet Monte Carlo 2-door Car 1300 479 175 136 22.4 2.1 
2008 Volkswagen New GTI 3-door Car 1332 441 154 109 19.8   
2007 Ford Five Hundred 4-door Car 1372 651 235 170 29.9 2 
2008 Honda Fit 5-door Car 1384 491 161 101 20.3   
2008 Volkswagen New Beetle 3-door Car 1388 477 155 100 13.8 1.4 
2008 Volvo S80 4-door Car 1393 604 229 152 29.1   
2008 Toyota Prius 5-door Car 1415 642 257 191 12.1 1.9 
2008 Pontiac G6 4-door Car 1436 733 313 226 39.5 1.6 
2008 Ford Focus 4-door Car 1489 726 289 216 36.6   
2008 Honda Accord 4-door Car 1499 742 264 174 33.5   
2008 Mazda Mazda3 4-door Car 1545 689 285 200 36.1 1.9 
2006 BMW 3-Series 4-door Car 1546 788 318 232 40.0   
2009 Acura RL 4-door Car 1547 641 271 202 34.4   
2008 Dodge Charger 4-door Car 1552 755 283 199 35.9   
2008 Kia Spectra 4-door Car 1558 710 255 169 26.1   
2005 Saturn Ion 4-door Car 1561 863 380 290 47.9 1.1 
2008 BMW 5-Series 4-door Car 1584 756 234 156 29.8   
2005 Chrysler 300 4-door Car 1619 816 303 228 38.3 2.3 
2008 Buick Lucerne 4-door Car 1620 792 325 240 41.0   
2008 Infiniti EX35 Stationwagon Car 1668 641 274 202 34.5   
2008 Hyundai Elantra 4-door Car 1676 755 270 192 28.1   
2008 Volkswagen Jetta 4-door Car 1681 803 301 207 31.9   
2008 Chevrolet Aveo 4-door Car 1685 671 255 182 32.3   
2009 Subaru Legacy 4-door Car 1689 866 344 250 37.2   
2006 Volkswagen Passat 4-door Car 1693 852 339 257 42.8   
2008 Toyota Avalon 4-door Car 1704 819 298 198 37.6   
2005 Cadillac STS 4-door Car 1753 891 366 266 45.9   
2008 Ford Fusion 4-door Car 1825 878 363 273 39.5   
2007 Lexus ES 4-door Car 1848 867 370 270 40.3   
2009 Toyota Corolla Matrix 5-door Car 1848 875 360 260 40.1   
2008 Dodge Dakota Quad Cab Pickup 1508 606 201 139 25.6 4.6 
2007 Chevrolet 1500 Silverado Crew 
Cab 
Pickup 1586 767 311 235 39.4 
  
2008 Honda Ridgeline Pickup 1662 652 255 200 30.8   
2008 GMC 1500 Sierra Regular Cab 
Short Bed 
Pickup 1664 729 345 259 43.6 
  
2008 Ford F-150 Super Cab Long Pickup 1804 939 395 297 49.3   
  
B-2 
Bed 
2005 Honda CR-V SUV 1217 545 191 140 24.4 3.1 
2008 Chevrolet Trailblazer SUV 1268 602 239 158 30.3 3.1 
2005 Ford Explorer SUV 1284 435 157 121 19.0 3 
2008 Jeep Wrangler SUV 1323 679 302 216 38.1   
2008 Hyundai Santa Fe SUV 1350 528 206 141 26.3   
2007 Dodge Magnum SUV 1369 619 218 155 27.8 2 
2008 Kia Sportage SUV 1408 639 266 191 33.8   
2008 Jeep Grand Cherokee SUV 1411 674 248 178 31.5 3.4 
2009 Chevrolet HHR SUV 1475 715 274 194 34.6   
2008 Toyota RAV4 SUV 1516 713 279 204 28.0   
2008 Toyota 4Runner SUV 1518 655 201 128 25.6 4.1 
2008 Honda CR-V SUV 1538 595 217 161 27.6   
2007 Suzuki Grand Vitara SUV 1547 760 252 161 31.3   
2006 Honda Pilot SUV 1594 775 290 190 36.6 3.3 
2008 Saturn Vue SUV 1625 839 337 243 42.4   
2008 Scion xB SUV 1625 820 298 211 37.5   
2008 Ford Edge SUV 1648 866 327 227 41.1   
2008 Ford Expedition EL SUV 1664 698 280 201 35.5   
2008 Chevrolet 1500 Suburban SUV 1778 838 374 274 46.9   
2007 Jeep Commander SUV 1792 941 400 300 50.0 4 
2008 Chevrolet Equinox SUV 1805 877 387 294 48.5 2.9 
2008 Ford Taurus X SUV 1814 843 349 249 41.3 2.3 
2008 Subaru Tribeca SUV 1842 943 400 300 50.0   
2008 Mazda CX-9 SUV 1880 873 365 272 40.4   
2007 Cadillac Escalade SUV 1890 843 352 261 44.3   
2008 Saturn Outlook SUV 1955 956 400 300 50.0   
2008 Chevrolet 1500 Avalanche SUV 2010 923 387 290 48.8   
2008 Dodge Caravan Wagon Van 1174 595 200 139 25.5   
2006 Chrysler PT Cruiser Wagon Van 1265 573 215 140 24.0   
2005 Chevrolet Uplander Wagon Van 1442 796 333 246 41.9 3.2 
2007 Honda Odyssey Wagon Van 1812 874 335 235 42.1 5.1 
2008 Ford E-250 Cargo Van 2500 1000 400 300 50.0 5.3 
 
