Wednesday, 
May 21, 2008 
Part III 
Department of 
Transportation 
Federal Aviation Administration 
14 CFR Part 93 
Congestion Management Rule for John F. 
Kennedy International Airport and 
Newark Liberty International Airport; 
Proposed Rule 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 15:15 May 20, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00001 Fmt 4717 Sfmt 4717 E:\FR\FM\21MYP3.SGM 21MYP3cp
ric
e-
se
we
ll o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
69
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
29626 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 99 / Wednesday, May 21, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
1 The term ‘‘new entrant carrier’’ was defined as 
‘‘an air carrier that does not hold a slot at the airport 
concerned and has never sold or given up a slot at 
that airport after December 16, 1985, and a limited 
incumbent carrier.’’ 49 U.S.C. 41714(h)(3). 
2 Application of New Air Corporation for 
Exemption from 14 CFR part 93, Subparts K and S 
of 49 U.S.C. 41714(c), Order 99–9–11 (September 
16, 1999). 
3 The phase-out also included LaGuardia, as of 
January 1, 2007. 49 U.S.C. 41715(a)(2). The HDR at 
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION 
Federal Aviation Administration 
14 CFR Part 93 
[Docket No. FAA–2008–0517; Notice No. 08– 
05] 
RIN 2120–AJ28 
Congestion Management Rule for John 
F. Kennedy International Airport and 
Newark Liberty International Airport 
AGENCY: Federal Aviation 
Administration (FAA). 
ACTION: Notice of proposed rulemaking 
(NPRM). 
SUMMARY: The FAA proposes to 
establish procedures to address 
congestion in the New York City area by 
assigning slots at John F. Kennedy (JFK) 
and Newark Liberty (Newark) 
International Airports in a way that 
allows carriers to respond to market 
forces to drive efficient airline behavior. 
This proposal is a companion to a 
separate rulemaking initiative 
addressing congestion mitigation at New 
York’s LaGuardia airport. Today’s 
proposal is similar to what we have 
proposed for LaGuardia airport, but it 
takes into consideration the 
characteristics of both JFK and Newark, 
including the large number of 
international flights at these airports 
and our international obligations. The 
FAA proposes to extend the caps on the 
operations at the two airports, assign to 
existing operators the majority of slots at 
the airports, and create a market by 
annually auctioning off a limited 
number of slots in each of the first five 
years of this rule. The FAA is proposing 
two alternatives. 
Under the first alternative, the 
assignment of slots at JFK and Newark 
would be conducted through a uniform 
mechanism. The FAA would auction off 
a portion of the slots and would use the 
proceeds to mitigate congestion and 
delay in the New York City area. Under 
the second alternative, the same auction 
procedure would apply at Newark as 
under the first alternative but at JFK the 
auction proceeds would go to the carrier 
holding the slot rather than to the FAA. 
For both alternatives, this proposal also 
contains provisions for minimum usage, 
capping unscheduled operations, and 
withdrawal for operational need. The 
FAA proposes to sunset the rule in ten 
years. 
DATES: Send your comments on or 
before July 21, 2008. 
ADDRESSES: You may send comments 
identified by Docket Number FAA– 
2008–0517 using any of the following 
methods: 
• Federal eRulemaking Portal: Go to 
http://www.regulations.gov and follow 
the online instructions for sending your 
comments electronically. 
• Mail: Send comments to Docket 
Operations, M–30; U.S. Department of 
Transportation, 1200 New Jersey 
Avenue, SE., Room W12–140, West 
Building Ground Floor, Washington, DC 
20590–0001. 
• Hand Delivery or Courier: Bring 
comments to Docket Operations in 
Room W12–140 of the West Building 
Ground Floor at 1200 New Jersey 
Avenue, SE., Washington, DC, between 
9 a.m. and 5 p.m., Monday through 
Friday, except Federal holidays. 
• Fax: Fax comments to Docket 
Operations at 202–493–2251. 
For more information on the rulemaking 
process, see the SUPPLEMENTARY 
INFORMATION section of this document. 
Privacy: We will post all comments 
we receive, without change, to http:// 
www.regulations.gov, including any 
personal information you provide. 
Using the search function of our docket 
Web site, anyone can find and read the 
electronic form of all comments 
received into any of our dockets, 
including the name of the individual 
sending the comment (or signing the 
comment for an association, business, 
labor union, etc.). You may review the 
Department of Transportation’s 
complete Privacy Act Statement in the 
Federal Register published on April 11, 
2000 (65 FR 19477–78) or you may visit 
http://DocketsInfo.dot.gov. 
Docket: To read background 
documents or comments received, go to 
http://www.regulations.gov at any time 
and follow the online instructions for 
accessing the docket. Or, go to Docket 
Operations in Room W12–140 of the 
West Building Ground Floor at 1200 
New Jersey Avenue, SE., Washington, 
DC, between 9 a.m. and 5 p.m., Monday 
through Friday, except Federal holidays. 
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: For 
technical questions regarding this 
rulemaking, contact: Molly W. Smith, 
Federal Aviation Administration, 800 
Independence Avenue, SW., 
Washington, DC 20591; telephone (202) 
267–3275; e-mail 
molly.w.smith@faa.gov. For legal 
questions concerning this rulemaking, 
contact: Rebecca MacPherson, FAA 
Office of the Chief Counsel, 800 
Independence Ave., SW., Washington, 
DC 20591; telephone (202) 267–3073; 
e-mail rebecca.macpherson@faa.gov. 
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Later in 
this preamble, under the Additional 
Information section, we discuss how 
you can comment on this proposal and 
how we will handle your comments. 
Included in this discussion is related 
information about the docket and the 
handling of proprietary or confidential 
business information. We also discuss 
how you can get a copy of this proposal 
and related rulemaking documents. 
Authority for This Rulemaking 
The FAA has broad authority under 
49 U.S.C. 40103 to regulate the use of 
the navigable airspace of the United 
States. This section authorizes the FAA 
to develop plans and policy for the use 
of navigable airspace and to assign the 
use that the FAA deems necessary for its 
safe and efficient utilization. It further 
directs the FAA to prescribe air traffic 
rules and regulations governing the 
efficient utilization of the navigable 
airspace. 
I. Background 
A. History of Congestion Management 
Initiatives at JFK 
JFK has historically been a 
constrained airport. From 1969 through 
2006, the FAA managed congestion 
there during the five hours of peak 
transatlantic demand—3 p.m. through 
7:59 p.m., Eastern Time under the High 
Density Rule (HDR). 14 CFR part 93 
subparts K and S. 
In 1994, Congress began to relax the 
HDR by authorizing the Secretary of 
Transportation, upon making a public 
interest finding, to grant exemptions 
from the HDR to enable new entrant 
carriers 1 to provide air transportation at 
certain slot-controlled airports, 
including JFK. 49 U.S.C. 41714. In 1999, 
pursuant to this authority, the 
Department issued an order that 
authorized new flight operations at JFK 
by granting 75 slot exemptions to 
JetBlue Airways (JetBlue), a new entrant 
carrier, to be phased in over a five-year 
period.2 The order stated that JetBlue 
would operate the majority of its flights 
outside the five HDR slot-controlled 
hours. 
In 2000, the Wendell H. Ford Aviation 
Investment and Reform Act for the 21st 
Century (AIR–21), Public Law No. 106– 
181, ended the application of the HDR 
at JFK, effective January 1, 2007. 49 
U.S.C. 41715(a)(2).3 AIR–21 also 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 15:15 May 20, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00002 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\21MYP3.SGM 21MYP3cp
ric
e-
se
we
ll o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
69
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
29627 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 99 / Wednesday, May 21, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
Chicago O’Hare International Airport was directed 
to be phased out by July 1, 2002. 49 U.S.C. 
41715(a)(1). 
4 See: http://www.faa.gov/airports_airtraffic/ 
air_traffic/nas_redesign/regional_guidance/ 
eastern_reg/nynjphl_redesign/. 
5 An airport, where demand is approaching 
capacity and a more formal level of cooperation is 
required to avoid the circumstances of over- 
capacity, is designated an IATA Level 2 Schedules 
Facilitated Airport. At a Level 2-designated airport, 
a schedules facilitator seeks the cooperation and 
voluntary agreement of airlines serving the airport 
to avoid congestion. 
6 Where demand for an airport exceeds capacity, 
voluntary cooperation is unlikely to resolve the 
problem, and short term capacity enhancements are 
not available, the airport is designated an IATA 
Level 3 Coordinated Airport. 
directed the Secretary to grant 
exemptions from the HDR’s flight 
restrictions for operations by new 
entrant carriers or for flights serving 
Small-Hub and Non-Hub airports as 
long as the aircraft used had less than 
71 seats. Additionally, it preserved the 
FAA’s authority to impose flight 
restrictions by stating that ‘‘[n]othing in 
this section * * * shall be construed 
* * * as affecting the Federal Aviation 
Administration’s authority for safety 
and the movement of air traffic.’’ 49 
U.S.C. 41715(b). 
Until recently, most operations at JFK 
took place during relatively pronounced 
arrival and departure banks 
corresponding to the operating windows 
of transatlantic flights. Maximum 
efficiency at JFK has been achieved with 
the use of either two arrival runways 
and one departure runway, or two 
departure runways and one arrival 
runway. Air traffic controllers have 
employed that configuration to facilitate 
the historic transatlantic traffic flows. 
Since the spring of 2006, U.S. air 
carriers serving JFK have significantly 
increased their domestic scheduled 
operations throughout the day. Most of 
the increase has come from the two 
largest operators at the airport, Delta 
Airlines (Delta) and JetBlue. The new 
traffic patterns affect the efficient use of 
JFK’s four runways, impeding the use of 
the three-runway configurations (two 
arrival/one departure, or one arrival/two 
departure) for maximum utility of active 
runways. 
As a result of the increase in 
scheduled operations at JFK, the 
summer 2007 demand exceeded the 
airport’s capacity during many periods 
of the day. During morning hours, 
volume-related delays were routine 
from 7 a.m. through 9 a.m. The 
afternoon and evening demand 
exceeded the airport’s optimal capacity 
until about 10 p.m. This prevented the 
airport from having an evening period to 
recover from congestion-induced delays. 
During fiscal year 2007, the average 
daily operations at JFK increased 21 
percent over fiscal year 2006. 
Corresponding to the increased 
operations, on-time performance and 
other delay metrics have declined year 
over year. The on-time performance at 
JFK, which is defined as the arrival at 
the gate within 15 minutes of the 
scheduled time, declined from 68.5 
percent in fiscal year 2006 to 62.19 
percent in fiscal year 2007. On-time 
arrivals during the peak travel months 
of June, July and August declined from 
63.37 percent in 2006 to 58.89 percent 
in 2007, while on-time departures 
declined from 67.49 percent to 59.89 
percent. For the entire fiscal year, the 
average daily arrival delays exceeding 
one hour increased by 87 percent over 
fiscal year 2006 levels. Taxi out delays, 
which measure the time that aircraft 
wait prior to departing the runway, 
increased by 15 percent. Taxi out delays 
in the evening departure periods 
frequently exceeded an hour in 
duration. 
The increased congestion and 
associated delays at JFK impact other 
airports in the region and the National 
Airspace System (NAS). The airspace 
redesign for the New York/New Jersey/ 
Philadelphia metropolitan area, 
approved in 2007, documents the costs 
and far-reaching impacts of delays that 
originate from this area. The delays that 
cascade from this area throughout the 
NAS are costly and far-reaching, as 
detailed in the recently approved 
airspace redesign plan for the New 
York/New Jersey/Philadelphia 
metropolitan area.4 The FAA has taken 
steps to implement airspace redesign, 
which will provide efficiency and 
congestion relief by, among other things, 
opening additional arrival and 
departure routes in the New York area. 
Further, the FAA, working with 
stakeholders, is implementing short- 
term initiatives to improve the 
efficiency of airport operations and air 
traffic control, particularly during 
severe weather. Additionally, the FAA 
has increased the use of a second 
departure runway at JFK when 
conditions permit. However, none of 
these initiatives will offer an immediate 
or complete solution. 
On September 24, 2007, the FAA re- 
designated JFK as a Level 2 Schedules 
Facilitated Airport 5 for the summer 
2008 scheduling season in accordance 
with the International Air Transport 
Association Worldwide Scheduling 
Guidelines (IATA WSG). 72 FR 54317. 
Under the WSG, carriers must inform 
the coordinator of projected operations 
at a Level 2 airport for the next 
scheduling season. When submitting the 
required information, the airlines 
expressed their intent to add new flights 
at JFK during peak and off-peak hours 
for summer 2008. 
Also in September 2007, the 
Administrator determined that JFK was 
a severely congested airport and that a 
scheduling reduction meeting, under 49 
U.S.C. 41722, was necessary to discuss 
flight reductions with U.S. air carriers to 
reduce over-scheduling and flight 
delays at JFK during peak operating 
hours. On October 12, 2007, the 
Secretary of Transportation determined 
that a scheduling reduction meeting was 
necessary to meet a serious 
transportation need or to achieve an 
important public benefit. On October 
22, the FAA opened a docket for 
information on the establishment of 
flight reduction targets at JFK during 
peak hours. 72 FR 59579. In order to 
address increases in demand by foreign 
air carriers, the FAA determined that a 
Level 3 Coordinated Airport declaration 
was warranted on October 25, 2007.6 72 
FR 60710. 
In order to address increases in 
demand by domestic carriers, the FAA 
convened the scheduling reduction 
meeting with U.S. carrier participants 
on October 23–24, 2007. Subsequent in- 
person and telephonic meetings took 
place as well. At the sessions, American 
Airlines, Delta and JetBlue, which 
together account for three-quarters of 
the total operations at JFK, withdrew the 
schedule increases each had proposed 
for summer 2008 during the airport’s 3 
p.m. to 7:59 p.m. peak hours. They also 
adjusted the timing of operations during 
those hours and others to smooth out 
peaks. Other airlines also agreed to 
retime peak operations. The FAA 
offered capacity during other hours to 
carriers who re-timed operations or 
added additional flights. 
As a result of the agreements reached 
at that meeting and other discussions 
held with carriers regarding their 
projected summer 2008 schedules, the 
FAA issued a temporary Order limiting 
scheduled operations at JFK, effective 6 
a.m., Eastern Time, March 30, 2008, 
through 11:59 p.m., Eastern Time, 
October 24, 2009, to U.S. and foreign air 
carriers serving the airport and generally 
capping scheduled operations at 81 per 
hour. 73 FR 3519 (Jan. 18, 2008), as 
amended 73 FR 8737 (Feb. 14, 2008). 
This Order temporarily responds to the 
carriers’ desire to regularly schedule 
flights above the airport’s capacity 
during peak operating hours, relieves 
the substantial inconvenience to the 
traveling public caused by excessive 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 15:15 May 20, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00003 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\21MYP3.SGM 21MYP3cp
ric
e-
se
we
ll o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
69
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
29628 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 99 / Wednesday, May 21, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
7 72 FR 54317 (Sept. 24, 2007). 
8 Id. 
9 Requests for additional flights or retiming of 
flights into peak periods were received after the 
FAA’s announced schedule submission deadline of 
October 11, 2007. These requests were 
accommodated only if there was available capacity 
remaining after consideration of historic operations 
and on-time requests. 
10 73 FR 14552 (March 18, 2008). 
11 The appendix to the order included a few 
operations for summer 2008 above the 81 per hour 
limit. 
congestion-related flight delays at the 
airport (which rippled through the 
NAS), reduces the average length of 
delays, and provides for a more efficient 
use of airspace. 
B. History of Congestion Management at 
Newark 
Newark was once subject to the HDR 
although the FAA suspended the 
application of the rule at Newark due to 
sufficient airport capacity to meet 
demand. 35 FR 16591 (Oct. 24, 1970). 
Over the past several years, however, 
Newark has grown to be one of the most 
delay-prone airports in the country. 
Current and anticipated demand during 
peak hours approaches or exceeds the 
average runway capacity, resulting in 
volume-related delays. These delays are 
aggravated by weather or other adverse 
operating conditions. 
Comparing FY 2007 to FY 2000, 
average daily operations at the airport 
decreased about 3 percent (from 1,253 to 
1,219) but performance nevertheless 
suffered. The percent of on-time gate 
arrivals decreased from 70.66 percent to 
61.71 percent; arrival delays greater 
than one hour increased from 54 to 93 
per day on average. 
In 2007, for example, Newark’s on- 
time arrival performance was 61.8 
percent, the second worst among the top 
35 airports. Based on ‘‘the airport’s 
performance metrics and imbalance 
between air traffic control (ATC) 
capacity and demand that is expected to 
continue in the near term,’’ the FAA 
designated Newark a Level 2 IATA 
Schedules Facilitated Airport for the 
summer 2008 scheduling season.7 The 
FAA explained that ‘‘increased levels of 
air traffic operations, congestion and 
delay at [both JFK and Newark] airports 
and a tangible decrease in operational 
performance’’ warranted this 
designation.8 The FAA found the 
morning hours of 7 a.m. to 10 a.m. and 
the afternoon and evening hours of 2 
p.m. to 10 p.m. were particularly 
constrained, but that capacity otherwise 
was available for retiming of flights or 
new operations. 
The FAA modeled the proposed 
summer 2008 schedule requests against 
Newark’s average runway capacity, and 
delay projections for the summer of 
2008 indicated a potential increase of 
almost 50 percent. The FAA also 
discussed carriers’ future schedule 
plans at Newark and asked carriers to 
consider scheduling flights at times 
where there was available capacity. It 
was clear that some carriers intended to 
proceed with their plans to begin 
operations according to their proposed 
schedules during the busiest hours, 
regardless of the potential impact on 
delay. Based on the requested schedules 
for Newark and anticipated additional 
demand for Newark due to the operating 
limits underway at JFK, the FAA 
determined that the anticipated summer 
2008 demand would overtax Newark’s 
capacity, warranting a Level 3 
Coordinated Airport designation. 72 FR 
73418 (Dec. 27, 2007). After the 
designation, a series of discussions with 
the FAA led some carriers, including 
the hub carrier, Continental, to move 
some of their historic flights from the 
most oversubscribed hours. The 
movement of these flights tended to 
smooth the scheduling peaks and 
valleys at Newark. 
The information provided by the 
carrier for the summer 2008 scheduling 
season reflected a projected increase in 
flight schedules during the summer of 
2008, especially during the peak hours. 
U.S. and foreign carriers had planned 
about 100 new operations per day at 
Newark, many during the afternoon and 
early evening hours for the summer of 
2008.9 That number of new flights, 
along with proposed retiming of historic 
flights into busier time periods, would 
have caused massive delays, because 
they would have exceeded the airport’s 
optimal rate of handling flights over 
multiple, consecutive hours. For several 
consecutive hours, the number of hourly 
arrivals and departures would have 
reached the upper 80s to the mid-90s. 
These operations would have 
significantly exceeded the airport’s 
average capacity of 83 total operations 
over the 12-month period ending 
August 2007. These additional flights 
would have caused a spike in 
congestion and delays at Newark and 
would also have had an adverse effect 
on other airports in the New York region 
and on the NAS. 
Consequently, on March 18, 2008, the 
FAA proposed to place temporary caps 
on peak hour operations at Newark to 
mitigate persistent congestion and 
delays at the airport.10 73 FR 14552. The 
cap would limit scheduled operations 
during constrained hours to an average 
of 81 per hour.11 The FAA stated that 
it identified Newark’s average capacity 
by considering the airport’s capacity to 
be ‘‘the higher value of either the 
aircraft throughput at the airport in a 
given hour or the number of arrivals and 
departures that ATC personnel 
identified as achievable in that hour.’’ 
73 FR 14552, 14554. The measurement 
reflected ‘‘the airport’s demonstrated 
and potential performance over time 
under actual meteorological and 
operational conditions.’’ Id. The FAA 
committed to closely monitoring the 
gains in efficiency and delay reductions 
from implementing the airspace 
redesign and other air traffic control or 
airport operational changes to ensure 
that the scheduling limits reflect the 
available capacity. 
The FAA has adopted its March 18, 
2008, proposal to impose a temporary 
cap on scheduled operations at Newark. 
The cap takes effect 30 days after 
publication and expires 11:59 p.m. 
Eastern Time, October 24, 2009. The cap 
limits peak hour scheduled operations 
to an average of 81 per hour, except as 
provided in the appendix to the Order, 
and total scheduled and unscheduled 
operations to an average of 83. As 
indicated in the proposed order, the 
FAA intends to use the hours with 
scheduled operations below the limit of 
81 for delay mitigation and would lease 
new capacity over 81 pursuant to an 
auction. 
C. New York Aviation Rulemaking 
Committee 
In addition to the regulatory 
initiatives discussed above, on 
September 25, 2007, the Acting FAA 
Administrator established an Aviation 
Rulemaking Committee (ARC) to 
explore various options, including 
market-based mechanisms, for 
addressing airspace congestion in the 
New York area. The ARC was comprised 
of officials from the FAA and the Office 
of the Secretary of Transportation 
(OST), the Port Authority of New York 
and New Jersey (Port Authority), 
representatives of carriers and operators 
serving JFK, Newark, LaGuardia, and 
Teterboro airports, airport and aviation 
industry trade associations, and 
consumer groups. 
By design, the ARC provided 
opportunity for extensive input by all 
stakeholders, having members from 
major air carriers in the United States 
and their trade organizations (the Air 
Transport Association, the Regional 
Airline Association, the Air Carrier 
Association of America, the National 
Air Carrier Association), foreign carriers 
and their worldwide trade organization 
(IATA), the Port Authority, and the 
Airports Council International-North 
America. Through the ARC process, 
these stakeholders played a key role in 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 15:15 May 20, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00004 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\21MYP3.SGM 21MYP3cp
ric
e-
se
we
ll o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
69
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
29629 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 99 / Wednesday, May 21, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
exploring ideas to address congestion 
and ensuring that any actions 
contemplated by the Department and 
the FAA would be fully informed. The 
ARC worked throughout the fall and 
submitted a report to the Secretary, 
dated December 13, 2007, discussing its 
findings. A copy of the ARC Report may 
be found at: http://www.dot.gov/affairs/ 
FinalARCReport.pdf. 
II. Discussion of Proposed Rule 
Today’s proposal would replace the 
Orders imposing operating limitations at 
JFK and Newark and establish a rule 
limiting unscheduled operations at 
those airports. The Orders are scheduled 
to expire on October 24, 2009. If 
adopted, the proposed rule would apply 
to all operations at JFK and Newark 
between the hours of 6 a.m. and 10:59 
p.m., every day. For reasons set out in 
the Newark and JFK Orders, discussed 
above, the FAA has determined that 
capacity is constrained at these airports 
for this entire period. 
The following table briefly 
summarizes today’s proposal and 
identifies differences between the two 
options. 
PROPOSED REGULATION FOR JFK AND NEWARK 
Feature Newark 
JFK 
Option 1 Option 2 
Base Schedule ............................... Seasonal schedule, as approved 
by the FAA, for summer 2008 
and winter 2008/2009.
Seasonal schedule, as approved 
by the FAA, for summer 2008 
and winter 2008/2009.
Same as Option 1. 
Slot ................................................. Defined as right to land or depart 
(not both) in a 30-minute time 
window.
Defined as right to land or depart 
(not both) in a 30-minute time 
window.
Same as Option 1. 
Number of Slots ............................. 81/hour + 1 to 2 unscheduled ...... 81/hour + 1 to 2 ............................ Same as Option 1 
Slots definition ............................... Common Slots: The Baseline (up 
to 20 slots per carrier) plus 90% 
of slots above 20 have 10 year 
leases; Limited Slots: 10% 
would have shorter leases and 
be auctioned over five years 
(2% each) (after which they 
convert to Unrestricted Slots).
Common Slots: the Baseline (up 
to 20 slots per carrier) plus 90% 
of slots above 20 have 10 year 
leases; Limited Slots: 10% 
would have shorter leases and 
be auctioned over five years 
(2% each) (after which they 
convert to Unrestricted Slots).
Common Slots: The Baseline (up 
to 20 slots per carrier) plus 80% 
of slots above 20 would have 
10 year leases; Limited Slots 
20% would have shorter leases 
and then be reallocated via 
auction over five years (4%/yr). 
Slot Time of Day ............................ 6:00 a.m. through 10:59 p.m., ev-
eryday; no more than 81 in any 
one hour or 44 in any half-hour.
6:00 a.m. through 11:59 p.m., ev-
eryday; no more than 81 in any 
one hour or 44 in ay half-hour.
Same as Option 1. 
Mechanics ...................................... ‘‘Fair’’ initial distribution with half 
of slots with less than 10 years 
life selected by carriers; the 
other half selected by FAA ac-
cording to specified rules.
‘‘Fair’’ initial distribution with half 
of slots with less than 10 years 
life selected by carriers; the 
other half selected by FAA ac-
cording to specified rules.
Same as Option 1. 
Auction ........................................... Limited Slots would be auctioned 
among carriers.
Limited Slots would be auctioned 
among carriers.
Same as Option 1. 
Auction Proceeds ........................... Auction funds to FAA to defray 
costs of auction, then to NY ca-
pacity/projects.
Auction funds to FAA to defray 
costs of auction, then to NY ca-
pacity/projects.
Auction funds (net of auction 
costs) to incumbent holder; in-
cumbent cannot bid on own 
slots. 
Use/Lose ........................................ Only on grandfathered slots as 
consideration for slots.
Only on grandfathered slots as 
consideration for slots.
As as Option 1. 
Term ............................................... Program is through March 2019; 
slot lives are whatever propor-
tion of 10 years remain upon 
reallocation.
Program is through March 2019; 
slot lives are whatever propor-
tion of 10 years remain upon 
reallocation.
As as Option 1. 
Bidders ........................................... Airlines .......................................... Airlines .......................................... As as Option 1. 
Holders ........................................... Holders of record (not marketing 
carrier).
Holders of record (not marketing 
carrier).
As as Option 1. 
New or returned capacity ............... IATA WSG .................................... IATA WSG .................................... As as Option 1. 
Secondary market .......................... Transparent not blind: carrier noti-
fies FAA of intent to sublease; 
FAA makes slot availability 
known; bilateral negotiations; 
final terms disclosed to OST for 
monitoring.
Transparent not blind: carrier noti-
fies FAA of intent to sublease; 
FAA makes slot availability 
known; bilateral negotiations; 
final terms disclosed to OST for 
monitoring.
Same. 
Logistical swaps of slots ................ Permitted ...................................... Permitted ...................................... Same. 
The rule would apply to carriers at 
JFK and Newark. A U.S. air carrier 
conducting operations solely under 
another carrier’s market control with 
unified inventory control would not be 
considered a separate carrier, an 
approach that is consistent with how 
carriers have been treated historically 
under the various slot regimes. The 
same would not be true for foreign air 
carriers. This difference in treatment 
reflects the commercial realities of JFK 
and Newark where there are foreign air 
carriers that share a common owner but 
hold out service to the public as 
separate commercial entities. Treating 
foreign air carriers with common 
ownership as separate carriers for 
purposes of slot allocation is an 
accepted practice in the international 
arena. The recent SNPRM on LaGuardia 
airport, as well as the LaGuardia Order, 
treats carriers with common ownership 
as a single carrier. 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 15:15 May 20, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00005 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\21MYP3.SGM 21MYP3cp
ric
e-
se
we
ll o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
69
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
29630 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 99 / Wednesday, May 21, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
As we have explained, we do not 
anticipate that airport and airspace 
system improvements scheduled to 
come on line during the next year and 
a half will be sufficient to meet the 
demand for flights at either JFK or 
Newark for the foreseeable future. 
Therefore, if we let the Orders expire 
according to their terms, we believe 
carriers will once again schedule flights 
well in excess of the respective 
capacities of both JFK and Newark and 
unscheduled operations would grow 
during peak hours. Historic experience 
strongly suggests that congestion and 
delays during peak operating hours 
would result, requiring the FAA to step 
in and address unacceptable operational 
performance yet again. 
Rather than taking repeated, 
piecemeal approaches to limit and 
manage operations at JFK and Newark 
on a short-term basis, we believe it is 
prudent to adopt a longer-term rule 
dealing with the congestion and delays 
we expect to persist at those airports. 
The FAA’s preference in addressing 
congestion resulting from capacity 
shortfalls is to expand the airport and 
airway system capacity and to increase 
the efficient use of existing resources. 
This is by far the most effective way to 
serve the traveling public and to 
promote a strong airport and airway 
system. Although both the FAA and the 
Port Authority are working to 
implement these capacity 
improvements, this rule would 
complement those efforts and mitigate 
projected airport congestion. 
We propose to treat the three major 
New York City-area airports similarly by 
capping operations and introducing 
market mechanisms to allocate some 
slots. While we have provided two 
different versions of the draft regulatory 
text to present two alternatives for 
market allocation, Newark would be 
treated the same under both versions. 
Accordingly, all discussion of 
alternative 2 will be limited to JFK. 
The FAA believes it is necessary to 
address congestion and delays at 
LaGuardia, JFK, and Newark in a 
coordinated manner. Congestion and 
delays at each of the three airports affect 
the other two airports as well as the 
NAS as a whole. The airports are all 
located relatively close to each other 
and consistently have been among the 
nation’s most delay-prone airports. 
Excluding any one of the three major 
New York-area airports from the 
imposition of caps would simply shift 
the problem to the non-slot controlled 
airport, as it would become very 
attractive to carriers wanting to start or 
add service in the New York market. 
The likely result would be an 
overburdening of that airport and the 
system. We propose to award capacity at 
JFK and Newark through mechanisms 
that rely, in part, on the market. These 
mechanisms resemble those in the 
proposal for LaGuardia Airport, but are 
modified to reflect the respective 
characteristics of JFK and Newark. 
Today’s proposal will ensure that the 
scarce airspace resources are used for 
operations by the carriers valuing the 
resources most highly. Additionally, 
over the course of the ten-year life of the 
proposed rule, we will monitor the need 
to maintain the caps and may increase 
the number of scheduled operations in 
response to technological, operational, 
or capacity plans or improvements or to 
other factors that may warrant such 
action. 
We note that both JFK and Newark are 
already capped under the respective 
Orders at 81 scheduled operations per 
hour (except as provided in the 
Appendices to the Orders). Today’s 
proposal, if adopted, will replace those 
Orders. The FAA believes the summer 
of 2007 served as a stark reminder that 
the demand for access to New York City 
is exceptional and cannot be managed 
without these caps at an acceptable 
level of delay. 
The NPRM proposes to apply the 
limits of the recent JFK and Newark 
Orders, except where the Administrator 
determines under § 93.163 of subpart N 
and § 93.183 of subpart O that 
additional slots can be accommodated. 
In addition, there would be no more 
than 44 slots in any 30-minute period at 
JFK and Newark, or more than 81 in a 
60-minute period. We have proposed to 
specify the 30- and 60-minute 
limitations in addition to the hourly 
maximum to avoid excessive bunching 
of slots, which can cause unnecessary 
delays. Section 93.163(d) of subpart N 
and § 93.183 of subpart O sets out the 
authority of the Administrator to 
increase the number of slots as airport 
conditions warrant. No additional 
rulemaking would be required for any 
increase. 
JFK and Newark have similar demand 
profiles, with an early morning peak 
that typically clears by mid-morning. 
Demand approaches capacity in the 
early afternoon and typically continues 
until about 10 p.m. Scheduled requests 
submitted by carriers to the FAA for 
summer 2008 showed marked increases 
throughout the day. Modeling and 
experience demonstrate that delays 
grow exponentially and have a 
cascading effect on airport operations 
and individual flights at the airport. As 
part of the discussions with the carriers 
regarding summer 2008 schedules, 
carriers decided to schedule flights at 
off-peak hours since the FAA was 
unwilling to authorize new peak hour 
flights. Based on demand and the 
modeling showing the potential for 
increased delays, the FAA determined 
that the appropriate hours to limit 
flights would cover much of the 
operating day. 
The FAA proposes that the final rule, 
if adopted, would terminate at 11 p.m. 
on March 30, 2019. This approach will 
allow for future determinations by the 
FAA as to whether a cap is still needed 
and, if so, whether changes are needed 
to more efficiently manage the scarce 
resource. At present it is impossible to 
determine what changes in business 
models may occur over the next ten 
years. In addition, full implementation 
of the New York/New Jersey/ 
Philadelphia Metropolitan Area 
Airspace Redesign project and NextGen 
technologies are expected to 
successfully impact delays and air 
traffic efficiency within the next ten 
years, and we should not prejudge the 
market response. The FAA plans to 
evaluate the effects of the slot program 
proposed today on the distribution of 
slots and entry into JFK and Newark. 
The agency intends to take this 
experience into account in all 
congestion management activities. 
III. Proposal for Efficient Allocation of 
Capacity at JFK and Newark 
A. Need for More Efficient Allocation 
Congress has directed the Department 
to place ‘‘maximum reliance on 
competitive market forces and on actual 
and potential competition.’’ 49 U.S.C. 
40101(a)(6). The ability of carriers to 
initiate or expand service at the airport 
is hindered, in large part, by the 
imposition of a cap. Accordingly, the 
FAA believes it must strike a balance 
between (1) promoting competition and 
permitting access to new entrants and 
(2) recognizing historical investments in 
the airport by carriers and the need to 
provide continuity. It is not the role of 
the Government either to dictate 
particular business models or to 
constrain a market and provide no 
means for others to enter that limited 
market. Simply imposing a cap and then 
doing nothing to ensure that there are 
competitive market forces and actual 
and potential competition is 
unacceptable. 
Not only is the FAA required to 
assure the efficient use of the NAS, but 
it must do so in a manner that does not 
penalize all potential operators at the 
airport by effectively shutting them out 
of the market. Accordingly, the FAA 
believes that it is well within the 
agency’s authority in 49 U.S.C. 40103 to 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 15:15 May 20, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00006 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\21MYP3.SGM 21MYP3cp
ric
e-
se
we
ll o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
69
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
29631 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 99 / Wednesday, May 21, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
12 Under the cooperative agreements FAA will be 
transferring a leasehold interest in the slots, but 
FAA will not entirely dispose of its property. 
Receiving compensation from these transfers is 
antithetical to the definition of a cooperative 
agreement. Nonetheless, to the degree that adequate 
compensation might be considered required under 
49 U.S.C. 40110(a)(2), the compensation will be the 
carriers’ agreement to be bound by the terms in the 
cooperative agreement as well as FAA’s recognition 
of the public value received by the carriers’ 
historical investment at JFK and Newark. 
provide some mechanism for slot 
reallocation. Today’s proposal attempts 
to strike the appropriate balance by 
actively developing a market that values 
the limited asset that the FAA created. 
B. Authority To Assign Slots at JFK and 
Newark 
The FAA has statutory authority to 
dispose of property. Because of the 
congressional mandate in 49 U.S.C. 
40101(a)(6) to rely to the maximum 
extent possible on competitive market 
forces, the FAA is tailoring its approach 
at the two airports. Today the agency is 
requesting comment on an approach 
whereby the FAA would establish a cap 
on operations and address, through a 
regulation, which slots would revert to 
the FAA for reallocation but would use 
its transaction authority to allow for 
reallocation of slots via a market-based 
mechanism. 
1. Authority To Determine the Best Use 
of the Airspace 
The United States Government holds 
exclusive sovereignty over United States 
airspace. 49 U.S.C. 40103. Citizens of 
the United States have a public right of 
transit through navigable airspace, but 
the FAA is authorized to assign the use 
of the airspace necessary to ensure the 
efficient use of airspace. To the extent 
these needs can be met without 
specifying which citizen may transit or 
reserve a particular segment of airspace 
at a particular time, there was no need 
for the FAA to place constraints such as 
slots on the use of the airspace—this 
remains the case for the vast majority of 
the NAS. 
As described above, however, at New 
York-area airports, in order to ensure 
the efficient use of airspace, FAA has 
had to impose constraints by assigning 
to carriers operational authority to 
conduct a scheduled arrival or 
departure operation on a particular day 
of the week during a specified 30- 
minute period. These reservations of 
airspace were called slots under the 
HDR. After the FAA issued the ‘‘buy/ 
sell rule’’, 14 CFR part 93, subpart S, 
these slots were treated not only as 
property of the United States 
Government, but also as if the carriers 
had a property interest, albeit an interest 
that was heavily encumbered by the 
restrictions imposed by the FAA. The 
nature of this property interest, 
however, has always been somewhat 
unclear. To encourage the most efficient 
use of constrained airspace, the FAA is 
clarifying the proprietary interest that 
the FAA is willing to transfer to airlines 
for a limited period of time. However, 
the FAA has determined that in order to 
assure the efficient use of airspace, it 
cannot simply permit those whom it 
grants authority to use the airspace to 
treat that authority as their own; it is the 
United States Government that has 
sovereignty over, and control of, the 
airspace. Such an approach would not 
only ignore the inherently valuable 
nature of an airspace usage assignment, 
but allows a select few to profit from a 
governmental interest to the detriment 
of their competitors and the public as a 
whole. 
2. Authority To Enter Into Leases and 
Cooperative Agreements 
The FAA has authority to lease real 
and personal property, including 
intangible property, to others. 49 U.S.C. 
106(l)(6) and 106(n). When disposing of 
an interest in property, however, the 
FAA must receive adequate 
compensation. 49 U.S.C. 40110(a)(2). 
Nevertheless, the FAA also has broad 
authority to enter into cooperative 
agreements on such terms and 
conditions as the FAA may consider 
appropriate. 49 U.S.C. 106(l)(6). Under 
the Federal Grants and Cooperative 
Agreements Act, a cooperative 
agreement is to be used when the 
principal purpose of the agreement is to 
transfer a thing of value to a recipient, 
either public or private, to carry out a 
public purpose of support or 
stimulation authorized by law, instead 
of acquiring (by purchase, lease or 
barter) property or services for the direct 
use or benefit of the agency, and there 
is substantial Federal involvement in 
the activity. 
Because we must balance the need to 
promote market forces with the value of 
continuity and certainty of services, the 
FAA believes this is the appropriate 
vehicle to use to transfer most of the 
slots as described in the following 
options, for a ten-year period, to the 
carriers that currently have operating 
authorizations at JFK and Newark. 
Doing so will recognize these carriers’ 
historical investment in JFK and 
Newark, and the public interest that has 
been served by that investment. In 
addition, it would prevent disruption to 
the national air transportation system 
that might otherwise occur, allowing the 
public to benefit from continued 
certainty of readily available air 
transportation to and from these 
airports. There will, however, be 
substantial ongoing Federal 
involvement with these slots, as the 
FAA will retain ATC responsibilities for 
assuring that the use of these segments 
of airspace for their specified times is 
done safely and with maximum possible 
efficiency.12 
C. Description of the Proposal 
1. Categories of Slots 
Today’s proposal would create three 
categories of slots: Common Slots, 
Limited Slots, and Unrestricted Slots. 
All three categories would be held by 
carriers pursuant to a lease. While the 
overwhelming percentage of slots will 
be Common Slots, many carriers would 
hold slots in all three categories. 
Common Slots would be assigned to 
carriers currently serving the airports, 
and would be leased for the duration of 
the rule, i.e., ten years. Once the rule 
sunsets, all interests would revert to the 
FAA, assuming the rule is not replaced 
by a different regulatory regime. Unlike 
slots allocated under the HDR and 
Operating Authorizations allocated 
under the JFK and Newark Orders, 
carriers would be granted clear property 
rights to Common Slots, allowing the 
slots to be collateralized or subleased to 
another carrier for consideration. 
However, Common Slots would be 
subject to reversion to the FAA under 
the rule’s minimum usage provision and 
could be withdrawn for operational 
reasons. 
Leases for Limited Slots would also be 
assigned by cooperative agreements 
between the FAA and the carriers, but 
during each of the first five years of the 
rule, a percentage of Limited Slots 
would be made available by auction, at 
which point they would be converted to 
Unrestricted Slots. Limited Slots would 
consist only of those slots operated on 
a daily, year-round basis. Thus, slots 
used on a seasonal or on a less-than- 
daily basis would not be designated as 
Limited Slots. The FAA arrived at this 
tentative proposal because we seek to 
populate the auction pool with those 
slots that are most economically 
valuable to carriers seeking to serve 
New York City. Slots only available on 
certain days or during one scheduling 
season would likely have value only to 
small subsets of operators at any given 
time, thus limiting the effectiveness of 
the market. Although slots would be 
awarded to carriers through the auction 
for daily, year-round operation, the 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 15:15 May 20, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00007 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\21MYP3.SGM 21MYP3cp
ric
e-
se
we
ll o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
69
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
29632 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 99 / Wednesday, May 21, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
13 ‘‘Baseline operations’’, as defined in § 93.162 
and § 93.182, are up to 20 slots per day. 
acquiring carrier may sublet to other 
carriers any portion of that award. 
Under alternative 1, as currently 
proposed, 10 percent of the slots above 
the baseline operations 13 at both JFK 
and Newark would be designated as 
Limited Slots, and thus could become 
Unrestricted Slots. Under alternative 2, 
20 percent of the slots at JFK above the 
baseline operations would be designated 
as Limited Slots. 
The FAA recognizes that the 
percentage of slots that the agency 
proposes to reallocate represents a 
relatively small percentage of the total 
number of slots at the two airports, 
particularly since each carrier’s first 20 
slots, at each airport, will not be subject 
to reversion. Accordingly, we 
specifically invite commenters to 
address the desirability of assigning 
different percentages for both JFK and 
Newark under both alternatives. For 
example, should we increase the 
percentages to be auctioned under 
alternative 1 to 20 percent? 
Additionally, the FAA seeks comment 
on whether the proposed percentages 
are sufficient to ensure the opportunity 
for new entry and an efficient allocation 
of slots among all carriers at the 
airports, such that each slot is allocated 
to the user who values it the most 
highly. Increasing the percentage of 
slots for auction would further facilitate 
the use of market forces to allocate 
capacity, which is a major goal of this 
rulemaking. On the other hand, 
lowering the number of slots withdrawn 
for auction would be less disruptive to 
the carriers currently operating at JFK 
and Newark, and would allow the 
agency to gain experience with the 
auction process. The agency also seeks 
input on the appropriate percentages of 
slots available for auction (both in total 
and annually) sufficient to assure an 
efficient allocation of this scarce 
resource. The final rule may provide for 
the reversion of a higher or lower 
percentage of slots available for auction 
than we have proposed under either 
alternative in this document. 
Following a review of the comments 
and further consideration, we may 
provide in a Final Rule for an auction 
of a greater percentage of a carrier’s 
Limited Slots. As with Common Slots, 
Limited Slots could be withdrawn 
under the proposed minimum usage 
provision, or for operational reasons. 
Unrestricted Slots are slots that a 
carrier would lease directly from the 
FAA under the auction processes under 
both alternatives. These slots would not 
be withdrawn by the FAA either under 
the minimum usage provisions or for 
operational reasons because carriers are 
required to purchase them due to 
government action. As with Common 
Slots, Unrestricted Slots would expire 
when the rule sunsets. 
2. Initial Assignment of Capacity 
Upon the rule’s effective date, each 
carrier at JFK and Newark would 
automatically be assigned up to 20 slots. 
Carriers whose approved schedules 
under the JFK and Newark orders call 
for fewer than 20 operations would be 
assigned the same number of slots as 
they are approved to operate under the 
respective orders. These slots would 
constitute carrier’s baseline operations. 
Slots above a carrier’s baseline 
operations would be designated as 
Common or Limited Slots as described 
above. The FAA believes this is a 
rational approach to assuring that no 
carrier is affected at a level that could 
seriously disrupt its existing operations 
at the airports. 
The number of slots to be designated 
as Limited Slots would be calculated 
after subtracting the slots in each 
carrier’s baseline operations of up to 20 
slots per day. In other words, if a carrier 
has 30 slots at JFK or Newark, 20 would 
be protected at that airport. Under 
alternative 1, 10 percent of the 
remainder, or one slot, would become a 
Limited Slot. Under alternative 2, 20 
percent of the remainder, or two slots, 
would become Limited Slots at JFK. Of 
course, most carriers hold a number of 
slots that would not be evenly divisible 
by applying a 10-or 20-percent rule. In 
such situations, the FAA would round 
the number of slots to be designated as 
Limited Slots up or down to the nearest 
whole number. As a practical matter, a 
carrier would have to have at least 25 
slots under alternative 1 or 23 slots 
under alternative 2, before any would be 
designated as Limited Slots. 
Given the seasonality of operations at 
these airports, both in terms of 
differences between summer and winter 
operations and within-season variability 
(which is much greater than at 
LaGuardia), the determination of which 
carrier is entitled to which slot will be 
based on the seasonal schedules 
approved by the FAA for summer 2008 
and winter 2008/2009. The FAA has 
tentatively decided to assign the 
majority of slots at the airport to existing 
carriers in order to minimize disruption 
and to recognize the carriers’ historical 
investments in both the airport and the 
community. 
No later than the final rule’s effective 
date, the FAA will inform all carriers 
that will have Limited Slots of the 
number of Limited Slots they will have. 
The designations as Limited Slots 
would be made by both carriers and the 
FAA. Once the total number of Limited 
Slots is communicated to each carrier, 
the carrier would designate 50 percent 
of the total by notifying the FAA within 
10 days which of the slots in its slot 
pool it designates as Limited Slots. 
During the subsequent 10 days, the FAA 
would determine the remainder of slots 
that will be designated as Limited Slots 
for each carrier. In making this 
determination, the FAA would initially 
exclude from consideration slots held 
during all hours where carriers have 
collectively determined two or more 
slots should be Limited Slots. This 
approach will assure that slots will be 
available for auction throughout the 
day. The time windows for the Limited 
Slots would be distributed evenly over 
the day to the extent possible. 
Limited Slots would expire on 
designated dates and the duration of 
each Limited Slot would be arranged to 
ensure that each affected carrier’s 
aggregate lease duration would be 
approximately equal to that of the other 
affected carriers. The FAA would 
publish a list showing the expiration 
date for each Limited Slot. In this way, 
all carriers would know within 20 days 
of the rule’s effective date what slots 
will become available for purchase, and 
when. 
A technical report more fully 
explaining how Limited Slots could be 
categorized and allocated was prepared 
for the LaGuardia rulemaking. A copy of 
that report has been placed in the 
docket for this rulemaking. Commenters 
are encouraged to review and comment 
on that document. 
3.Market-Based Award of Capacity 
For the first five years of the rule, the 
FAA would conduct an annual auction 
of Limited Slots. Section 93.165(c) of 
subpart N and § 93.185 of subpart O 
provides for the conversion of Limited 
Slots to Unrestricted Slots. In 
accordance with the schedule published 
under § 93.164, one-fifth of the 
identified Limited Slots would revert to 
the FAA for auction each year. Both the 
auction and secondary market would be 
open to any carrier in order to avoid 
artificially restricting any carrier’s 
flexibility to acquire Unrestricted Slots 
for its services, and to offer carriers 
wishing to initiate or expand operations 
at JFK or Newark the full range of 
opportunities to acquire slots. 
Under alternative 1, the FAA is 
proposing to have 10 percent of the 
carriers’ slots above its baseline 
operations revert to the FAA over the 
first five years of the rule. The FAA 
would auction the reverting Limited 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 15:15 May 20, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00008 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\21MYP3.SGM 21MYP3cp
ric
e-
se
we
ll o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
69
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
29633 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 99 / Wednesday, May 21, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
14 The FAA will attempt to auction an even 
number of slots during each hour to provide an 
opportunity for a carrier to replace a slot that it is 
auctioning. This may not always be possible. 
Slots, with FAA retaining proceeds of 
the sale. After recouping its auction 
costs, the FAA plans to spend the 
remainder of the proceeds on aviation 
congestion and delay management 
initiatives in the New York City area. 
Alternative 1 would make 
approximately 19 slots available for 
auction at JFK and 18 slots available at 
Newark each year. Carriers typically 
require pairs of slots, so alternative 1 
would provide the equivalent of 
approximately 9 round trips per day at 
both airports. Under alternative 1, any 
carrier could bid on a slot in an auction 
that is blind to the participants and it 
would be awarded in the form of an 
Unrestricted Slot to the highest 
responsive bidder. The winning carrier 
could commence operations using the 
newly acquired slot at the beginning of 
the next summer scheduling season. 
Alternative 2 proposes a different 
auction procedure for JFK that would 
provide that the holder of a Limited Slot 
would retain the proceeds of its sale in 
the auction. The only deduction from 
the sale price would be for the FAA’s 
costs associated with conducting the 
auction. 
Under this alternative, 20 percent of 
the carriers’ slots above the baseline 
operations at JFK would revert to the 
FAA over the first five years of the rule. 
Therefore, approximately 179 slots 
would be available at JFK, of which 
approximately 36 slots would be 
available for auction each year. Carriers 
typically require pairs of slots, so 
alternative 2 as proposed would provide 
the equivalent of 18 round trips per day 
at JFK. 
Under alternative 2, Unrestricted 
Slots would be awarded to the highest 
responsive bidders in a blind auction. 
Only cash could be bid for a slot. Since 
the goal of this rulemaking is to impose 
marketplace discipline on the use of 
slots, the FAA has proposed certain 
restrictions in alternative 2 to reduce 
anticompetitive behavior. For example, 
carriers may not set minimum bids for 
the slots, so they cannot impose a price 
so prohibitively high as to effectively 
preclude any sales. For similar reasons, 
carriers would not be permitted to bid 
on their own slots; otherwise, knowing 
that no actual payment would be made, 
they could bid unrealistic amounts that 
no competitor could match. With 
unrealistic bids, the fair market value of 
the slot would not be identified. 
Although the prohibition against a 
carrier bidding on its own slots would 
mean that the carrier would no longer 
have that slot, any carrier could 
negotiate for subleases or transfers from 
other carriers in the secondary market or 
bid on other slots concurrently up for 
auction and held by other carriers.14 
The FAA believes that the above 
procedures could not be applied at 
Newark, because the current market 
profile there would diminish the 
likelihood that the auction would bring 
the beneficial effects of market forces 
that this proposal seeks to stimulate. At 
JFK (and at LaGuardia), no one carrier 
provides the vast majority of slots that 
would be up for auction, and any carrier 
that values a slot at a particular time 
could have the opportunity to bid on an 
equivalent slot that is held by another 
carrier. At Newark, however, 
Continental would have approximately 
174 of its slots up for auction if 20 
percent of its slots reverted to the FAA, 
but would be unable to bid on those 
slots or on an equivalent number of slots 
because only 19 slots would be available 
from any other carrier. Under this 
circumstance, the prices paid for slots at 
Newark may not be reflective of their 
actual value, with no meaningful slot 
market developing. 
Among the specific questions on 
which we request comment is whether 
under alternative 2, 20 percent of a 
carrier’s slots above its baseline at 
Newark should revert to the FAA for 
auction, even though the reallocation 
mechanism would be the same as under 
the first alternative. The agency also 
requests comment on whether 
alternative 2, in its entirety, should be 
adopted at Newark. 
The FAA considered using a 
transparent auction procedure for both 
alternatives 1 and 2. The FAA believes 
that such transparency with respect to 
identity of the bidders and their 
corresponding bids would encourage 
gaming of the auction and significantly 
reduce the economic value of the initial 
auction of slots. The FAA also believes 
that an auction where the identity of the 
bidders is not known assists new 
entrants seeking to enter the market. 
Therefore, under Alternative 1, the 
identity of bidders would not be known 
to other bidders. Since the FAA will 
accept the highest responsive bid, 
regardless of who that bidder is, there is 
no need to keep bidders’ identities from 
the agency. Under Alternative 2, the 
identity of bidders would be known 
only to the auctioneer, and then only for 
administrative purposes. 
The FAA does not propose to auction 
slots after the first five years because it 
believes that ideally slots should 
transfer from one carrier to another 
through the secondary market. Not only 
will the auctions help create a market 
for slots, but all carriers will be able to 
assess the true market value of a slot. 
Armed with information on how much 
a given slot is likely to be worth on the 
open market, carriers (and their 
shareholders) will be in an even better 
position to determine how best to use 
their slots based on commercial 
considerations. 
In the unlikely event no bids were 
received for a slot, we propose that the 
FAA retire the slot until the next 
auction to assist in delay mitigation. We 
request comment on whether, in the 
alternative, the carrier that previously 
held the slot should retain the slot for 
use until the next season. 
4. New and Returned Capacity 
As mentioned above, the FAA may 
raise the caps at JFK or Newark based 
on an analysis of delay statistics, aircraft 
operations at the respective airports, 
airport and airspace improvements, and 
other pertinent factors. The agency 
believes there is unlikely to be much, if 
any, returned capacity because carriers 
can sublease slots that they do not 
utilize efficiently rather than surrender 
them to the FAA because of inadequate 
usage. It is impossible at this time to 
estimate with any certainty how much 
new capacity is likely to come online; 
but it is unlikely there will be much 
new capacity in the near-term. Over a 
longer period of time, the realization of 
new capacity is dependent upon 
NextGen technologies. The efficiencies 
realized from the New York/New Jersey/ 
Philadelphia Metropolitan Area 
Airspace Redesign project will benefit 
delay reduction and will not be used to 
add new capacity at the airports. 
The auction method proposed for 
LaGuardia, whereby all new and 
returned capacity would be auctioned, 
maximizes the total number of slots 
available for auction and would, in turn, 
increase the efficiencies that the 
proposal is intended to generate. 
However, the FAA believes the 
character of operations at JFK and 
Newark justifies a different approach. At 
both airports, a substantial percentage of 
air traffic is international. Historically, 
the FAA has used the IATA Worldwide 
Scheduling Guidelines (WSG) to 
allocate slots for international 
operations at slot constrained airports to 
the extent they did not conflict with the 
rules imposing caps at the affected 
airports. 
The use of the WSG to assign new 
slots could affect carriers’ scheduling 
incentives and reduce the efficiency of 
the market for existing slots. However, 
given the amount of new capacity that 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 15:15 May 20, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00009 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\21MYP3.SGM 21MYP3cp
ric
e-
se
we
ll o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
69
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
29634 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 99 / Wednesday, May 21, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
15 As indicated in the Order Limiting Operations 
at John F. Kennedy International Airport, 73 FR 
3510 (1/18/08) and the Notice of Proposed Order 
Limiting Scheduled Operations at Newark Liberty 
International Airport, 73 FR 14552 (3/18/08), the 
FAA intends to auction new or returned capacity, 
if any, under those orders. The contract would 
cover auctions at all possible airports. The FAA is 
not waiting until this rule is finalized to award the 
contract, because this proposal and the two orders 
contemplate potentially conducting the first auction 
before the end of the year. 
16 Since the auction will address the lease of slots 
awarded by the FAA under its leasing authority 
rather than under any administrative allocation, 
notice to interested parties will be governed by 
applicable procurement law rather than the 
Administrative Procedure Act. 
is likely to be available during the rule’s 
timeframe, this effect is likely to be 
small. Given the significant 
international presence at both airports, 
the FAA proposes to follow procedures 
for assigning newly available or 
returned slots that are largely derived 
from the WSG. A new entrant would be 
defined as a carrier holding or operating 
eight slots or fewer, assigned by the 
FAA, during the constrained hours. The 
FAA understands that in order to 
maintain viable operations at JFK or 
Newark, a carrier would need four to six 
slots for domestic operations, and at 
least two slots for an international 
operation. The five slots contemplated 
under the WSG provide little 
opportunity for a new entrant carrier to 
establish its operations before losing 
new entrant status and thereafter being 
able to expand in the New York market 
only through the purchase of a lease. 
Setting a limit of eight slots 
administratively assigned by the FAA as 
the cut-off for new entrant status allows 
a carrier to maintain its operations and 
provides some ability to grow without 
jeopardizing the carrier’s access to slots 
through the WSG. 
The agency is proposing that carriers 
lose their new entrant status if, at any 
point during the duration of the 
proposed rule, the FAA assigns a total 
of more than eight Common or Limited 
Slots on a particular day. Thus, if a 
carrier were awarded six Common Slots 
on a given day of the week, it could only 
be eligible for assignment of two more 
slots for that day through the WSG 
before losing its new entrant status, 
even if it subsequently subleased some 
of those Common Slots to another 
carrier, giving it less than eight total 
slots. However, the same carrier could 
be assigned six Common Slots, acquire 
any number of additional slots through 
the secondary market, and still be 
eligible to receive two additional slots 
under the WSG as a new entrant. This 
provision is intended to prevent carriers 
from continuing to gain an advantage as 
a new entrant by transferring holdings 
for which they have provided no 
monetary consideration. On the other 
hand, since only those slots 
administratively assigned by the FAA, 
and not those awarded by auction or 
through a lease with another carrier, 
would be considered in determining 
new entrant status, carriers with eight or 
fewer of these slots will not be 
discouraged from entering into lease 
agreements with other carriers, 
contributing to the development of a 
robust secondary market. A carrier’s 
new entrant status would not be affected 
by one-for-one trades, which the agency 
believes are necessary for operational 
efficiency, which do not result in either 
a gain or reduction in operations, and 
for which no consideration may be 
given. The FAA seeks comment on 
whether carriers should be allowed to 
retain their new entrant status if they 
have subleased or otherwise transferred 
slots originally allocated to them by the 
FAA. 
After allowing for retimings and 
accommodating requests by new 
entrants, the FAA would evaluate the 
efficiency of the requested assignment 
in determining which carriers should 
receive the slot. We would consider the 
effective period of operation, the extent 
and regularity of the proposed usage, 
and the carrier’s schedule constraints. 
Using a WSG-based approach would 
facilitate the continued smooth 
integration of JFK and Newark into the 
international slot allocation system. 
Based on discussions during the ARC, 
we believe that the WSG approach is 
well-understood and is an 
internationally-recognized system of 
allocation at airports. 
We recognize that this method of 
allocation differs from the method 
proposed for new and returned capacity 
in the companion proposal at 
LaGuardia. We also recognize that 
several commenters to the LaGuardia 
NPRM argued that any administrative 
allocation of capacity could dilute the 
viability of the secondary market. 
Accordingly, the FAA may adopt an 
allocation method that allocates new 
and returned capacity via an auction. 
This was the approach favored in the 
LaGuardia SNPRM. Under that 
approach, the slots would be auctioned 
as Unrestricted Slots. During the first 
five years of the rule, this new capacity 
would be auctioned at the same time as 
the slots that revert to the FAA under 
today’s proposal. Should insufficient 
capacity be available to justify the 
expense of conducting an auction in the 
last five years of the rule, the FAA 
would retain the slots until sufficient 
capacity was available for a meaningful 
auction. The FAA invites comment as to 
whether the final rule should specify 
that new and returned capacity at JFK 
and Newark be allocated by auction 
instead of by the WSG-method method 
described above. 
D. Auction Procedures 
The FAA is currently engaged in 
procuring the services of a contractor to 
conduct auctions of the proposed 
Limited Slots.15 The details regarding 
the specifics of any potential auction 
will be disclosed after the contractor has 
developed and validated an auction 
process and the FAA is ready to proceed 
with an auction.16 
In order to ensure that auction 
participants understand how the 
auction process works, the FAA 
anticipates the contractor would have to 
conduct a training seminar and a mock 
auction prior to each auction. A single 
training seminar and mock auction 
would not suffice since presumably not 
every carrier will participate in every 
auction. The auction would also have to 
be structured to prevent gaming. This 
would likely be accomplished through 
the use of activity rules. 
Finally, the contractor would have to 
provide and maintain a secure 
communication mechanism for 
conducting the auction and develop a 
website that provides information on 
the availability of slots and the logistics 
of the auction. 
At present, the FAA is contemplating 
requiring bidding carriers to provide up- 
front payments as a prerequisite to 
participating in the auction and 
requiring full payment for the slots at 
the time of award. The Federal 
Communications Commission (FCC) has 
experienced problems with bidders who 
were not financially secure or who were 
otherwise unwilling or unable to pay for 
the awards. The upfront payment could 
also discourage bid-sniping by 
preventing carriers from adding slots to 
their bid package beyond the amount of 
the upfront payment. The FAA 
recognizes that paying for the entire 
lease at one time could be expensive; 
however, it also believes that serious 
bidders should be able to obtain the 
requisite financing. 
E. Secondary Trading 
All slots will have value in the 
secondary market. To the extent that the 
secondary market is not mature and the 
value of slots is not well-known, the 
auction should inform potential buyers 
of the value of these slots and stimulate 
the secondary market. The FAA believes 
that ultimately the best way to 
maximize competition is with the 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 15:15 May 20, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00010 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\21MYP3.SGM 21MYP3cp
ric
e-
se
we
ll o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
69
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
29635 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 99 / Wednesday, May 21, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
17 See United Airlines, Inc. v. Civil Aeronautics 
Board, 766 F. 2d 1107, 1112, 1114 (7th Cir. 1985) 
and cases cited therein; see also H.R. Rep. No. 98– 
793, 98th Cong., 2d Sess. (1984) at 4–5, Order 2002– 
9–2, Complaint of the American Society of Travel 
Agents, Inc., and Joseph Galloway against United 
Air Lines, Inc, et al. (Docket No. OST–99–6410) and 
Complaint of The American Society of Travel 
Agents, Inc., and Hillside Travel, Inc. against Delta 
Air Lines, et al. (Docket No. OST–02–12004) 
(September 4, 2002) at 22–23. 
development of a robust secondary 
market. Through the years, the FAA has 
received complaints that carriers were 
unaware of possible opportunities to 
buy or lease slots at slot-controlled 
airports and that incumbent carriers 
were colluding to keep new entrant 
carriers out of the airport. 
We believe some measures must be 
taken to assure access to the secondary 
market. All carriers interested in 
initiating operations at JFK and Newark, 
or increasing their operations there, 
should have an opportunity to 
participate in any transactions. 
Accordingly, the FAA proposes to (1) 
permit carriers to include Common 
Slots for sale in the auction, organized 
by the FAA, and (2) establish a 
‘‘secondary-market’’ bulletin-board 
system whereby carriers seeking to 
sublet slots, or to acquire such 
subleases, would notify the FAA, which 
would then post the relevant 
information on its Web site. 
If a carrier wishes to include some of 
its slots in the auction, these slots will 
be treated in the same manner as other 
slots being auctioned by the FAA. 
However, the carrier would be able to 
specify a minimum price for these slots 
so that it need not give up the slots 
unless they command a price that the 
carrier is willing to accept. 
The FAA has tentatively decided that 
transactions via the bulletin-board- 
system would not have to be blind, and 
the transaction could include both cash 
and non-cash payments. While it may 
be argued that transparency among 
parties to the transaction encourages 
anti-competitive behavior, the FAA 
believes that a blind, cash-only 
requirement could be unduly restrictive. 
In particular, the FAA believes that non- 
cash bids promote competition by 
enlarging the pool of potential bidders. 
Thus, non-cash transactions should 
result in both more bidders and 
potentially higher bids. However, it is 
critical that the identities of parties be 
known if non-cash assets are permitted 
because that is the only way to value 
those assets. In addition, the non-cash 
aspect of the transaction would require 
direct negotiating. 
The FAA believes that these concerns 
could be met in a blind secondary 
market. For example, the agency could 
adopt a hybrid scheme whereby the 
initial offer and acceptance would be 
blind and limited to a cash offer, but the 
parties could negotiate non-cash assets 
after the offer had been accepted. Such 
an approach may be workable. During 
the posting of the lease and subsequent 
bidding for the slots, the parties’ 
identities would not be known. Once 
the auction closed, the FAA would 
forward the highest bid to the sublessor 
without any bidder identification. The 
sublessor would have a set number of 
business days to accept the bid. At that 
point, the parties’ identities would be 
revealed, and they would have a set 
period of time to negotiate the 
possibility of non-cash assets in lieu of 
money as consideration for the lease. If 
the parties were unable to come to an 
agreement, the lease would have to 
proceed on a cash basis. The FAA seeks 
comment on this and other viable 
alternatives. 
The FAA recognizes that non-blind 
transactions could facilitate, and even 
encourage, collusion. The Department 
has the authority under 49 U.S.C. 41712 
to investigate, prohibit, and impose 
penalties on an air carrier for an unfair 
or deceptive practice or an unfair 
method of competition in air 
transportation or the sale of air 
transportation. The Department has 
consistently held that this authority 
empowers it to prohibit anticompetitive 
conduct (1) that violates the antitrust 
laws, (2) that is not yet serious enough 
to violate the antitrust laws but may do 
so in the future, or (3) that, although not 
a violation of the letter of the antitrust 
laws, is close to a violation or contrary 
to their spirit.17 
In order to assure that the Department 
can conduct adequate oversight, today’s 
proposal would require carriers to file 
with the Department a detailed 
breakdown of all lease terms and asset 
transfers for each transaction, and the 
subletting carrier would have to disclose 
all bids submitted in response to its 
solicitation. The slot could not be 
operated by the acquiring carrier until 
all documentation has been received, 
and the FAA has approved the transfer. 
The FAA has considered whether to 
publicly disclose non-confidential 
business information so that all carriers 
have an assessment of the relative value 
of the slots that are being traded. We 
have not included language to this effect 
in the proposed regulatory text. 
However, we seek comment on whether 
it would be helpful for this type of 
information to be disclosed. 
Under proposed § 93.168 and 
§ 93.188, trades among U.S. air carriers 
with unified marketing control 
(marketing carriers) would not have to 
be advertised, because they are 
considered a single carrier for the 
purpose of this rule and these trades do 
not have the characteristics of a normal 
arm’s-length transaction. Since foreign 
air carriers are considered separate 
carriers, they would not be able to take 
advantage of this provision. As it has 
done historically, the FAA would 
approve these transactions after it has 
received written evidence from each 
carrier that it consents to the transfer. 
The receiving carrier could not use the 
slot until the FAA has provided written 
approval of the transfer. Same day 
transactions among marketing carriers 
that address emergency situations, such 
as maintenance problems, adverse 
weather, or other unforeseen operational 
issues, could take place without prior 
approval by the FAA, but carriers would 
have to notify the FAA of the trade 
within five business days. 
One-for-one trades between any two 
carriers would similarly not be subject 
to the restrictions of the secondary 
market. Such trades enhance the 
operational efficiency of the airport. 
However, the proposed rule would not 
allow consideration other than slots to 
be offered. When monetary or other 
compensation is involved in a slot 
transfer, the transaction would have to 
be handled as a sublease under § 93.168 
of subpart N and § 93.188 of subpart O. 
As with subleases and trades between 
marketing carriers, the slot could not be 
used by the new carrier until the FAA 
provides written confirmation of the 
transfer. 
IV. Unscheduled Operations 
The FAA intends to limit 
unscheduled operations into and out of 
JFK and Newark during the constrained 
hours. Unscheduled operations at 
Newark would be limited to two per 
hour between 6 a.m. and 11:59 a.m. and 
between 10 p.m. and 10:59 p.m. and one 
per hour between 12 noon and 9:59 p.m. 
At JFK, there would be two 
unscheduled operations permitted per 
hour between 6 a.m. and 1:59 p.m. and 
between 10 p.m. and 10:59 p.m. and one 
per hour between 2 p.m. and 9:59 p.m. 
Under today’s proposal, reservations 
would be required to use the airport 
(except for emergency operations) and 
could be obtained up to 72 hours in 
advance. 
To the extent ATC can handle 
additional requests (for example, in 
good weather) it will do so without 
regard to the reason for the request. 
However, there is no guarantee that the 
FAA would accept more than the 
specified number of reservations per 
hour, and the determination to handle 
more traffic would likely be made on 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 15:15 May 20, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00011 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\21MYP3.SGM 21MYP3cp
ric
e-
se
we
ll o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
69
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
29636 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 99 / Wednesday, May 21, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
that day. Reservations for all non- 
emergency flights would still be 
required and would be assigned by the 
FAA’s e-CVRS system. Additional 
information of procedures for obtaining 
reservations will be available on the 
Internet at http://fly.faa.gov/ecvrs. 
The FAA proposes to allow Public 
Charter operators to reserve an 
allowable operation up to six months in 
advance. Since the reservation pool 
consists of operations planned well in 
advance and last-minute operations, the 
number of reservations made available 
to public charter flights up to six 
months in advance would be limited to 
no more than one in any hour and no 
more than 25 percent of the total 
reservations from 12 noon to 9:59 p.m. 
local time. A Public Charter operator 
without the advance reservation could 
attempt to secure a reservation within 
the three-day window that is available 
for all other unscheduled operations. A 
carrier could also elect to use one of its 
assigned slots or obtain a slot from 
another carrier in the secondary market. 
V. Other Issues 
A. 30-Minute Windows 
Consistent with the existing JFK and 
Newark Orders, we propose to assign 
slots at JFK and Newark in 30-minute 
windows. The FAA cautions, however, 
that peaking within the 30-minute 
windows could lead to increased 
congestion. The FAA will continue to 
monitor operations and will address any 
significant operational issues through 
discussions with carriers. 
B. Use-or-Lose 
Consistent with the approach taken in 
the JFK and Newark Orders, which is 
based on the WSG, the FAA is 
proposing a use-or-lose requirement for 
JFK and Newark that takes into 
consideration the seasonal nature of 
international, as well as some domestic, 
operations at those airports. Carriers 
would be expected to operate their 
Common Slots and Limited Slots in 
accordance with approved schedules at 
least 80 percent of the time. However, 
proposed § 93.170 of subpart N and 
§ 93.190 of subpart O would consider 
the summer and winter schedules 
separately. Carriers would be allocated 
slots on the days and for the time 
periods set out in their summer 2008 
and winter 2008/2009 schedules 
approved by the FAA. The carriers will 
be subject to the use-or-lose requirement 
only for those slot times that are 
allocated to them. Unrestricted Slots 
would not be subject to usage 
requirements. 
The proposed rule would allow for 
limited waivers of the minimum usage 
requirements in the event that the 
carrier experiences an unusual and 
unpredictable condition that prevents it 
from using the slot for at least five 
consecutive days. If weather conditions 
prevented operations, for example, an 
operator might be granted a waiver of 
the use-or-lose provisions. 
To enable carriers to make necessary 
operational adjustments, the usage 
requirements will not apply for the first 
90 days after a carrier receives a slot 
under a sublease. However, a transfer 
between carriers under § 93.168(f) of 
subpart N and § 93.188(f) of subpart O 
of this part, in which one carrier holds 
marketing and inventory control of the 
flights operated by another carrier, is 
not a sublease for the purpose of this 
section. Therefore, there would be no 
90-day waiver of the minimum use 
requirements following a transfer 
between them. Likewise, there would be 
no waiver for slots acquired via the 
WSG because carriers would have 
ample time after the slots were allocated 
to take the steps necessary to initiate the 
new operations. 
C. Usage Reporting Requirements 
The minimum usage requirement for 
JFK and Newark would be calculated on 
a seasonal basis. Therefore, we are 
proposing to require carriers to file 
reports with the FAA for each 
scheduling season. In accordance with 
§ 93.172 of subpart N and § 93.192 of 
subpart O, carriers would report the 
usage of Common and Limited Slots. An 
interim report would be due no later 
than September 1 for the summer 
scheduling season and no later than 
February 1 for the winter scheduling 
season. Carriers would also be required 
to file final usage reports within 30 days 
of the last day of the applicable 
scheduling season. 
D. Administrative Provisions 
The FAA may withdraw or suspend 
slots at JFK or Newark for operational 
reasons pursuant to § 93.167 of subpart 
N and § 93.187 of subpart O. The FAA 
would assign a withdrawal priority 
number to each Common and Limited 
Slot by a random lottery. If a reduction 
in operations becomes necessary, slots 
would be withdrawn starting with the 
highest number. The Common or 
Limited Slot with the lowest assigned 
numbers would be the last to be 
withdrawn. The FAA would provide at 
least 45 days’ notice of its intention to 
withdraw or temporarily suspend a slot, 
unless the operational circumstances 
necessitate a shorter notice period. 
Given that a number of operators will 
have only a limited number of slots at 
JFK and Newark, we are requesting 
comment on whether the FAA should 
establish a level of slots that would not 
be subject to withdrawal or temporary 
suspension to fulfill operational needs 
to avoid the possibility of marginalizing 
or excluding such operators from the 
airport. 
VI. Regulatory Notices and Analyses 
Changes to Federal regulations must 
undergo several economic analyses. 
First, Executive Order 12866 directs that 
each Federal agency shall propose or 
adopt a regulation only upon a reasoned 
determination that the benefits of the 
intended regulation justify its costs. 
Second, the Regulatory Flexibility Act 
of 1980 requires agencies to analyze the 
economic impact of regulatory changes 
on small entities. Third, the Trade 
Agreements Act (19 U.S.C. 4 2531–2533) 
prohibits agencies from setting 
standards that create unnecessary 
obstacles to the foreign commerce of the 
United States. In developing U.S. 
standards, the Trade Act requires 
agencies to consider international 
standards and, where appropriate, to be 
the basis of U.S. standards. Fourth, the 
Unfunded Mandate Reform Act of 1995 
(Pub. L. 104–4) requires agencies to 
prepare a written assessment of the 
costs, benefits, and other effects of 
proposed or final rules that include a 
Federal mandate likely to result in the 
expenditure by State, local, or tribal 
governments, in the aggregate, or by the 
private sector, of $100 million or more 
annually (adjusted for inflation). 
In conducting these analyses, FAA 
has determined this final rule (1) has 
benefits that justify its costs, is a 
‘‘significant regulatory action’’ as 
defined in § 3(f) of Executive Order 
12866, which is also known as an 
‘‘economically significant regulation 
action,’’ and is ‘‘significant’’ as defined 
in DOT’s Regulatory Policies and 
Procedures; (2) would not have a 
significant economic impact on a 
substantial number of small entities; (3) 
would not adversely affect international 
trade; and (4) would not impose an 
unfunded mandate on State, local, or 
tribal governments, or on the private 
sector. These analyses, set forth in this 
document, are summarized below. 
Total Costs and Benefits of This 
Rulemaking 
Through implementation of an 
auction, FAA estimates that this 
proposed rule would result in a long- 
term improvement in the allocation of 
scarce slot resources at JFK and Newark. 
The estimated present value of net 
benefits of improved slot allocation by 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 15:15 May 20, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00012 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\21MYP3.SGM 21MYP3cp
ric
e-
se
we
ll o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
69
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
29637 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 99 / Wednesday, May 21, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
18 Estimates based on a 7 percent discount rate. 
All results reported in this analysis are cost- 
beneficial at a 7 percent discount rate; using a 3 
percent rate would make them even more so, with 
a present value net benefit of about $836 million 
from 2009–2019 for JFK and $859 million from 
2009–2019 for Newark. 
19 The slots auctioned in January 2009 under both 
alternatives would become available beginning in 
the summer season of 2009. Until that time, the air 
carrier that formerly held the Limited Slot could 
continue to use it. 
20 GRA, Incorporated ‘‘Economic Values for FAA 
Investment and Regulatory Decisions, A Guide,’’ 
prepared for FAA Office of Aviation Policy and 
Plans, (October 3, 2007). Passenger value of time is 
for ‘‘all purposes,’’ reflecting a mix of business and 
leisure travel. 
auctions is between $256 million and 
$267 million at JFK and between $207 
million and 218 million at Newark from 
2009 to 2019. The costs of the rule, with 
a present value between $11 and $22 
million each at JFK and Newark, are due 
to the design, implementation and 
participation in an auction of slots. 
These costs assume that the full cost of 
setting up the auction mechanism and 
participating in the auctions are 
individually borne at each airport; in 
fact, if auctions are conducted at more 
than one airport in the New York area, 
the costs of the setting up and 
participating in the auctions could be 
shared among the users of the airports 
and would be lower on a per airport 
basis. 
This regulatory impact analysis 
assumes as a baseline that in the 
absence of this rulemaking, the FAA 
would not otherwise impose long-term 
caps on aircraft operations at JFK and 
Newark. Therefore, the FAA estimates 
that, through the long-term 
implementation of a cap on aircraft 
operations, this proposed rule would 
result in about a 25 percent reduction in 
the average delay per operation at JFK 
relative to a situation with no cap. After 
allowing for the lost consumer and 
producer surplus due to a reduction in 
air service caused by the caps, the net 
value of the savings in average delay 
attributable to the cap generates a 
present value net benefit of about $686 
million from 2009 to 2019. At Newark, 
this proposed rule would result in about 
a 23 percent reduction in the average 
delay per operation at Newark relative 
to a situation with no cap, generating a 
present value net benefit (after 
deducting lost producer and consumer 
surplus from reductions in air service) 
of about $705 million from 2009– 
2019.18 The benefits are estimated by 
comparing the no-rule scenario (similar 
to the situation at JFK and Newark in 
August 2007) with the proposed cap. 
Who Is Potentially Affected by This 
Rulemaking 
• Operators of scheduled and non- 
scheduled, domestic and international 
flights, and new entrants who do not yet 
operate at JFK and Newark. 
• All communities with air service to 
JFK and Newark. 
• Passengers of scheduled flights to 
JFK and Newark. 
• The Port Authority of New York 
and New Jersey, which operates the 
airport. 
Key Assumptions 
• Base Case: No operating 
authorizations or caps. 
• Cap on operations provides delay 
improvement. 
• Alternative 1: 100 percent of slots 
held by a carrier with fewer than 21 
slots at either JFK or Newark would be 
reassigned to the carrier with 10 years 
of life; for holders with 21 or more slots 
at either airport, 100 percent of the first 
20 slots at each airport would 
reassigned to the carrier with leases of 
10 years and 90 percent of slots above 
the 20 slot base for the carrier would be 
reassigned to the carrier with leases of 
10 years. Ten percent of slots above the 
20 slot base would be designated as 
Limited Slots and would be auctioned: 
one-fifth immediately upon the 
implementation of the rule.19 The 
remaining four-fifths of the Limited 
Slots would be assigned to the carrier 
which held them previously, but with 
leases of 1 to 4 years of life. The FAA 
would auction the Limited Slots to the 
highest bidder in annual auctions 
beginning in January 2009 and ending 
in January 2013. FAA would use the net 
revenues of the annual auctions to 
invest in capacity in the New York area. 
• Alternative 2: For JFK, 100 percent 
of slots held by carriers with fewer than 
21 slots at JFK would be reassigned to 
the carrier with leases of 10 years; for 
holders with 21 or more slots, 100 
percent of the first 20 slots would be 
reassigned to the carrier with leases of 
10 years and 80 percent of slots above 
the 20 slot base for the carrier would be 
reassigned to the carrier with leases of 
10 years. Twenty percent of slots above 
the 20 slot base would be designated as 
Limited Slots and would be auctioned: 
one-fifth immediately upon the 
implementation of the rule. The 
remaining four-fifths of the Limited 
Slots would be assigned to the carrier 
which held them previously, but with 
leases of 1 to 4 years of life. The FAA 
would auction the Limited Slots to the 
highest bidder in annual auctions 
beginning in January 2009 and ending 
in January 2013. Carriers at JFK could 
not bid on slots they formerly held but 
would retain the net revenues generated 
by the sale of the former leases. As 
Newark would be treated the same 
under either approach, the key 
assumptions for Newark are the same as 
under Alternative 1. 
• For the purposes of this evaluation, 
the effective date is 12/01/08. 
Other Important Assumptions 
• Discount Rate—3 and 7 percent in 
real (net of inflation) terms. 
• Period of Analysis: 2009 to 2019. 
• Assumes 2008 constant year (real) 
dollars. 
• Passenger Value of Travel Time— 
$28.60 per hour at JFK and Newark.20 
Alternatives We Have Considered 
• No Action: This alternative would 
let the current orders restricting 
operations at JFK and Newark expire on 
October 24, 2009 without replacing the 
limitations. The FAA expects that, 
without caps, air carriers would expand 
flight operations at these two airports to 
levels equal to or exceeding those 
experienced in the summer of 2007, 
causing increasingly severe delays at 
these airports and throughout the 
National Airspace System (NAS). 
• Caps: This alternative would 
permanently impose caps at 81 
scheduled operations per hour each at 
JFK and Newark, plus up to two 
unscheduled operations per hour at 
each airport, every day from 6 a.m. to 
10:59 p.m.; it would grandfather current 
holders of operating authorizations to 
operate at the airports. 
• Alternative 1: This alternative 
would institute caps at both JFK and 
Newark as described above and 
reallocate 10 percent of eligible capacity 
via five annual auctions beginning in 
January 2009. The FAA would retain the 
net proceeds of the auctions for use on 
congestion and delay management 
initiatives in the New York City area. 
• Alternative 2: This alternative 
would institute caps at JFK as above and 
reallocate 20 percent of eligible slots at 
JFK, via five annual auctions beginning 
in January 2009. The carrier holding a 
slot to be reallocated would not be able 
to bid on its own slots, but would retain 
the net auction proceeds. Under 
alternative 2, the regime of Newark 
would be the same as in alternative 1. 
We are requesting comment from 
industry on the range of alternatives 
considered. 
Benefits of This Rulemaking 
The primary benefits of this 
rulemaking would be due to the delay 
reduction from the caps on operations 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 15:15 May 20, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00013 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\21MYP3.SGM 21MYP3cp
ric
e-
se
we
ll o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
69
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
29638 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 99 / Wednesday, May 21, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
and an improvement in the efficiency of 
allocation of scarce slot resources 
through the use of an auction 
mechanism and secondary slot 
subleasing markets characterized by 
clearly defined property rights. 
Costs of This Rulemaking 
The major costs of this proposed rule 
are the costs to the public and private 
sectors of designing, implementing and 
participating in the auction. 
Additionally, the implementation of 
caps under this rulemaking will lead to 
a reduction in flights into JFK and 
Newark compared to what would occur 
without the caps. The FAA has 
estimated the value of these scheduled 
flight reductions and has deducted them 
from the delay benefits of the caps at 
each airport to calculate overall net 
benefits of the caps. FAA specifically 
requests comment on the impacts from 
the reduction in scheduled flights. 
Paperwork Reduction Act 
This proposal contains the following 
new information collection 
requirements. As required by the 
Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 (44 
U.S.C. 3507(d)), the FAA has submitted 
the information requirements associated 
with this proposal to the Office of 
Management and Budget for its review. 
Some of the information requirements 
in today’s notice are similar to those 
originally proposed in the SNPRM 
‘‘Congestion Management Rule for 
LaGuardia Airport’’ (Docket No. FAA– 
2006–25707; Notice No. 08–04). The 
FAA has applied these requirements 
and summarized them below. 
Title: Congestion Management Rule 
for John F. Kennedy International 
Airport and Newark Liberty 
International Airport. 
Summary: The FAA proposes to 
grandfather the majority of operations at 
JFK and Newark and develop a 
secondary market by annually 
auctioning off a limited number of slots 
at each airport. This proposal also 
contains provisions for use-or-lose and 
withdrawal for operational need. The 
FAA proposes to sunset the rule in ten 
years. More information on the 
proposed requirements is detailed 
elsewhere in today’s notice. 
Use of: The information is reported to 
the FAA by scheduled operators holding 
slots at JFK and Newark. The FAA logs, 
verifies, and processes the requests 
made by the operators. 
This information is used to allocate, 
track usage, withdraw, and confirm 
transfers of slots among the operators 
and facilitates the transfer of slots in the 
secondary market. The FAA also uses 
this information in order to maintain an 
accurate accounting of operations to 
ensure compliance with the operations 
permitted under the rule and those 
actually conducted at the airports. 
Respondents: The respondents to the 
proposed information requirements in 
today’s notice are scheduled carriers 
with existing service at JFK and Newark, 
carriers that plan to enter the JFK and 
Newark markets (by auction or 
secondary market), and carriers that 
enter the JFK and Newark market in the 
future. There are currently seventy- 
seven (77) carriers with existing 
scheduled service at JFK and thirty-nine 
(39) carriers with existing scheduled 
service at Newark. Various carriers 
included in these totals have service at 
both airports. 
Frequency: The information collection 
requirements of the rule involve 
scheduled carriers notifying the FAA of 
their use of slots. Each carrier must 
notify the FAA of its: (1) Designation of 
50 percent of its Limited Slots, if 
applicable; (2) request for confirmation 
to sublease slots; (3) consent to transfer 
slots under the transferring Carrier’s 
marketing control; (4) requests for 
confirmation of one-for-one slot trades; 
(5) slot usage (operations); and (6) 
request for assignment of slots available 
on a temporary basis. 
Annual Burden Estimate: The annual 
reporting burden for each subsection of 
the rule is presented below. Annual 
burden estimates presented in today’s 
notice are based on burden estimates 
from the SNPRM ‘‘Congestion 
Management Rule for LaGuardia 
Airport’’ (Docket No. FAA–2006–25709; 
Notice No. 08–04). 
The burden is calculated by the 
following formula: 
Annual Hourly Burden = (# of 
respondents) * (time involved) * 
(frequency of the response). 
Section 93.164(c)(2) Categories of 
Slots: A Carrier Shall Designate 50 
Percent of Its Limited Slots 
JFK 
(4 carriers with Limited Slots) * (80 
hours per submittal) = 320 hours. 
Based on the current allocation of 
Operating Authorizations and the 
proposed level of baseline operations 
each carrier would be grandfathered 
under today’s proposal, we assumed the 
four carriers with the most operations at 
JFK would expend up to 10 days of 
planning time each, potentially 80 
hours, to develop and submit their 
designations of 50 percent of their 
Limited Slots, for a total of 320 hours. 
This designation would occur once, 10 
days after the final rule effective date. 
Newark 
(1 carrier) * (240 hours per submittal) = 
240 hours. 
(5 carriers) * (80 hours per submittal) = 
400 hours. 
Total Annual Hourly Burden = 640 
hours. 
Based on the projected allocation of 
Operating Authorizations and the 
proposed level of baseline operations 
each carrier would be grandfathered 
under today’s proposal, we assumed 
that one carrier, Continental Airlines, 
with the most operations at Newark 
would expend up to 30 days of planning 
time, potentially 240 hours, to develop 
and submit its designation of 50 percent 
of its Limited Slots. The remaining five 
carriers required to designate Limited 
Slots would each expend up to 10 days 
of planning time, potentially 80 hours 
each, to develop and submit their 
designation of 50 percent of their 
Limited Slots. These five carriers would 
therefore need 400 hours. In total, the 
six carriers at Newark required to 
designate Limited Slots would require 
640 hours of effort to make the 
designation. This designation would 
occur once, 10 days after the final rule 
effective date. 
Section 93.165(c) Initial Assignment of 
Slots 
We assumed that the 77 carriers 
operating at JFK and 39 carriers 
operating at Newark would expend time 
submitting and collecting information to 
participate in the proposed auctions for 
slot assignments. The FAA is currently 
in the process of procuring auction 
software and services. The FAA will 
make available burden estimates for 
information requirements relating to 
auction participation in a separate 
notice. 
Section 93.166(b)–(c) Assignment of 
New or Returned Slots 
We made no assumptions about 
additional workload for carriers at either 
airport associated with the IATA-like 
administrative process for assigning 
new or returned slots. Workload would 
vary depending on how many (if any) 
new or returned slots were to develop 
at either airport over the 10 year period 
of the proposed rule. In any case, 
carriers are already familiar with and 
use IATA-like allocation methods and 
would handle them in the course of 
normal operations at JFK and Newark. 
Section 93.168(b), (d), (f) Sublease and 
Transfer of Slots 
JFK 
(18 carriers) * (1.5 hours per submittal) 
* (4 occurrences per year) = 108 
hours. 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 15:15 May 20, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00014 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\21MYP3.SGM 21MYP3cp
ric
e-
se
we
ll o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
69
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
29639 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 99 / Wednesday, May 21, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
(59 carriers) * (1.5 hours per submittal) 
* (2 occurrences per year) = 177 
hours. 
Total Annual Hourly Burden = 285 
hours. 
Based on burden estimates from 
‘‘Congestion Management Rule for 
LaGuardia Airport,’’ we assumed the 77 
carriers operating at JFK would expend 
11⁄2 hours for each occurrence of a lease 
or transfer of a slot. For each operator 
with 6 or more slots (18 carriers total), 
we assumed that a lease or transfer of a 
slot would occur on average quarterly. 
For each operator with fewer than 6 
slots (59 carriers total), we assumed that 
a lease or transfer of a slot would occur 
on average biannually. The total annual 
hourly burden for all carriers 
collectively would be 285 hours. 
Newark 
(1 carrier) * (1.5 hours per submittal) * 
(16 occurrences per year) = 24 hours. 
(12 carriers) * (1.5 hours per submittal) 
* (4 occurrences per year) = 72 hours. 
(26 carriers) * (1.5 hours per submittal) 
* (2 occurrences per year) = 78 hours. 
Total Annual Hourly Burden = 174 
hours. 
As with JFK, we assumed the 39 
carriers operating at Newark would 
expend 1/1⁄2 hours for each occurrence 
of a lease or transfer of a slot. For the 
largest operator, we assumed that a lease 
or transfer of 4 slots would occur on 
average quarterly. For those operators at 
Newark with 6 or more slots (12 carriers 
total, excluding Continental Airlines), 
we assumed that a lease or transfer of a 
slot would occur on average quarterly. 
For each operator with fewer than 6 
slots (26 carriers total), we assumed that 
a lease or transfer of a slot would occur 
on average biannually. The total annual 
hourly burden for all carriers 
collectively would be 174 hours. 
Section 93.169(b), (d) One-for-One 
Trades of Slots 
JFK 
(18 carriers) * (1.5 hours per submittal) 
* (4 occurrences per year) = 108 
hours. 
(59 carriers) * (1.5 hours per submittal) 
* (2 occurrences per year) = 177 
hours. 
Total Annual Hourly Burden = 285 
hours. 
Based on burden estimates from 
‘‘Congestion Management Rule for 
LaGuardia Airport,’’ we assumed the 77 
carriers operating at JFK would expend 
11⁄2 hours for each occurrence of a one- 
for-one trade of a slot. For each operator 
with 6 or more slots (18 carriers total), 
we assumed that a one-for-one slot trade 
would occur on average quarterly. For 
each operator with fewer than 6 slots 
(59 carriers total), we assumed that a 
one-for-one slot trade would occur on 
average biannually. The total annual 
hourly burden would be 285 hours. 
Newark 
(1 carrier) * (1.5 hours per submittal) * 
(16 occurrences per year) = 24 hours. 
(12 carriers) * (1.5 hours per submittal) 
* (4 occurrences per year) = 72 hours. 
(26 carriers) * (1.5 hours per submittal) 
* (2 occurrences per year) = 78 hours. 
Total Annual Hourly Burden = 174 
hours. 
As with JFK, we assumed the 39 
carriers operating at Newark would 
expend 11⁄2 hours for each occurrence of 
a one-for-one trade of a slot. For the 
largest operator, we assumed that a one- 
for-one trade of 4 slots would occur on 
average quarterly. For those operators at 
Newark with 6 or more slots (12 carriers 
total, excluding Continental Airlines), 
we assumed that a one-for-one slot trade 
would occur on average quarterly. For 
each operator with fewer than 6 slots 
(26 carriers total), we assumed that a 
one-for-one slot trade would occur on 
average biannually. The total annual 
hourly burden would be 174 hours. 
Section 93.171 Unscheduled 
Operations 
This section of the proposed rule 
requires unscheduled and public charter 
operations at JFK and Newark to be 
reserved using the Airport Reservation 
Office (ARO) or, for public charters 
seeking reservations up to six months in 
advance, through the Slot 
Administration Office. It is the FAA’s 
intention, however, to require these 
reservation procedures at JFK and 
Newark regardless of and apart from the 
outcome of this rulemaking. 
Accordingly, the FAA will make 
available burden estimates relating to 
unscheduled and public charter 
operations in a separate rulemaking 
notice. 
Section 93.172(a)–(b) Reporting 
Requirements 
JFK 
(77 carriers) * (1.5 hours per submittal) 
* (4 occurrences per year) = 462 
hours. 
Based on burden estimates from the 
‘‘Congestion Management Rule for 
LaGuardia Airport’’ (Docket No. FAA– 
2006–25709; Notice No. 08–04), we 
assumed the 77 carriers operating at JFK 
would expend, on average, 11⁄2 hours 
two times per summer and winter 
season to submit the data required by 
§ 93.172. 
Newark 
(39 carriers) * (1.5 hours per submittal) 
* (4 occurrences per year) = 234 
hours. 
Based on burden estimates from the 
‘‘Congestion Management Rule for 
LaGuardia Airport’’ (Docket No. FAA– 
2006–25709; Notice No. 08–04), we 
assumed the 39 carriers operating at 
Newark would expend, on average, 11⁄2 
hours every two months to submit the 
data required by § 93.172. 
Summary 
JFK 
Total First Year Hourly Burden—320 
Hours. 
Total Recurring Annual Hourly 
Burden (per year for 10 years)—1,032 
Hours. 
Newark 
Total First Year Hourly Burden—640 
Hours. 
Total Recurring Annual Hourly 
Burden (per year for 10 years)—582 
Hours. 
The burden estimates for JFK and 
Newark do not include the time 
required to participate in the annual 
auctions. The FAA will make available 
burden estimates for information 
requirements relating to auction 
participation in a separate notice. 
The agency is soliciting comments 
to— 
(1) Evaluate whether the proposed 
information requirements are necessary 
for the proper performance of the 
functions of the agency, including 
whether the information will have 
practical utility; 
(2) Evaluate the agency’s estimate of 
the burden; 
(3) Enhance the quality, utility, and 
clarity of the information to be 
collected; and 
(4) Minimize the burden of the 
collection of information on those who 
are to respond, including through the 
use of appropriate automated, 
electronic, mechanical, or other 
technological collection techniques or 
other forms of information technology. 
Individuals and organizations may 
submit comments on the information 
collection requirement by July 21, 2008, 
and should direct them to the address 
listed in the ADDRESSES section of this 
document. Comments also should be 
submitted to the Office of Information 
and Regulatory Affairs, OMB, via 
facsimile at (202) 395–6974, Attention: 
Desk Officer for FAA. 
According to the 1995 amendments to 
the Paperwork Reduction Act (5 CFR 
1320.8(b)(2)(vi)), an agency may not 
collect or sponsor the collection of 
information, nor may it impose an 
information collection requirement 
unless it displays a currently valid OMB 
control number. The OMB control 
number for this information collection 
will be published in the Federal 
Register, after the Office of Management 
and Budget approves it. 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 15:15 May 20, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00015 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\21MYP3.SGM 21MYP3cp
ric
e-
se
we
ll o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
69
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
29640 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 99 / Wednesday, May 21, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
Regulatory Flexibility Determination 
The Regulatory Flexibility Act of 1980 
(RFA) establishes ‘‘as a principle of 
regulatory issuance that agencies shall 
endeavor, consistent with the objective 
of the rule and of applicable statutes, to 
fit regulatory and informational 
requirements to the scale of the 
business, organizations, and 
governmental jurisdictions subject to 
regulation.’’ To achieve that principle, 
the RFA requires agencies to solicit and 
consider flexible regulatory proposals 
and to explain the rationale for their 
actions. The RFA covers a wide range of 
small entities, including small 
businesses, not-for-profit organizations, 
and small governmental jurisdictions. 
Agencies must perform a review to 
determine whether a proposed or final 
rule would have a significant economic 
impact on a substantial number of small 
entities. If the agency determines that it 
would, the agency must prepare a 
regulatory flexibility analysis as 
described in the Act. 
However, if an agency determines that 
a proposed or final rule is not expected 
to have a significant economic impact 
on a substantial number of small 
entities, § 605(b) of the 1980 RFA 
provides that the head of the agency 
may so certify and a regulatory 
flexibility analysis is not required. The 
certification must include a statement 
providing the factual basis for this 
determination, and the reasoning should 
be clear. The basis for such FAA 
determination follows. 
The proposed rule most directly 
affects four scheduled operators at JFK 
(Delta Air Lines, JetBlue Airways, 
American Airlines, and United Airlines) 
and five scheduled operators at Newark 
(Continental Airlines, American 
Airlines, United Airlines, Delta Air 
Lines, and U.S. Airways). These carriers 
would receive one or more Limited 
Slots. None of these carriers are small 
businesses. However, the FAA 
considered that some small regional 
operators affiliated with these carriers 
and using slots provided by these 
carriers could be affected. Based on a 
review of the number of employees for 
each scheduled operator, the FAA found 
that only two scheduled operators 
(CommutAir and EOS Airlines) at JFK, 
and none at Newark, are considered 
small by Small Business Administration 
size standards (in this case, firms with 
1,500 or fewer employees). Of the two 
scheduled operators at JFK, CommutAir 
operates under the name Continental 
Connection for Continental Airlines. 
Continental Airlines has fewer than 20 
operations per day at JFK and therefore 
neither it nor CommutAir is affected by 
this rule. 
Using Enhanced Traffic Management 
System (ETMS) data, the FAA has 
determined that there are approximately 
54 identifiable unscheduled operators at 
JFK and 61 identifiable unscheduled 
operators at Newark who could be 
affected by this rule. While some of 
these operators may be small 
businesses, the FAA does not believe 
they will be significantly impacted by 
this rulemaking. These operators 
typically have greater flexibility to 
adjust operations and carry out very few 
operations during peak hours compared 
to scheduled operators. During peak 
hours in the summer of 2007, there were 
fewer than two average unscheduled 
operations per hour at each airport, 
whereas the proposed rule would allow 
1 to 2 operations per hour. Section 
93.171(g) of subpart N and § 93.191(g) of 
subpart O enables the FAA to determine 
that additional reservations may be 
accommodated for a specific time 
period, and allows unused slots to be 
available temporarily for unscheduled 
operations. In summary, while the 
proposed rule reduces the number of 
unscheduled operations per hour, it 
does not significantly affect the overall 
number of current unscheduled 
operations that take place at each 
airport. 
Using 2007 Census data, the FAA has 
also reviewed whether there would be 
interruptions to service to communities 
with a population of less than 50,000. 
We do not know if there will be any 
service interruptions as a result of the 
rule. We have reviewed population 
statistics for every city served from JFK 
and Newark in August 2007 (the base 
for initial allocation of slots under the 
proposal) and found none with a 
population of less 50,000. 
Therefore, the FAA certifies that this 
proposed rule would not have a 
significant economic impact on a 
substantial number of small entities. 
International Trade Impact Assessment 
The Trade Agreements Act of 1979 
(Pub. L. 96–39), as amended by the 
Uruguay Round Agreements Act (Pub. 
L. 103–465), prohibits Federal agencies 
from establishing any standards or 
engaging in related activities that create 
unnecessary obstacles to the foreign 
commerce of the United States. 
Pursuant to these Acts, the 
establishment of standards or engaging 
in related activities is not considered as 
creating unnecessary obstacles to the 
foreign commerce of the United States, 
so long as the standards and activities 
have a legitimate domestic objective, 
such the protection of safety, and do not 
operate in a manner that excludes 
imports that meet this objective. The 
statute also requires consideration of 
international standards and, where 
appropriate, that they be the basis for 
U.S. standards. The FAA notes the 
proposed rule to establish slots and 
limited auctions of slot leases at JFK and 
Newark is necessary for the efficient 
utilization of the national airspace 
system, and has assessed the effects of 
this rulemaking to ensure that the final 
rule, if adopted, would not impose costs 
or barriers to international entities 
within the national airspace system. 
Foreign entities at both JFK and 
Newark would not have any slots 
classified as Limited Slots under either 
alternative 1 or 2 under the terms of 
§ 93.164 of subpart N and § 93.184 of 
subpart O of the proposed rule. Foreign 
carriers might benefit from the rule if 
they choose to participate in the 
proposed auction to acquire additional 
slots or to sublease slots in the 
secondary market. 
Unfunded Mandate Assessment 
The Unfunded Mandate Reform Act of 
1995 (the Act) is intended, among other 
things, to curb the practice of imposing 
unfunded Federal mandates on State, 
local, and tribal governments. Title II of 
the Act requires each Federal agency to 
prepare a written statement assessing 
the effects of any Federal mandate in a 
proposed or final agency rule that may 
result in an expenditure of $100 million 
or more (adjusted annually for inflation) 
in any one year by State, local, and 
tribal governments, in the aggregate, or 
by the private sector; such a mandate is 
deemed to be a ‘‘significant regulatory 
action.’’ The FAA currently uses an 
inflation-adjusted value of $136.1 
million in lieu of $100 million. This 
final rule does not contain such a 
mandate. The requirements of Title II do 
not apply. 
Executive Order 13132, Federalism 
The FAA has analyzed this proposed 
rule under the principles and criteria of 
Executive Order 13132, Federalism. We 
determined that this action would not 
have a substantial direct effect on the 
States, on the relationship between the 
national Government and the States, or 
on the distribution of power and 
responsibilities among the various 
levels of government, and, therefore, 
would not have federalism implications. 
Environmental Analysis 
FAA Order 1050.1E, ‘‘Environmental 
Impacts: Policies and Procedures’’ 
identifies FAA actions that are normally 
categorically excluded from preparation 
of an environmental assessment or 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 15:15 May 20, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00016 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\21MYP3.SGM 21MYP3cp
ric
e-
se
we
ll o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
69
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
29641 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 99 / Wednesday, May 21, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
environmental impact statement under 
the National Environmental Policy Act 
(NEPA) in the absence of extraordinary 
circumstances. The FAA has 
determined that this rulemaking 
qualifies for the categorical exclusions 
identified in paragraph 312d ‘‘Issuance 
of regulatory documents (e.g., Notices of 
Proposed Rulemaking and issuance of 
Final Rules) covering administration or 
procedural requirements (does not 
include Air Traffic procedures; specific 
Air traffic procedures that are 
categorically excluded are identified 
under paragraph 311 of this Order)’’ and 
paragraph 312f, ‘‘Regulations, standards, 
and exemptions (excluding those which 
if implemented may cause a significant 
impact on the human environment.)’’ It 
has further been determined that no 
extraordinary circumstances exist that 
may cause a significant impact and 
therefore no further environmental 
review is required. The FAA has 
documented this categorical exclusion 
determination. A copy of the 
determination and underlying 
documents has been included in the 
Docket for this rulemaking. 
Regulations That Significantly Affect 
Energy Supply, Distribution, or Use 
The FAA has analyzed this NPRM 
under Executive Order 13211, Actions 
Concerning Regulations that 
Significantly Affect Energy Supply, 
Distribution, or Use (May 18, 2001). We 
have determined that it is not a 
‘‘significant energy action’’ under the 
executive order because it is not a 
‘‘significant regulatory action’’ under 
Executive Order 12866, and it is not 
likely to have a significant adverse effect 
on the supply, distribution, or use of 
energy. 
Additional Information 
Comments Invited: The FAA invites 
interested persons to participate in this 
rulemaking by submitting written 
comments, data, or views. We also 
invite comments relating to the 
economic, environmental, energy or 
federalism impacts that might result 
from adopting the proposals in this 
document. The most helpful comments 
reference a specific portion of the 
proposal, explain the reason for any 
recommended change, and include 
supporting data. To ensure the docket 
does not contain duplicate comments, 
please send only one copy of written 
comments, or if you are filing comments 
electronically, please submit your 
comments only one time. 
We will file in the docket all 
comments we receive, as well as a 
report summarizing each substantive 
public contact with FAA personnel 
concerning this proposed rulemaking. 
Before acting on this proposal, we will 
consider all comments we receive on or 
before the closing date for comments. 
We will consider comments filed after 
the comment period has closed if it is 
possible to do so without incurring 
expense or delay. We may change this 
proposal in light of the comments we 
receive. 
Proprietary or Confidential Business 
Information 
Do not file in the docket information 
that you consider to be proprietary or 
confidential business information. Send 
or deliver this information directly to 
the person identified in the FOR FURTHER 
INFORMATION CONTACT section of this 
document. You must mark the 
information that you consider 
proprietary or confidential. If you send 
the information on a disk or CD ROM, 
mark the outside of the disk or CD ROM 
and also identify electronically within 
the disk or CD ROM the specific 
information that is proprietary or 
confidential. 
Under 14 CFR 11.35(b), when we are 
aware of proprietary information filed 
with a comment, we do not place it in 
the docket. We hold it in a separate file 
to which the public does not have 
access, and we place a note in the 
docket that we have received it. If we 
receive a request to examine or copy 
this information, we treat it as any other 
request under the Freedom of 
Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552). We 
process such a request under the DOT 
procedures found in 49 CFR part 7. 
Availability of Rulemaking Documents 
You can get an electronic copy of 
rulemaking documents using the 
Internet by— 
1. Searching the Federal eRulemaking 
Portal (http://www.regulations.gov); 
2. Visiting the FAA’s Regulations and 
Policies Web page at http:// 
www.faa.gov/regulations_policies/; or 
3. Accessing the Government Printing 
Office’s Web page at http:// 
www.gpoaccess.gov/fr/index.html. 
You can also get a copy by sending a 
request to the Federal Aviation 
Administration, Office of Rulemaking, 
ARM–1, 800 Independence Avenue 
SW., Washington, DC 20591, or by 
calling (202) 267–9680. Make sure to 
identify the docket number, notice 
number, or amendment number of this 
rulemaking. 
You may access all documents the 
FAA considered in developing this 
proposed rule, including economic 
analyses and technical reports, from the 
internet through the Federal 
eRulemaking Portal referenced in 
paragraph (1). 
List of Subjects in 14 CFR Part 93 
Air traffic control, Airports, 
Navigation (air). 
Proposed Regulatory Text 
In consideration of the foregoing, the 
Federal Aviation Administration 
proposes to amend Chapter I of Title 14, 
Code of Federal Regulations, as follows: 
PART 93—SPECIAL AIR TRAFFIC 
RULES 
1. The authority citation for part 93 
continues to read as follows: 
Authority: 49 U.S.C. 106(g), 40103, 40106, 
40109, 40113, 44502, 44514, 44701, 44719, 
46301. 
Proposed Amendment—Alternative 1 
2. Subpart N is added to read as 
follows: 
Subpart N—John F. Kennedy 
International Airport and Newark 
Liberty International Airport Traffic 
Rules 
Sec. 
93.161 Applicability. 
93.162 Definitions. 
93.163 Slots for scheduled arrivals and 
departures. 
93.164 Categories of slots. 
93.165 Initial assignment of slots. 
93.166 Assignment of new or returned slots. 
93.167 Reversion and withdrawal of slots. 
93.168 Sublease and transfer of slots. 
93.169 One-for-one trade of slots. 
93.170 Minimum usage requirements. 
93.171 Unscheduled operations. 
93.172 Reporting requirements. 
93.173 Administrative provisions. 
Subpart N—John F. Kennedy 
International Airport and Newark 
Liberty International Airport Traffic 
Rules 
§ 93.161 Applicability. 
(a) This subpart prescribes the air 
traffic rules for the arrival and departure 
of aircraft used for scheduled and 
unscheduled service, other than 
helicopters, at John F. Kennedy 
International Airport (JFK) and Newark 
Liberty International Airport (Newark). 
(b) This subpart also prescribes 
procedures for the assignment, transfer, 
sublease and withdrawal of Slots issued 
by the FAA for scheduled operations at 
JFK and Newark. 
(c) The provisions of this subpart 
apply to JFK and Newark during the 
hours of 6 a.m. through 10:59 p.m., 
Eastern Time. No person shall operate 
any scheduled arrival or departure into 
or out of JFK or Newark during such 
hours without first obtaining a Slot in 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 15:15 May 20, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00017 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\21MYP3.SGM 21MYP3cp
ric
e-
se
we
ll o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
69
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
29642 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 99 / Wednesday, May 21, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
accordance with this subpart. No person 
shall conduct an Unscheduled 
Operation to or from JFK or Newark 
during such hours without first 
obtaining a Reservation. 
(d) A U.S. Air Carrier conducting 
operations solely under another 
Carrier’s marketing control with unified 
inventory control shall not be 
considered a separate Carrier for 
purposes of this subpart. 
(e) The Slots assigned under this 
subpart terminate at 11 p.m. on March 
30, 2019. 
§ 93.162 Definitions. 
For purposes of this subpart, the 
following definitions apply: 
Airport Reservation Office (ARO) is an 
operational unit of the FAA’s David J. 
Hurley Air Traffic Control System 
Command Center. It is responsible for 
the administration of reservations for 
unscheduled operations at JFK and 
Newark. 
Baseline Operations are those 
common slots held by a carrier at JFK 
or Newark on [final rule effective date], 
that do not exceed 20 operations per 
day. 
Carrier is a U.S. or foreign air carrier 
with authority to conduct scheduled 
service under parts 121, 129, or 135 of 
this chapter and the appropriate 
economic authority for scheduled 
service under 14 CFR chapter II and 49 
U.S.C. chapter 411. 
Common Slot (C-slot) is a slot that is 
assigned by the FAA as a lease under its 
cooperative agreement authority for the 
length of this rule. 
Enhanced Computer Voice 
Reservation System (e-CVRS) is the 
system used by the FAA to make arrival 
and/or departure reservations for 
unscheduled operations at JFK, Newark, 
and other designated airports. 
Limited Slot (L-slot) is a slot operated 
every day, the lease for which expires 
prior to the expiration of this rule for 
subsequent award by the FAA as an 
unrestricted slot. 
New Entrant is any carrier that is 
administratively allocated a total of 8 or 
fewer slots at JFK or Newark, 
respectively, during controlled hours at 
any point during the duration of the 
rule. 
Public Charter is defined in 14 CFR 
380.2 as a one-way or roundtrip charter 
flight to be performed by one or more 
direct air carriers that is arranged and 
sponsored by a public charter operator. 
Public Charter Operator is defined in 
14 CFR 380.2 as a U.S. or foreign public 
charter operator. 
Reservation is an authorization 
received by a carrier or other operator of 
an aircraft, excluding helicopters, in 
accordance with procedures established 
by the FAA to operate an unscheduled 
arrival or departure on a particular day 
of the week during a specific 30-minute 
period. 
Scheduled Operation is the arrival or 
departure segment of any operation 
regularly conducted by a carrier 
between either JFK or Newark and 
another point regularly served by that 
carrier. 
Slot is the operational authority 
assigned by the FAA to a carrier to 
conduct one scheduled arrival or 
departure operation at JFK or Newark on 
a particular day of the week during a 
specific 30-minute period. 
Summer Scheduling Season begins on 
the last Sunday of March. 
Unrestricted Slot (U-slot) is a slot that 
is awarded to a carrier by the FAA via 
the auction of a lease. 
Unscheduled Operation is an arrival 
or departure segment of any operation 
that is not regularly conducted by a 
carrier or other operator of an aircraft, 
excluding helicopters, between JFK or 
Newark and another service point. The 
following types of carrier operations 
shall be considered unscheduled 
operations for the purposes of this 
subpart: Public, on-demand, and other 
charter flights; hired aircraft service; 
extra sections of scheduled flights; ferry 
flights; and other non-passenger flights. 
Winter Scheduling Season begins on 
the last Sunday in October. 
§ 93.163 Slots for scheduled arrivals and 
departures. 
(a) During the hours of 6 a.m. through 
10:59 p.m., Eastern Time, no person 
shall operate any scheduled arrival or 
departure into or out of JFK or Newark 
without first obtaining a Slot in 
accordance with this subpart. 
(b) Except as otherwise established by 
the FAA under paragraph (c) of this 
section, the number of Slots shall be 
limited to no more than eighty-one (81) 
per hour at JFK and eighty-one (81) per 
hour at Newark. At JFK, the number of 
Slots may not exceed 44 in any 30- 
minute period, and 81 in any 60-minute 
period. At Newark, the number of Slots 
may not exceed 44 in any 30-minute 
period and 81 in any 60-minute period. 
The number of arrival and departure 
Slots in any period may be adjusted by 
the FAA as necessary based on the 
actual or potential delays created by 
such number or other considerations 
relating to congestion, airfield capacity 
and the air traffic control system. 
(c) Notwithstanding paragraph (b) of 
this section, the Administrator may 
increase the number of Slots based on 
a review of the following: 
(1) The number of delays; 
(2) The length of delays; 
(3) On-time arrivals and departures; 
(4) The number of actual operations; 
(5) Runway utilization and capacity 
plans; and 
(6) Other factors relating to the 
efficient management of the National 
Airspace System. 
§ 93.164 Categories of slots. 
(a) General. Each Slot shall be 
designated as a Common Slot, Limited 
Slot or Unrestricted Slot and shall be 
assigned to the Carrier under a lease 
agreement. A lease for a Common or 
Limited Slot shall be awarded via a 
cooperative agreement. A lease for an 
Unrestricted Slot shall be awarded via 
an auction. 
(b) Common Slots. (1) All Slots within 
any Carrier’s Baseline Operations, as 
determined on [final rule effective date], 
shall be designated as Common Slots. 
(2) Ten percent of the Slots at JFK and 
Newark on [final rule effective date] not 
otherwise designated as Common Slots 
under paragraph (b)(1) of this section 
shall be designated as Limited Slots. All 
other Slots shall be designated as 
Common Slots. 
(c) Limited Slots. Those Slots assigned 
to a Carrier subject to return to the FAA 
under § 93.165(c) shall be designated as 
Limited Slots until the date of their 
reassignment by the FAA as 
Unrestricted Slots. A Carrier may 
continue to use a Limited Slot that has 
reverted to the FAA until the date of the 
auction. 
(1) Each Carrier with a total number 
of daily operations at JFK or Newark in 
excess of its Baseline Operations will be 
notified by [final rule effective date] 
how many of its Slots will be designated 
as Limited Slots pursuant to paragraphs 
(c)(2) and (3) of this section. 
(2) A Carrier shall designate 50 
percent of its Limited Slots. The Carrier 
must notify the FAA of its 
determination by [date 10 days after the 
final rule effective date]. 
(3) The FAA will designate the 
remaining Limited Slots initially 
excluding those hours in which two or 
more Slots have been designated as 
Limited Slots by the Carriers. 
(4) No later than [date 20 days after 
the final rule effective date], the FAA 
will publish a list of all Limited Slots 
and the dates upon which they will 
expire. 
(d) Unrestricted Slots. Unrestricted 
Slots are Slots acquired by a Carrier 
through a lease with the FAA awarded 
via an auction. Unrestricted Slots are 
not subject to withdrawal by the FAA. 
§ 93.165 Initial assignment of slots. 
(a) Except as provided for under 
paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section, 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 15:15 May 20, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00018 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\21MYP3.SGM 21MYP3cp
ric
e-
se
we
ll o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
69
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
29643 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 99 / Wednesday, May 21, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
any Carrier allocated operating rights 
under the Order limiting operations at 
JFK or the Order limiting operations at 
Newark as evidenced by the FAA’s 
records, will be assigned corresponding 
Slots in 30-minute periods consistent 
with the limits under § 93.163(b) and its 
summer and winter season schedules as 
approved by the FAA. If necessary, the 
FAA may utilize administrative 
measures such as voluntary measures or 
a lottery to re-time the assigned Slots 
within the same hour to meet the 30- 
minute limits under § 93.163(b). The 
FAA Vice President, System Operations 
Services, is the final decisionmaker for 
determinations under this section. 
(b) If a Carrier was allocated operating 
rights under the Order limiting 
operations at JFK or the Order limiting 
operations at Newark, but the operating 
rights were held by another Carrier, then 
the corresponding Slots will be assigned 
to the Carrier that held the operating 
rights for that period, as evidenced by 
the FAA’s records. 
(c) Starting [date 35 days after the 
effective date] and every year thereafter 
through 2013, one-fifth of the total 
number of Limited Slots shall revert to 
the FAA in accordance with the 
schedule published under § 93.164(c)(4) 
and be auctioned as Unrestricted Slots 
by the FAA. Any Slot receiving no 
responsive bids will be retired until the 
next auction. An affected Carrier will be 
allowed to use the Limited Slot until the 
effective date of an award to a Carrier 
as an Unrestricted Slot. 
§ 93.166 Assignment of new or returned 
slots. 
(a) This section describes the process 
by which the FAA assigns new Slots, as 
well as Slots returned to the FAA 
pursuant to the provisions of § 93.170. 
These Slots will be assigned by the FAA 
to requesting Carriers for the summer 
and winter scheduling seasons. 
(b) Requests for the new Slots or 
returned Slots or both must be 
submitted to the Federal Aviation 
Administration, Slot Administration 
Office, AGC–200, 800 Independence 
Avenue, SW., Washington, DC 20591 
(Facsimile: (202) 267–7277; e-mail: 7- 
awa-slotadmin@faa.gov), by the 
deadline as published by the FAA in a 
Federal Register notice for each 
Summer and Winter Scheduling Season. 
The requesting Carrier must submit its 
entire schedule at JFK and Newark for 
the particular season, noting which 
requests are in addition to, or changes 
from, the previous corresponding season 
at the respective airports. 
(c) Before assigning new or returned 
Slots under this section, the FAA will 
first accommodate Carrier requests to 
retime Slots for operational reasons or to 
bring the flight time closer to the time 
originally requested by the applicant 
Carrier in previous corresponding 
seasons, as reflected in FAA records. 
(d) After accommodating Carrier 
requests for retiming of Slots, the FAA 
will assign 50% of the new Slots and 
returned Slots to New Entrants, unless 
requests by New Entrants constitute 
fewer than 50% of available Slots. 
(e) With the remaining available Slots, 
if all requests for Slots under this 
section cannot be accommodated, the 
FAA will give priority to requests to 
introduce year-round service or to 
extend an existing operation to a year- 
round operation. 
(f) Thereafter, the FAA will assign 
Slots considering all relevant factors 
including: 
(1) The effective period of operation; 
(2) The extent and regularity of 
intended use of a Slot; 
(3) Schedule constraints of Carriers 
requesting Slots. 
§ 93.167 Reversion and withdrawal of 
slots. 
(a) This section does not apply to 
Unrestricted Slots. 
(b) A Carrier’s Common Slots or 
Limited Slots at JFK or Newark revert 
back to the FAA 30 days after the 
Carrier has ceased all operations at the 
respective airport(s) for any reasons 
other than a strike. 
(c) The FAA may retime, withdraw, or 
temporarily suspend Common Slots and 
Limited Slots at any time to fulfill 
operational needs. 
(d) Common Slots and Limited Slots 
will be withdrawn in accordance with 
the priority list established under 
§ 93.173 and international obligations. 
(e) Except as otherwise provided in 
paragraph (a) of this section, the FAA 
will notify an affected Carrier before 
withdrawing or temporarily suspending 
a Common Slot or Limited Slot and 
specify the date by which operations 
under the Common Slot or Limited Slot 
must cease. The FAA will provide at 
least 45 days’ notice unless otherwise 
required by operational needs. 
(f) Any Common Slot or Limited Slot 
that is temporarily withdrawn under 
this paragraph will be reassigned, if at 
all, only to the Carrier from which it 
was withdrawn, provided the Carrier 
continues to conduct Scheduled 
Operations at the respective airport. 
§ 93.168 Sublease and transfer of slots. 
(a) A Carrier may sublease its Slots to 
another Carrier in accordance with this 
section and subject to the provisions of 
the Carrier’s lease agreement with the 
FAA. 
(b) A Carrier must provide notice to 
the FAA to sublease a Slot. Such notice 
must contain: the Slot number and time, 
effective dates and, if appropriate, the 
duration of the lease. The Carrier may 
also provide the FAA with a minimum 
bid price. 
(c) The FAA will post a notice of the 
offer to sublease the Slot and relevant 
details on the FAA Web site at http:// 
www.faa.gov. An opening date, closing 
date and time by which bids must be 
received will be provided. 
(d) Upon consummation of the 
transaction, written evidence of each 
Carrier’s consent to sublease must be 
provided to the FAA, as well as all bids 
received and the terms of the sublease, 
including but not limited to: 
(1) The names of all bidders and all 
parties to the transaction; 
(2) The offered and final length of the 
sublease; 
(3) The consideration offered by all 
bidders and provided by the sublessee. 
(e) The Slot may not be used until the 
conditions of paragraph (d) of this 
section have been met, and the FAA 
provides notice of its approval of the 
sublease. 
(f) Slots may be transferred among a 
U.S. Air Carrier and another Carrier that 
conducts operations at JFK or Newark 
solely under the transferring Carrier’s 
marketing control, including the entire 
inventory of the flight. Each party to 
such transfer must provide written 
evidence of its consent to the transfer 
and the FAA must confirm and approve 
these transfers in writing prior to the 
effective date of the transaction. 
However, the FAA will approve 
transfers under this paragraph up to five 
business days after the actual operation 
to accommodate operational disruptions 
that occur on the same day of the 
scheduled operation. The FAA Vice 
President, System Operations Services 
is the final decision-maker for any 
determinations under this section. 
(g) A Carrier wishing to sublease a 
Slot via an FAA auction, rather than 
pursuant to this section, may do so. The 
Carrier shall retain the proceeds and the 
Slot shall retain the same designation 
that it had prior to the Carrier placing 
it up for auction. 
§ 93.169 One-for-one trade of slots. 
(a) A Carrier may trade a Slot with 
another Carrier on a one-for-one basis. 
(b) Written evidence of each Carrier’s 
consent to the trade must be provided 
to the FAA. 
(c) Each recipient of the trade may not 
use the acquired Slot until written 
confirmation has been received from the 
FAA. 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 15:15 May 20, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00019 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\21MYP3.SGM 21MYP3cp
ric
e-
se
we
ll o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
69
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
29644 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 99 / Wednesday, May 21, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
(d) Carriers participating in a one-for- 
one trade must certify to the FAA that 
no consideration or promise of 
consideration was provided by either 
party to the trade. 
§ 93.170 Minimum usage requirements. 
(a) This section does not apply to 
Unrestricted Slots. 
(b) Any Common Slot or Limited Slot 
included in a summer or winter season 
schedule approved by the FAA that is 
not used at least 80 percent of the time 
during the period for which it is 
assigned will be withdrawn by the FAA. 
(c) Paragraph (b) of this section does 
not apply to the first 90-day period after 
assignment of a Common Slot or 
Limited Slot through a sublease. 
(d) The FAA may waive the 
requirements of paragraph (b) of this 
section in the event of a highly unusual 
and unpredictable condition which is 
beyond the control of the Carrier and 
which affects Carrier operations for a 
period of five or more consecutive days. 
Examples of conditions which could 
justify a waiver under this paragraph are 
weather conditions that result in the 
restricted operation of the airport for an 
extended period of time or the 
grounding of an aircraft type. 
(e) The FAA will treat as used any 
Common Slot or Limited Slot held by a 
Carrier on Thanksgiving Day, the Friday 
following Thanksgiving Day, and the 
period from December 24 through the 
first Sunday of January. 
§ 93.171 Unscheduled operations. 
(a) During the hours of 6 a.m. through 
10:59 p.m. Eastern Time, no person may 
operate an aircraft other than a 
helicopter to or from JFK or Newark 
unless he or she has received, for that 
Unscheduled Operation, a Reservation 
that is assigned by the Airport 
Reservation Office (ARO) or in the case 
of Public Charters, in accordance with 
the procedures in paragraph (d) of this 
section. Requests for Reservations will 
be accepted through the e-CVRS 
beginning 72 hours prior to the 
proposed time of arrival to or departure 
from JFK or Newark. Additional 
information on procedures for obtaining 
a Reservation is available on the Internet 
at http://www.fly.faa.gov/ecvrs. 
(b) Reservations, including those 
assigned to Public Charter operations 
under paragraph (d) of this section, will 
be available to be assigned by the ARO 
on a 30-minute basis as follows: 
(1) At JFK, two Reservations per hour 
between 6 a.m. and 1:59 p.m. and 
between 10 p.m. and 10:59 p.m. and one 
Reservation per hour between 2 p.m. 
and 10:59 p.m. 
(2) At Newark, two Reservations per 
hour between 6 a.m. and 11:59 a.m. and 
between 10 p.m. and 10:59 p.m. and one 
Reservation per hour between 12 noon 
and 9:59 p.m. 
(c) The ARO will receive and process 
all Reservation requests for unscheduled 
arrivals and departures at JFK and 
Newark. Reservations are assigned on a 
‘‘first-come, first-served’’ basis 
determined by the time the request is 
received at the ARO. Reservations must 
be cancelled if they will not be used as 
assigned. 
(d) One Reservation per hour will be 
available for assignment to Public 
Charter operations prior to the 72-hour 
Reservation window in paragraph (a) of 
this section. No more than 25 percent of 
the Reservation available from 12 noon 
through 9:59 p.m. will be made 
available to Public Charter operations 
under this paragraph. 
(1) The Public Charter operator may 
request a reservation up to six months 
in advance of the date of the flight 
operation. Reservation requests should 
be submitted to Federal Aviation 
Administration, Slot Administration 
Office, AGC–200, 800 Independence 
Avenue, SW., Washington, DC 20591. 
Submissions may be made via facsimile 
to (202) 267–7277 or by e-mail to: 7- 
awa-slotadmin@faa.gov. 
(2) The Public Charter operator must 
certify that its prospectus has been 
accepted by the Department of 
Transportation in accordance with 14 
CFR part 380. 
(3) The Public Charter operator must 
identify the call sign/flight number or 
aircraft registration number of the direct 
Air Carrier, the date and time of the 
proposed operation(s), the airport 
served immediately prior to or after JFK 
or Newark, aircraft type, and the nature 
of the operation (e.g., ferry or 
passenger). Any changes to an approved 
Reservation must be approved in 
advance by the Slot Administration 
Office. 
(4) If Reservations under paragraph 
(d)(1) of this section have already been 
assigned, the Public Charter Operator 
may request a Reservation under 
paragraph (a) of this section. 
(e) The filing of a request for a 
Reservation does not constitute the 
filing of an IFR flight plan as required 
by regulation. The IFR flight plan may 
be filed only after the Reservation is 
obtained, must include the Reservation 
number in the ‘‘Remarks’’ section, and 
must be filed in accordance with FAA 
regulations and procedures. 
(f) Air Traffic Control will 
accommodate declared emergencies 
without regard to Reservations. Non- 
emergency flights in direct support of 
national security, law enforcement, 
military aircraft operations, or public- 
use aircraft operations may be 
accommodated above the Reservation 
limits with the prior approval of the 
Vice President, System Operations 
Services, Air Traffic Organization. 
Procedures for obtaining the appropriate 
waiver will be available on the Internet 
at http://www.fly.faa.gov/ecvrs. 
(g) Notwithstanding the limits in 
paragraph (b) of this section, if the Air 
Traffic Organization determines that air 
traffic control, weather and capacity 
conditions are favorable and significant 
delay is unlikely, the FAA may 
determine that additional Reservations 
may be accommodated for a specific 
time period. Unused Slots may also be 
made available temporarily for 
unscheduled operations. Reservations 
for additional operations must be 
obtained through the ARO. 
(h) Reservations may not be bought, 
sold or leased. 
§ 93.172 Reporting requirements. 
(a) No later than September 1 for the 
summer scheduling season and 
February 1 for the winter scheduling 
season, each Carrier holding a Common 
Slot or Limited Slot must submit an 
interim report of Slot usage for each day 
of the applicable scheduling season. No 
later than 30 days after the last day of 
the applicable scheduling season, each 
Carrier holding a Common Slot or 
Limited Slot must submit a final report 
of the completed operations for each 
day of the entire scheduling season. 
(b) Such reports, in a format 
acceptable to the FAA, must contain the 
following information for each Common 
Slot or Limited Slot: 
(1) The Slot number, time, and arrival 
or departure designation; 
(2) The operating Carrier; 
(3) The date and time of each of the 
operations conducted pursuant to the 
Slot, including the flight number and 
origin/destination; and 
(4) The aircraft type identifier. 
(c) The FAA may withdraw the Slot 
of any Carrier that does not meet the 
reporting requirements of paragraph (a) 
of this section. 
§ 93.173 Administrative provisions. 
(a) Each Slot shall be assigned a 
number for administrative convenience. 
(b) The FAA will assign priority 
numbers by random lottery for Common 
Slots and Limited Slots at JFK and 
Newark. Each Common Slot and 
Limited Slot will be assigned a 
withdrawal priority number, and the 30- 
minute time period for the Common 
Slot or Limited Slot, frequency, and the 
arrival or departure designation. 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 15:15 May 20, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00020 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\21MYP3.SGM 21MYP3cp
ric
e-
se
we
ll o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
69
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
29645 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 99 / Wednesday, May 21, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
(c) If the FAA determines that 
operations need to be reduced for 
operational reasons, the lowest assigned 
priority number Common Slot or 
Limited Slot will be the last withdrawn. 
(d) Any Slot available on a temporary 
basis may be assigned by the FAA to a 
Carrier on a non-permanent, first-come, 
first-served basis subject to permanent 
assignment under this subpart. Any 
remaining Slots may be made available 
for unscheduled operations on a non- 
permanent basis and will be assigned 
under the same procedures applicable to 
other operating Reservations. 
(e) All transactions under this subpart 
must be in a written or electronic format 
approved by the FAA. 
Proposed Amendment—Alternative 2 
3. Subparts N and O are added to read 
as follows: 
Subpart N—John F. Kennedy International 
Airport Traffic Rules 
Sec. 
93.161 Applicability. 
93.162 Definitions. 
93.163 Slots for scheduled arrivals and 
departures. 
93.164 Categories of slots. 
93.165 Initial assignment of slots. 
93.166 Assignment of new or returned slots. 
93.167 Reversion and Withdrawal of Slots. 
93.168 Sublease and transfer of slots. 
93.169 One-for-one trade of slots. 
93.170 Minimum usage requirements. 
93.171 Unscheduled operations. 
93.172 Reporting requirements. 
93.173 Administrative provisions. 
Subpart O—Newark Liberty International 
Airport Traffic Rules 
93.181 Applicability. 
93.182 Definitions. 
93.183 Slots for scheduled arrivals and 
departures. 
93.184 Categories of slots. 
93.185 Initial assignment of slots. 
93.186 Assignment of new or returned slots. 
93.187 Reversion and withdrawal of slots. 
93.188 Sublease and transfer of slots. 
93.189 One-for-one trade of slots. 
93.190 Minimum usage requirements. 
93.191 Unscheduled operations. 
93.192 Reporting requirements. 
93.193 Administrative provisions. 
§ 93.161 Applicability. 
(a) This subpart prescribes the air 
traffic rules for the arrival and departure 
of aircraft used for scheduled and 
unscheduled service, other than 
helicopters, at John F. Kennedy 
International Airport (JFK). 
(b) This subpart also prescribes 
procedures for the assignment, transfer, 
sublease and withdrawal of Slots issued 
by the FAA for scheduled operations at 
JFK. 
(c) The provisions of this subpart 
apply to JFK during the hours of 6 a.m. 
through 10:59 p.m., Eastern Time. No 
person shall operate any scheduled 
arrival or departure into or out of JFK 
during such hours without first 
obtaining a Slot in accordance with this 
subpart. No person shall conduct an 
Unscheduled Operation to or from JFK 
during such hours without first 
obtaining a Reservation. 
(d) A U.S. Air Carrier conducting 
operations solely under another 
Carrier’s marketing control with unified 
inventory control shall not be 
considered a separate Carrier for 
purposes of this subpart. 
(e) The Slots assigned under this 
subpart terminate at 11 p.m. on March 
30, 2019. 
§ 93.162 Definitions. 
For purposes of this subpart, the 
following definitions apply: 
Airport Reservation Office (ARO) is an 
operational unit of the FAA’s David J. 
Hurley Air Traffic Control System 
Command Center. It is responsible for 
the administration of reservations for 
unscheduled operations at JFK. 
Baseline Operations are those 
common slots held by a carrier on [final 
rule effective date], that do not exceed 
20 operations per day. 
Carrier is a U.S or foreign air carrier 
with authority to conduct scheduled 
service under Parts 121, 129, or 135 of 
this Chapter and the appropriate 
economic authority for scheduled 
service under 14 CFR chapter II and 49 
U.S.C. chapter 411. 
Common Slot (C-slot) is a slot that is 
assigned by the FAA as a lease under its 
cooperative agreement authority for the 
length of this rule. 
Enhanced Computer Voice 
Reservation System (e-CVRS) is the 
system used by the FAA to make arrival 
and/or departure reservations for 
unscheduled operations at JFK and 
other designated airports. 
Limited Slot (L-slot) is a slot operated 
every day, the lease for which must be 
transferred to another carrier by the 
holder of the limited slot as an 
unrestricted slot. 
New Entrant is any carrier that is 
administratively allocated a total of 8 or 
fewer slots at JFK during controlled 
hours at any point during the duration 
of the rule. 
Public Charter is defined in 14 CFR 
380.2 as a one-way or roundtrip charter 
flight to be performed by one or more 
direct air carriers that is arranged and 
sponsored by a public charter operator. 
Public Charter Operator is defined in 
14 CFR 380.2 as a U.S. or foreign public 
charter operator. 
Reservation is an authorization 
received by a carrier or other operator of 
an aircraft, excluding helicopters, in 
accordance with procedures established 
by the FAA to operate an unscheduled 
arrival or departure on a particular day 
of the week during a specific 30-minute 
period. 
Scheduled Operation is the arrival or 
departure segment of any operation 
regularly conducted by a carrier 
between JFK and another point regularly 
served by that carrier. 
Slot is the operational authority 
assigned by the FAA to a carrier to 
conduct one scheduled arrival or 
departure operation at JFK on a 
particular day of the week during a 
specific 30-minute period. 
Summer Scheduling Season begins on 
the last Sunday of March. 
Unrestricted Slot (U-slot) is a slot that 
is awarded to another carrier by the 
holder of a limited slot pursuant to the 
mandatory lease transfer provisions of 
this subpart. 
Unscheduled Operation is an arrival 
or departure segment of any operation 
that is not regularly conducted by a 
carrier or other operator of an aircraft, 
excluding helicopters, between JFK and 
another service point. The following 
types of carrier operations shall be 
considered unscheduled operations for 
the purposes of this subpart: public, on- 
demand, and other charter flights; hired 
aircraft service; extra sections of 
scheduled flights; ferry flights; and 
other non-passenger flights. 
Winter Scheduling Season begins on 
the last Sunday in October. 
§ 93.163 Slots for scheduled arrivals and 
departures. 
(a) During the hours of 6 a.m. through 
10:59 p.m., Eastern Time, no person 
shall operate any scheduled arrival or 
departure into or out of JFK during such 
hours without first obtaining a Slot in 
accordance with this subpart. 
(b) Except as otherwise established by 
the FAA under paragraph (c) of this 
section, the number of Slots shall be 
limited to no more than eighty-one (81) 
per hour at JFK. The number of Slots 
may not exceed 44 in any 30-minute 
period, and 81 in any 60-minute period. 
The number of arrival and departure 
Slots in any period may be adjusted by 
the FAA as necessary based on the 
actual or potential delays created by 
such number or other considerations 
relating to congestion, airfield capacity 
and the air traffic control system. 
(c) Notwithstanding paragraph (b) of 
this section, the Administrator may 
increase the number of Slots based on 
a review of the following: 
(1) The number of delays; 
(2) The length of delays; 
(3) On-time arrivals and departures; 
(4) The number of actual operations; 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 15:15 May 20, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00021 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\21MYP3.SGM 21MYP3cp
ric
e-
se
we
ll o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
69
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
29646 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 99 / Wednesday, May 21, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
(5) Runway utilization and capacity 
plans; and 
(6) Other factors relating to the 
efficient management of the National 
Airspace System. 
§ 93.164 Categories of slots. 
(a) General. Each Slot shall be 
designated as a Common Slot, Limited 
Slot or Unrestricted Slot and shall be 
assigned to the Carrier under a lease 
agreement. A lease for a Common or 
Limited Slot shall be awarded via a 
cooperative agreement. A lease for an 
Unrestricted Slot shall be awarded via 
an auction. 
(b) Common Slots. 
(1) All Slots within any Carrier’s 
Baseline Operations, as determined on 
[final rule effective date], shall be 
designated as Common Slots. 
(2) Twenty percent of the Slots at JFK 
on [final rule effective date] not 
otherwise designated as Common Slots 
under paragraph (b) (1) of this section 
shall be designated as Limited Slots. All 
other Slots shall be designated as 
Common Slots. 
(c) Limited Slots. Those Slots assigned 
to a Carrier subject to return to the FAA 
under § 93.165(c) shall be designated as 
Limited Slots until they are transferred 
to another Carrier under those 
provisions. A Carrier may continue to 
use a Limited Slot that has reverted to 
the FAA until reassigned to another 
Carrier as an Unrestricted Slot. 
(1) Each Carrier with a total number 
of daily operations at JFK in excess of 
its Baseline Operations will be notified 
by [final rule effective date] how many 
of its remaining Slots will be classified 
as Limited Slots pursuant to paragraphs 
(c)(2) and (3) of this section. 
(2) A Carrier shall designate 50 
percent of its Limited Slots. The Carrier 
must notify the FAA of its 
determination by [date 10 days after the 
final rule effective date]. 
(3) The FAA will designate the 
remaining Limited Slots, initially 
excluding those hours in which two or 
more Slots have been designated as 
Limited Slots by the Carriers. 
(4) No later than [date 20 days after 
the final rule effective date], the FAA 
will publish a list of all Limited Slots 
and the dates upon which they will 
expire. 
(d) Unrestricted Slots. Unrestricted 
Slots are Slots acquired by a Carrier 
through a lease with the FAA awarded 
via an auction. Unrestricted Slots are 
not subject to withdrawal by the FAA. 
§ 93.165 Initial assignment of slots. 
(a) Except as provided for under 
paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section, 
any Carrier allocated operating rights 
under the Order limiting operations at 
JFK, as evidenced by the FAA’s records, 
will be assigned corresponding Slots in 
30-minute periods consistent with the 
limits under § 93.163(b), and its summer 
and winter season schedules as 
approved by the FAA. If necessary, the 
FAA may utilize administrative 
measures such as voluntary measures or 
a lottery to re-time the assigned Slots 
within the same hour to meet the 30- 
minute limits under § 93.163(b). The 
FAA Vice President, System Operations 
Services, is the final decisionmaker for 
determinations under this section. 
(b) If a Carrier was allocated operating 
rights under the Order limiting 
operations at JFK but the operating 
rights were held by another Carrier, then 
the corresponding Slots will be assigned 
to the Carrier that held the operating 
rights for that period, as evidenced by 
the FAA’s records. 
(c) Starting [date 35 days after the 
effective date] and every year thereafter 
through 2013, one-fifth of the total 
number of Limited Slots identified on 
[date 20 days after the effective date] 
shall revert to the FAA in accordance 
with the schedule published under 
§ 93.164(c)(4) and be auctioned as 
Unrestricted Slots by the FAA and 
subsequently transferred to another 
Carrier, effective no later than the next 
Summer Scheduling Season. 
(1) The auction shall be blind, and 
only cash may be bid. 
(2) The holder of a Limited Slot may 
not bid on its own Slots. 
(3) The FAA shall pay to the holder 
of the Limited Slot all proceeds from the 
transaction following deduction of the 
FAA’s expenses for conducting the 
auction. 
(4) The auction shall be conducted by 
the FAA, which will dictate all 
procedures related to the auction, 
including but not limited to the 
requirement that the Carrier may not 
specify a minimum bid price. 
(5) In the event no Carrier bids on the 
Slot, the FAA will retire it until the next 
auction. 
(6) The Carrier holding a Limited Slot 
will be allowed to use the Slot until the 
first day of the next Summer Scheduling 
Season. 
§ 93.166 Assignment of new or returned 
slots. 
(a) This section describes the process 
by which the FAA assigns new Slots, as 
well as Slots returned to the FAA 
pursuant to the provisions of § 93.170. 
These Slots will be assigned by the FAA 
to requesting Carriers for the Summer 
and Winter Scheduling Seasons. 
(b) Requests for the new Slots or 
returned Slots or both must be 
submitted to the Federal Aviation 
Administration, Slot Administration 
Office, AGC–200, 800 Independence 
Avenue, SW., Washington, DC 20591 
(Facsimile: (202) 267–7277; e-mail: 7- 
awa-slotadmin@faa.gov), by the 
deadline as published by the FAA in a 
Federal Register notice for each 
Summer and Winter Scheduling Season. 
The requesting Carrier must submit its 
entire schedule at JFK for the particular 
season, noting which requests are in 
addition to, or changes from, the 
previous corresponding season at the 
respective airports. 
(c) Before assigning new or returned 
Slots under this section, the FAA will 
first accommodate Carrier requests to re- 
time Slots for operational reasons or to 
bring the flight time closer to the time 
originally requested by the applicant 
Carrier in previous corresponding 
seasons, as reflected in FAA records. 
(d) After accommodating Carrier 
requests for re-timing of Slots, the FAA 
will assign 50% of the new Slots and 
returned Slots to New Entrants, unless 
requests by New Entrants constitute 
fewer than 50% of available Slots. 
(e) With the remaining available Slots, 
if all requests for Slots under this 
section cannot be accommodated, the 
FAA will give priority to requests to 
introduce year-round service or to 
extend an existing operation to a year- 
round operation. 
(f) Thereafter, the FAA will assign 
Slots considering all relevant factors 
including: 
(1) The effective period of operation; 
(2) The extent and regularity of 
intended use of a Slot; 
(3) Schedule constraints of Carriers 
requesting Slots. 
§ 93.167 Reversion and withdrawal of 
slots. 
(a) This section does not apply to 
Unrestricted Slots. 
(b) A Carrier’s Common Slots or 
Limited Slots revert back to the FAA 30 
days after the Carrier has ceased all 
operations at JFK for any reasons other 
than a strike. 
(c) The FAA may re-time, withdraw, 
or temporarily suspend Common Slots 
and Limited Slots at any time to fulfill 
operational needs. 
(d) Common Slots and Limited Slots 
will be withdrawn in accordance with 
the priority list established under 
§ 93.173 and international obligations. 
(e) Except as otherwise provided in 
paragraph (a) of this section, the FAA 
will notify an affected Carrier before 
withdrawing or temporarily suspending 
a Common Slot or Limited Slot and 
specify the date by which operations 
under the Common Slot or Limited Slot 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 15:15 May 20, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00022 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\21MYP3.SGM 21MYP3cp
ric
e-
se
we
ll o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
69
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
29647 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 99 / Wednesday, May 21, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
must cease. The FAA will provide at 
least 45 days’ notice unless otherwise 
required by operational needs. 
(f) Any Common Slot or Limited Slot 
that is temporarily withdrawn under 
this paragraph will be reassigned, if at 
all, only to the Carrier from which it 
was withdrawn, provided the Carrier 
continues to conduct Scheduled 
Operations at JFK. 
§ 93.168 Sublease and transfer of slots. 
(a) A Carrier may sublease its Slots to 
another Carrier in accordance with this 
section and subject to the provisions of 
the Carrier’s lease agreement with the 
FAA. 
(b) A Carrier must provide notice to 
the FAA to sublease a Slot. Such notice 
must contain: the Slot number and time, 
effective dates and, if appropriate, the 
duration of the lease. The Carrier may 
also provide the FAA with a minimum 
bid price. 
(c) The FAA will post a notice of the 
offer to sublease the Slot and relevant 
details on the FAA Web site at http:// 
www.faa.gov. An opening date, closing 
date and time by which bids must be 
received will be provided. 
(d) Upon consummation of the 
transaction, written evidence of each 
Carrier’s consent to sublease must be 
provided to the FAA, as well as all bids 
received and the terms of the sublease, 
including but not limited to: 
(1) The names of all bidders and all 
parties to the transaction; 
(2) The offered and final length of the 
sublease; 
(3) The consideration offered by all 
bidders and provided by the sublessee. 
(e) The Slot may not be used until the 
conditions of paragraph (d) of this 
section have been met, and the FAA 
provides notice of its approval of the 
sublease. 
(f) Slots may be transferred among a 
U.S. Air Carrier and another Carrier that 
conducts operations at JFK solely under 
the transferring Carrier’s marketing 
control, including the entire inventory 
of the flight. Each party to such transfer 
must provide written evidence of its 
consent to the transfer and the FAA 
must confirm and approve these 
transfers in writing prior to the effective 
date of the transaction. However, the 
FAA will approve transfers under this 
paragraph up to five business days after 
the actual operation to accommodate 
operational disruptions that occur on 
the same day of the scheduled 
operation. The FAA Vice President, 
System Operations Services, is the final 
decision-maker for any determinations 
under this section. 
(g) A Carrier wishing to sublease a 
Slot via an FAA auction, rather than 
pursuant to this section, may do so. The 
Carrier shall retain the proceeds and the 
Slot shall retain the same designation 
that it had prior to the Carrier placing 
it up for auction. 
§ 93.169 One-for-one trade of slots. 
(a) A Carrier may trade a Slot with 
another Carrier on a one-for-one basis. 
(b) Written evidence of each Carrier’s 
consent to the trade must be provided 
to the FAA. 
(c) Each recipient of the trade may not 
use the acquired Slot until written 
confirmation has been received from the 
FAA. 
(d) Carriers participating in a one-for- 
one trade must certify to the FAA that 
no consideration or promise of 
consideration was provided by either 
party to the trade. 
§ 93.170 Minimum usage requirements. 
(a) This section does not apply to 
Unrestricted Slots. 
(b) Any Common Slot or Limited Slot 
included in a summer or winter season 
schedule approved by the FAA that is 
not used at least 80 percent of the time 
during the period for which it is 
assigned will be withdrawn by the FAA. 
(c) Paragraph (b) of this section does 
not apply to the first 90-day period after 
assignment of a Common Slot or 
Limited Slot through a sublease. 
(d) The FAA may waive the 
requirements of paragraph (b) of this 
section in the event of a highly unusual 
and unpredictable condition which is 
beyond the control of the Carrier and 
which affects Carrier operations for a 
period of five or more consecutive days. 
Examples of conditions which could 
justify a waiver under this paragraph are 
weather conditions that result in the 
restricted operation of the airport for an 
extended period of time or the 
grounding of an aircraft type. 
(e) The FAA will treat as used any 
Common Slot or Limited Slot held by a 
Carrier on Thanksgiving Day, the Friday 
following Thanksgiving Day, and the 
period from December 24 through the 
first Sunday of January. 
§ 93.171 Unscheduled operations. 
(a) During the hours of 6 a.m. through 
10:59 p.m., Eastern Time, no person 
may operate an aircraft other than a 
helicopter to or from JFK unless he or 
she has received, for that Unscheduled 
Operation, a Reservation that is assigned 
by the Airport Reservation Office (ARO) 
or in the case of public charters, in 
accordance with the procedures in 
paragraph (d) of this section. Requests 
for Reservations will be accepted 
through the e-CVRS beginning 72 hours 
prior to the proposed time of arrival to 
or departure from JFK. Additional 
information on procedures for obtaining 
a Reservation is available on the Internet 
at http://www.fly.faa.gov/ecvrs. 
(b) Reservations, including those 
assigned to Public Charter operations 
under paragraph (d) of this section, will 
be available to be assigned by the ARO 
on a 30-minute basis at JFK as follows: 
(1) Two Reservations per hour 
between 6 a.m. and 1:59 p.m. and 
between 10 p.m. and 10:59 p.m. 
(2) One Reservation per hour between 
2 p.m. and 10:59 p.m. 
(c) The ARO will receive and process 
all Reservation requests for unscheduled 
arrivals and departures at JFK. 
Reservations are assigned on a ‘‘first- 
come, first-served’’ basis determined by 
the time the request is received at the 
ARO. Reservations must be cancelled if 
they will not be used as assigned. 
(d) One Reservation per hour will be 
available for assignment to Public 
Charter operations prior to the 72-hour 
Reservation window in paragraph (a) of 
this section. No more than 25 percent of 
the reservations from 12 noon through 
9:59 p.m. will be made available for 
Public Charter operations under this 
paragraph. 
(1) The Public Charter Operator may 
request a reservation up to six months 
in advance of date of the flight 
operation. Reservation requests should 
be submitted to Federal Aviation 
Administration, Slot Administration 
Office, AGC–200, 800 Independence 
Avenue, SW., Washington, DC 20591. 
Submissions may be made via facsimile 
to (202) 267–7277 or by e-mail to: 
7–awa–slotadmin@faa.gov. 
(2) The Public Charter operator must 
certify that its prospectus has been 
accepted by the Department of 
Transportation in accordance with 14 
CFR part 380. 
(3) The Public Charter operator must 
identify the call sign/flight number or 
aircraft registration number of the direct 
Air Carrier, the date and time of the 
proposed operations(s), the airport 
served immediately prior to or after JFK, 
aircraft type, and the nature of the 
operations (e.g., ferry, passenger). Any 
changes to an approved Reservation 
must be approved in advance by the 
Slot Administration Office. 
(4) If Reservations under paragraph 
(d)(1) of this section have already been 
assigned, the Public Charter Operator 
may request a Reservation under 
paragraph (a) of this section. 
(e) The filing of a request for a 
Reservation does not constitute the 
filing of an IFR flight plan as required 
by regulation. The IFR flight plan may 
be filed only after the Reservation is 
obtained, must include the Reservation 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 15:15 May 20, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00023 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\21MYP3.SGM 21MYP3cp
ric
e-
se
we
ll o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
69
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
29648 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 99 / Wednesday, May 21, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
number in the ‘‘Remarks’’ section, and 
must be filed in accordance with FAA 
regulations and procedures. 
(f) Air Traffic Control will 
accommodate declared emergencies 
without regard to Reservations. Non- 
emergency flights in direct support of 
national security, law enforcement, 
military aircraft operations, or public- 
use aircraft operations may be 
accommodated above the Reservation 
limits with the prior approval of the 
Vice President, System Operations 
Services, Air Traffic Organization. 
Procedures for obtaining the appropriate 
waiver will be available on the Internet 
at http://www.fly.faa.gov/ecvrs. 
(g) Notwithstanding the limits in 
paragraph (b) of this section, if the Air 
Traffic Organization determines that air 
traffic control, weather and capacity 
conditions are favorable and significant 
delay is unlikely, the FAA may 
determine that additional Reservations 
may be accommodated for a specific 
time period. Unused Slots may also be 
made available temporarily for 
unscheduled operations. Reservations 
for additional operations must be 
obtained through the ARO. 
(h) Reservations may not be bought, 
sold or leased. 
§ 93.172 Reporting requirements. 
(a) No later than September 1 for the 
Summer Scheduling season and 
February 1 for the Winter Scheduling 
Season, each Carrier holding a Common 
Slot or Limited Slot must submit an 
interim report of Slot usage for each day 
of the applicable scheduling season. No 
later than 30 days after the last day of 
the applicable scheduling season, each 
Carrier holding a Common Slot or 
Limited Slot must submit a final report 
of the completed operations for each 
day of the entire scheduling season. 
(b) Such reports, in a format 
acceptable to the FAA, must contain the 
following information for each Common 
Slot or Limited Slot: 
(1) The Slot number, time, and arrival 
or departure designation; 
(2) The operating Carrier; 
(3) The date and time of each of the 
operations conducted pursuant to the 
Slot, including the flight number and 
origin/destination; and 
(4) The aircraft type identifier. 
(c) The FAA may withdraw the Slot 
of any Carrier that does not meet the 
reporting requirements of paragraph (a) 
of this section. 
§ 93.173 Administrative provisions. 
(a) Each Slot shall be assigned a 
number for administrative convenience. 
(b) The FAA will assign priority 
numbers by random lottery for Common 
Slots and Limited Slots at JFK. Each 
Common Slot and Limited Slot will be 
assigned a withdrawal priority number, 
and the 30-minute time period for the 
Common Slot or Limited Slot, 
frequency, and the arrival or departure 
designation. 
(c) If the FAA determines that 
operations need to be reduced for 
operational reasons, the lowest assigned 
priority number Common Slot or 
Limited Slot will be the last withdrawn. 
(d) Any Slot available on a temporary 
basis may be assigned by the FAA to a 
Carrier on a non-permanent, first-come, 
first-served basis subject to permanent 
assignment under this subpart. Any 
remaining Slots may be made available 
for unscheduled operations on a non- 
permanent basis and will be assigned 
under the same procedures applicable to 
other operating Reservations. 
(e) All transactions under this subpart 
must be in a written or electronic format 
approved by the FAA. 
Subpart O—Newark Liberty 
International Airport Traffic Rules 
§ 93.181 Applicability. 
(a) This subpart prescribes the air 
traffic rules for the arrival and departure 
of aircraft used for scheduled and 
unscheduled service, other than 
helicopters, at Newark Liberty 
International Airport (Newark). 
(b) This subpart also prescribes 
procedures for the assignment, transfer, 
sublease and withdrawal of Slots issued 
by the FAA for scheduled operations at 
Newark. 
(c) The provisions of this subpart 
apply to Newark during the hours of 6 
a.m. through 10:59 p.m., Eastern Time. 
No person shall operate any scheduled 
arrival or departure into or out of 
Newark during such hours without first 
obtaining a Slot in accordance with this 
subpart. No person shall conduct an 
Unscheduled Operation to or from 
Newark during such hours without first 
obtaining a Reservation. 
(d) A U.S. Air Carrier conducting 
operations solely under anther Carrier’s 
marketing control with unified 
inventory control shall not be 
considered as a separate Carrier for 
purposes of this rule. 
(e) The Slots assigned under this 
subpart terminate at 11 p.m. on March 
30, 2019. 
§ 93.182 Definitions. 
For purposes of this subpart, the 
following definitions apply: 
Airport Reservation Office (ARO) is an 
operational unit of the FAA’s David J. 
Hurley Air Traffic Control System 
Command Center. It is responsible for 
the administration of reservations for 
unscheduled operations at Newark. 
Baseline Operations are those 
Common Slots held by a carrier on [final 
rule effective date], that do not exceed 
20 operations per day. 
Carrier is a U.S or foreign air carrier 
with authority to conduct scheduled 
service under Parts 121, 129, or 135 of 
this Chapter and the appropriate 
economic authority for scheduled 
service under 14 CFR chapter II and 49 
U.S.C. chapter 411. 
Common Slot (C-slot) is a slot that is 
assigned by the FAA as a lease under its 
cooperative agreement authority for the 
length of this rule. 
Enhanced Computer Voice 
Reservation System (e-CVRS) is the 
system used by the FAA to make arrival 
and/or departure reservations for 
unscheduled operations at Newark and 
other designated airports. 
Limited Slot (L-slot) is a slot operated 
every day, the lease for which expires 
prior to the expiration of this rule for 
subsequent award by the FAA as an 
unrestricted slot. 
New Entrant is any carrier that is 
administratively allocated a total of 8 or 
fewer slots at either JFK or Newark 
during controlled hours at any point 
during the duration of the rule. 
Public Charter is defined in 14 CFR 
380.2 as a one-way or roundtrip charter 
flight to be performed by one or more 
direct air carriers that is arranged and 
sponsored by a public charter operator. 
Public Charter Operator is defined in 
14 CFR 380.2 as a U.S. or foreign public 
charter operator. 
Reservation is an authorization 
received by a carrier or other operator of 
an aircraft, excluding helicopters, in 
accordance with procedures established 
by the FAA to operate an unscheduled 
arrival or departure on a particular day 
of the week during a specific 30-minute 
period. 
Scheduled Operation is the arrival or 
departure segment of any operation 
regularly conducted by a carrier 
between Newark and another point 
regularly served by that carrier. 
Slot is the operational authority 
assigned by the FAA to a carrier to 
conduct one scheduled arrival or 
departure operation at Newark on a 
particular day of the week during a 
specific 30-minute period. 
Summer Scheduling Season begins on 
the last Sunday of March. 
Unrestricted Slot (U-slot) is a slot that 
is awarded to a carrier by the FAA via 
the auction of a lease. 
Unscheduled Operation is an arrival 
or departure segment of any operation 
that is not regularly conducted by a 
carrier or other operator of an aircraft, 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 15:15 May 20, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00024 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\21MYP3.SGM 21MYP3cp
ric
e-
se
we
ll o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
69
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
29649 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 99 / Wednesday, May 21, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
excluding helicopters, between Newark 
and another service point. The 
following types of carrier operations 
shall be considered unscheduled 
operations for the purposes of this rule: 
public, on-demand, and other charter 
flights; hired aircraft service; extra 
sections of scheduled flights; ferry 
flights; and other non-passenger flights. 
Winter Scheduling Season begins on 
the last Sunday in October. 
§ 93.183 Slots for scheduled arrivals and 
departures. 
(a) During the hours of 6 a.m. through 
10:59 p.m., Eastern Time, no person 
shall operate any scheduled arrival or 
departure into or out of Newark without 
first obtaining a Slot in accordance with 
this subpart. 
(b) Except as otherwise established by 
the FAA under paragraph (c) of this 
section, the number of Slots shall be 
limited to no more than eighty-one (81) 
period at Newark. The number of Slots 
may not exceed 44 in any 30-minute 
period and 81 in any 60-minute period. 
The number of arrival and departure 
Slots in any period may be adjusted by 
the FAA as necessary based on the 
actual or potential delays created by 
such number or other considerations 
relating to congestion, airfield capacity 
and the air traffic control system. 
(c) Notwithstanding paragraph (b) of 
this section, the Administrator may 
increase the number of Slots based on 
a review of the following: 
(1) The number of delays; 
(2) The length of delays; 
(3) On-time arrivals and departures; 
(4) The number of actual operations; 
(5) Runway utilization and capacity 
plans; and 
(6) Other factors relating to the 
efficient management of the National 
Airspace System. 
§ 93.184 Categories of slots. 
(a) General. Each Slot shall be 
designated as a Common Slot, Limited 
Slot or Unrestricted Slot and shall be 
assigned to the Carrier under a lease 
agreement. A lease for a Common or 
Limited Slot shall be awarded via a 
cooperative agreement. A lease for an 
Unrestricted Slot shall be awarded via 
an auction. 
(b) Common Slots. 
(1) All Slots within any Carrier’s 
Baseline Operations, as determined on 
[final rule effective date], shall be 
designated as Common Slots. 
(2) Ten percent of the Slots at Newark 
on [final rule effective date] not 
otherwise designated as Common Slots 
under paragraph (b) (1) of this section 
shall be designated as Limited Slots. All 
other Slots shall be designated as 
Common Slots. 
(c) Limited Slots. Those Slots assigned 
to a Carrier subject to return to the FAA 
under § 93.185(c) shall be designated as 
Limited Slots until the date of their 
reassignment by the FAA as 
Unrestricted Slots. A Carrier may 
continue to use a Limited Slot that has 
reverted to the FAA until reassigned to 
another Carrier as an Unrestricted Slot. 
(1) Each Carrier with a total number 
of daily operations at Newark in excess 
of its Baseline Operations will be 
notified by [final rule effective date] 
how many of its remaining Slots will be 
designated as Limited Slots pursuant to 
paragraphs (c)(2) and (3) of this section. 
(2) A Carrier shall designate 50 
percent of its Limited Slots. The Carrier 
must notify the FAA of its 
determination by [date 10 days after the 
final rule effective date]. 
(3) The FAA will designate the 
remaining Limited Slots, initially 
excluding those hours in which two or 
more Slots have been classified as 
Limited Slots by the Carriers. 
(4) No later than [date 20 days after 
the final rule effective date], the FAA 
will publish a list of all Limited Slots 
and the dates upon which they will 
expire. 
(d) Unrestricted Slots. Unrestricted 
Slots are Slots acquired by a Carrier 
through a lease with the FAA awarded 
via an auction. Unrestricted Slots are 
not subject to withdrawal by the FAA. 
§ 93.185 Initial assignment of slots. 
(a) Except as provided for under 
paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section, 
any Carrier allocated operating rights 
under the Order limiting operations at 
Newark as evidenced by the FAA’s 
records, will be assigned corresponding 
Slots in 30-minute periods consistent 
with the limits under § 93.183(b) and its 
summer and winter season schedules as 
approved by the FAA. If necessary, the 
FAA may utilize administrative 
measures such as voluntary measures or 
a lottery to re-time the assigned Slots 
within the same hour to meet the 30- 
minute limits under § 93.183(b). The 
FAA Vice President, System Operations 
Services, is the final decision-maker for 
determinations under this section. 
(b) If a Carrier was allocated operating 
rights under the Order limiting 
operations at Newark, but the operating 
rights were held by another Carrier, then 
the corresponding Slots will be assigned 
to the Carrier that held the operating 
rights for that period, as evidenced by 
the FAA’s records. 
(c) Starting [date 35 days after the 
effective date] and every year thereafter 
through 2013, one-fifth of the total 
number of Limited Slots shall revert to 
the FAA in accordance with the 
schedule published under § 93.164(c)(4) 
and be auctioned as Unrestricted Slots 
by the FAA. Any Slot receiving no 
responsive bids will be retired until the 
next auction. An affected Carrier will be 
allowed to use the Limited Slot until the 
effective date of an award to a Carrier 
as an Unrestricted Slot. 
§ 93.186 Assignment of new or returned 
slots. 
(a) This section describes the process 
by which the FAA assigns new Slots, as 
well as Slots returned to the FAA 
pursuant to the provisions of § 93.190. 
These Slots will be assigned by the FAA 
to requesting Carriers for the Summer 
and Winter Scheduling Seasons. 
(b) Requests for the new Slots or 
returned Slots or both must be 
submitted to the Federal Aviation 
Administration, Slot Administration 
Office, AGC–200, 800 Independence 
Avenue, SW., Washington, DC 20591 
(Facsimile: (202) 267–7277; e-mail: 7- 
awa-slotadmin@faa.gov), by the 
deadline as published by the FAA in a 
Federal Register notice for each 
Summer and Winter Scheduling Season. 
The requesting Carrier must submit its 
entire schedule at Newark for the 
particular season, noting which requests 
are in addition to, or changes from, the 
previous corresponding season at the 
respective airports. 
(c) Before assigning new or returned 
Slots under this section, the FAA will 
first accommodate Carrier requests to 
retime Slots for operational reasons or to 
bring the flight time closer to the time 
originally requested by the applicant 
Carrier in previous corresponding 
seasons, as reflected in FAA records. 
(d) After accommodating Carrier 
requests for retiming of Slots, the FAA 
will assign 50% of the new Slots and 
returned Slots to New Entrants, unless 
requests by New Entrants constitute 
fewer than 50% of available Slots. 
(e) With the remaining available Slots, 
if all requests for Slots under this 
section cannot be accommodated, the 
FAA will give priority to requests to 
introduce year-round service or to 
extend an existing operation to a year- 
round operation. 
(f) Thereafter, the FAA will assign 
Slots considering all relevant factors 
including: 
(1) The effective period of operation; 
(2) The extent and regularity of 
intended use of a Slot; 
(3) Schedule constraints of Carriers 
requesting Slots. 
§ 93.187 Reversion and withdrawal of 
slots. 
(a) This section does not apply to 
Unrestricted Slots. 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 15:15 May 20, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00025 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\21MYP3.SGM 21MYP3cp
ric
e-
se
we
ll o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
69
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
29650 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 99 / Wednesday, May 21, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
(b) A Carrier’s Common Slots or 
Limited Slots revert back to the FAA 30 
days after the Carrier has ceased all 
operations at Newark for any reasons 
other than a strike. 
(c) The FAA may retime, withdraw, or 
temporarily suspend Common Slots and 
Limited Slots at any time to fulfill 
operational needs. 
(d) Common Slots and Limited Slots 
will be withdrawn in accordance with 
the priority list established under 
§ 93.193 and international obligations. 
(e) Except as otherwise provided in 
paragraph (a) of this section, the FAA 
will notify an affected Carrier before 
withdrawing or temporarily suspending 
a Common Slot or Limited Slot and 
specify the date by which operations 
under the Common Slot or Limited Slot 
must cease. The FAA will provide at 
least 45 days’ notice unless otherwise 
required by operational needs. 
(f) Any Common Slot or Limited Slot 
that is temporarily withdrawn under 
this paragraph will be reassigned, if at 
all, only to the Carrier from which it 
was withdrawn, provided the Carrier 
continues to conduct Scheduled 
Operations at the airport. 
§ 93.188 Sublease and transfer of slots. 
(a) A Carrier may sublease its Slots to 
another Carrier in accordance with this 
section and subject to the provisions of 
the Carrier’s lease agreement with the 
FAA. 
(b) A Carrier must provide notice to 
the FAA to sublease a Slot. Such notice 
must contain: the Slot number and time, 
effective dates and, if appropriate, the 
duration of the lease. The Carrier may 
also provide the FAA with a minimum 
bid price. 
(c) The FAA will post a notice of the 
offer to sublease the Slot and relevant 
details on the FAA Web site at http:// 
www.faa.gov. An opening date, closing 
date and time by which bids must be 
received will be provided. 
(d) Upon consummation of the 
transaction, written evidence of each 
Carrier’s consent to sublease must be 
provided to the FAA, as well as all bids 
received and the terms of the sublease, 
including but not limited to: 
(1) The names of all bidders and all 
parties to the transaction; 
(2) The offered and final lengths of the 
sublease; 
(3) The consideration offered by all 
bidders and provided by the sublessee. 
(e) The Slot may not be used until the 
conditions of paragraph (d) of this 
section have been met, and the FAA 
provides notice of its approval of the 
sublease. 
(f) Slots may be transferred among a 
U.S. Air Carrier and another Carrier that 
conducts operations at Newark solely 
under the transferring Carrier’s 
marketing control, including the entire 
inventory of the flight. Each party to 
such transfer must provide written 
evidence of its consent to the transfer 
and the FAA must confirm and approve 
these transfers in writing prior to the 
effective date of the transaction. 
However, the FAA will approve 
transfers under this paragraph up to five 
business days after the actual operation 
to accommodate operational disruptions 
that occur on the same day of the 
scheduled operation. The FAA Vice 
President, System Operations Services 
is the final decision-maker for any 
determinations under this section. 
(g) A Carrier wishing to sublease a 
Slot via an FAA auction, rather than 
pursuant to this section, may do so. The 
Carrier shall retain the proceeds and the 
Slot shall retain the same designation 
that it had prior to the Carrier placing 
it up for auction. 
§ 93.189 One-for-one trade of slots. 
(a) A Carrier may trade a Slot with 
another Carrier on a one-for-one basis. 
(b) Written evidence of each Carrier’s 
consent to the trade must be provided 
to the FAA. 
(c) Each recipient of the trade may not 
use the acquired Slot until written 
confirmation has been received from the 
FAA. 
(d) Carriers participating in a one-for- 
one trade must certify to the FAA that 
no consideration or promise of 
consideration was provided by either 
party to the trade. 
§ 93.190 Minimum usage requirements. 
(a) This section does not apply to 
Unrestricted Slots. 
(b) Any Common Slot or Limited Slot 
included in a summer or winter season 
schedule approved by the FAA that is 
not used at least 80 percent of the time 
during the period for which it is 
assigned will be withdrawn by the FAA. 
(c) Paragraph (b) of this section does 
not apply to the first 90-day period after 
assignment of a Common Slot or 
Limited Slot through a sublease. 
(d) The FAA may waive the 
requirements of paragraph (b) of this 
section in the event of a highly unusual 
and unpredictable condition which is 
beyond the control of the Carrier and 
which affects Carrier operations for a 
period of five or more consecutive days. 
Examples of conditions which could 
justify a waiver under this paragraph are 
weather conditions that result in the 
restricted operation of the airport for an 
extended period of time or the 
grounding of an aircraft type. 
(e) The FAA will treat as used any 
Common Slot or Limited Slot held by a 
Carrier on Thanksgiving Day, the Friday 
following Thanksgiving Day, and the 
period from December 24 through the 
first Sunday of January. 
§ 93.191 Unscheduled operations. 
(a) During the hours of 6 a.m. through 
10:59 p.m. Eastern Time, no person may 
operate an aircraft other than a 
helicopter to or from Newark unless he 
or she has received, for that 
Unscheduled Operation, a Reservation 
that is assigned by the Airport 
Reservation Office (ARO) or in the case 
of Public Charters, in accordance with 
the procedures in paragraph (d) of this 
section. Requests for Reservations will 
be accepted through the e-CVRS 
beginning 72 hours prior to the 
proposed time of arrival to or departure 
from Newark. Additional information 
on procedures for obtaining a 
Reservation is available on the Internet 
at http://www.fly.faa.gov/ecvrs. 
(b) Reservations, including those 
assigned to Public Charter operations 
under paragraph (d) of this section, will 
be available to be assigned by the ARO 
on a 30-minute basis at Newark as 
follows: 
(1) Two Reservations per hour 
between 6 a.m. and 11:59 a.m. and 
between 10 p.m. and 10:59 p.m. 
(2) One Reservation per hour between 
12 noon and 9:59 p.m. 
(c) The ARO will receive and process 
all Reservation requests for unscheduled 
arrivals and departures at Newark. 
Reservations are assigned on a ‘‘first- 
come, first-served’’ basis determined by 
the time the request is received at the 
ARO. Reservations must be cancelled if 
they will not be used as assigned. 
(d) One Reservation per hour will be 
available for assignment to Public 
Charter operations prior to the 72-hour 
Reservation window in paragraph (a) of 
this section. No more than 25 percent of 
the reservations available from 12 noon 
through 9:59 p.m. will be made 
available for Public Charter operations 
under this paragraph. 
(1) The Public Charter Operator may 
request a reservation up to six months 
in advance of the date of the flight 
operation. Reservation requests should 
be submitted to Federal Aviation 
Administration, Slot Administration 
Office, AGC–200, 800 Independence 
Avenue, SW., Washington, DC 20591. 
Submissions may be made via facsimile 
to (202) 267–7277 or by e-mail to: 7- 
awa-slotadmin@faa.gov. 
(2) The Public Charter operator must 
certify that its prospectus has been 
accepted by the Department of 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 15:15 May 20, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00026 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\21MYP3.SGM 21MYP3cp
ric
e-
se
we
ll o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
69
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
29651 Federal Register / Vol. 73, No. 99 / Wednesday, May 21, 2008 / Proposed Rules 
Transportation in accordance with 14 
CFR part 380. 
(3) The Public Charter operator must 
identify the call sign/flight number or 
aircraft registration number of the direct 
Air Carrier, the date and time of the 
proposed operation(s), the airport 
served immediately prior to or after 
Newark, aircraft type, and the nature of 
the operation (e.g., ferry, passenger). 
Any changes to an approved 
Reservation must be approved in 
advance by the Slot Administration 
Office. 
(4) If Reservations under paragraph 
(d)(1) of this section have already been 
assigned, the Public Charter operator 
may request a Reservation under 
paragraph (a) of this section. 
(e) The filing of a request for a 
Reservation does not constitute the 
filing of an IFR flight plan as required 
by regulation. The IFR flight plan may 
be filed only after the Reservation is 
obtained, must include the Reservation 
number in the ‘‘Remarks’’ section, and 
must be filed in accordance with FAA 
regulations and procedures. 
(f) Air Traffic Control will 
accommodate declared emergencies 
without regard to Reservations. Non- 
emergency flights in direct support of 
national security, law enforcement, 
military aircraft operations, or public- 
use aircraft operations may be 
accommodated above the Reservation 
limits with the prior approval of the 
Vice President, System Operations 
Services, Air Traffic Organization. 
Procedures for obtaining the appropriate 
waiver will be available on the Internet 
at http://www.fly.faa.gov/ecvrs. 
(g) Notwithstanding the limits in 
paragraph (b) of this section, if the Air 
Traffic Organization determines that air 
traffic control, weather and capacity 
conditions are favorable and significant 
delay is unlikely, the FAA may 
determine that additional Reservations 
may be accommodated for a specific 
time period. Unused Slots may also be 
made available temporarily for 
unscheduled operations. Reservations 
for additional operations must be 
obtained through the ARO. 
(h) Reservations may not be bought, 
sold or leased. 
§ 93.192 Reporting requirements. 
(a) No later than September 1 for the 
Summer Scheduling Season and 
February 1 for the Winter Scheduling 
Season, each Carrier holding a Common 
Slot or Limited Slot must submit an 
interim report of Slot usage for each day 
of the applicable scheduling season. No 
later than 30 days after the last day of 
the applicable scheduling season, each 
Carrier holding a Common Slot or 
Limited Slot must submit a final report 
of the completed operations for each 
day of the entire scheduling season. 
(b) Such reports, in a format 
acceptable to the FAA, must contain the 
following information for each Common 
Slot or Limited Slot: 
(1) The Slot number, time, and arrival 
or departure designation; 
(2) The operating Carrier; 
(3) The date and time of each of the 
operations conducted pursuant to the 
Slot, including the flight number and 
origin/destination; and 
(4) The aircraft type identifier. 
(c) The FAA may withdraw the Slot 
of any Carrier that does not meet the 
reporting requirements of paragraph (a) 
of this section. 
§ 93.193 Administrative provisions. 
(a) Each Slot shall be assigned a 
number for administrative convenience. 
(b) The FAA will assign priority 
numbers by random lottery for Common 
Slots and Limited Slots at Newark. Each 
Common Slot and Limited Slot will be 
assigned a withdrawal priority number, 
and the 30-minute time period for the 
Common Slot or Limited Slot, 
frequency, and the arrival or departure 
designation. 
(c) If the FAA determines that 
operations need to be reduced for 
operational reasons, the lowest assigned 
priority number Common Slot or 
Limited Slot will be the last withdrawn. 
(d) Any Slot available on a temporary 
basis may be assigned by the FAA to a 
Carrier on a non-permanent, first-come, 
first-served basis subject to permanent 
assignment under this subpart. Any 
remaining Slots may be made available 
for unscheduled operations on a non- 
permanent basis and will be assigned 
under the same procedures applicable to 
other operating Reservations. 
(e) All transactions under this subpart 
must be in a written or electronic format 
approved by the FAA. 
Issued in Washington, DC, on May 15, 
2008. 
Nan Shellabarger, 
Director of Aviation Policy and Plans. 
[FR Doc. 08–1271 Filed 5–16–08; 12:00 pm] 
BILLING CODE 4910–13–P 
VerDate Aug<31>2005 15:15 May 20, 2008 Jkt 214001 PO 00000 Frm 00027 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4702 E:\FR\FM\21MYP3.SGM 21MYP3cp
ric
e-
se
we
ll o
n 
PR
O
D1
PC
69
 w
ith
 P
RO
PO
SA
LS
3
