 
 
Cover Sheet for Transmitting Documents under E.O. 12866 
 
 
Information about the Regulatory Action Related to This Document 
 
 
Title of the Regulatory Action:  Draft NO2 NAAQS Regulatory Impact Analysis (RIA) 
 
Regulatory Identifier Number (RIN):  2060-AO19 
 
Stage of Action:  Proposal 
 
 
 
Information about This Document 
 
 
Document Creation Date:  05-27-09 
 
 
Document Type: 
 
(  )   Draft preamble and regulatory text (i.e., this is the regulatory action) 
(  )   Draft Technical Support Document 
(x)   Draft Regulatory Impact Analysis 
(  )   Draft Information Collection Request 
(  )   Other:  _________________________________________________ 
 
 
 
 
Executive Summary 
ES.1  Overview
This Regulatory Impact Analysis (RIA) provides illustrative estimates of the incremental 
costs and monetized human health benefits of attaining a lower-bound revised short-term 
Nitrogen Dioxide (NO2) National Ambient Air Quality Standard (NAAQS) within the current 
community-wide monitoring network of 409 monitors.  Because this analysis only considers 
counties with an NO2 monitors, the possibility exists that there may be many more potential 
nonattainment areas than have been analyzed in this RIA.  
 
The proposal would set a new short-term NO2 standard based on the 3-year average of 
the 99th percentile of 1-hour daily maximum concentrations, establishing a new standard within 
the range of 80 to 100 ppb. The proposal also requests comment on standard levels ranging 
from a low of 65 ppb to a high of 125 ppb. As a lower bound, we chose an alternative primary 
standard of 50 parts per billion (ppb).  This more stringent NAAQS alternative affects the largest 
number of geographic areas that may be affected by a new NO2 standard. Our analysis of this 
hypothetical scenario is meant to approximate the most comprehensive set of control 
strategies that areas across the country might employ to attain. (We chose 50 ppb as an 
analytic lower bound before decisions were made about either the proposed range, or the 
range for requesting public comment.)  
 
This RIA chiefly serves two purposes. First, it provides the public with an estimate of the 
expected costs and benefits of attaining a new NO2 NAAQS. Second, it fulfills the requirements 
of Executive Order 12866 and the guidelines of OMB Circular A-4. 1  These documents present 
guidelines for EPA to assess the benefits and costs of the selected regulatory option, as well as 
one less stringent and one more stringent option. As stated above, we chose 50 ppb as an 
analytic lower bound.  Our original intent had been to also analyze a target NAAQS level of 100 
ppb as a mid-range target identified in the Risk and Exposure Assessment (REA) as an 
epidemiological level of concern.  We had also intended to analyze an upper bound of 200 ppb.  
As it turned out, as shown in chapter 3, our projections indicated no counties in the analysis 
year of 2020 that would have ambient 1-hour peak levels as high as the 80 to 100 ppb proposal 
range, assuming a baseline of no additional control beyond the controls expected from rules 
                                                          
1 U.S. Office of Management and Budget. Circular A-4, September 17, 2003. Available at 
http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/circulars/a004/a-4.pdf. 
ES-2 
that are already in place (including the current PM2.5 and ozone NAAQS).
1 Therefore the bulk of 
our analysis in this RIA focuses on the lower bound target NAAQS level of 50 ppb.  
 
This analysis does not estimate the projected attainment status of areas of the country 
other than those counties currently served by one of the 409 monitors in the current network.  
Chapter 2 explains that the current network is focused on community-wide ambient levels of 
NO2, and not near-roadway levels, which may be significantly higher, and the proposal also 
contains requirements for an NO2 monitoring network that will include monitors near major 
roadways.  We recognize that once a network of near-roadway monitors is put in place, more 
areas could find themselves exceeding the new hourly NO2 NAAQS.  However for this RIA 
analysis, we lack sufficient data to predict which counties might exceed the new NAAQS after 
implementation of a near-roadway monitoring network.  Therefore we lack a credible analytic 
path to estimating costs and benefits for such a future scenario. 
 
In setting primary ambient air quality standards, EPA’s responsibility under the law is to 
establish standards that protect public health, regardless of the costs of implementing a new 
standard.  The Clean Air Act requires EPA, for each criteria pollutant, to set a standard that 
protects public health with “an adequate margin of safety.” As interpreted by the Agency and 
the courts, the Act requires EPA to create standards based on health considerations only.  
The prohibition against the consideration of cost in the setting of the primary air quality 
standard, however, does not mean that costs or other economic considerations are 
unimportant or should be ignored. The Agency believes that consideration of costs and benefits 
is essential to making efficient, cost effective decisions for implementation of these standards. 
The impacts of cost and efficiency are considered by states during this process, as they decide 
what timelines, strategies, and policies are most appropriate. This RIA is intended to inform the 
public about the potential costs and benefits associated with a hypothetical scenario that may 
result when a new NO2 standard is implemented, but is not relevant to establishing the 
standards themselves.   
 
ES.2  Summary of Analytic Approach  
                                                          
1 For this RIA, we chose an analysis year of 2020.  Although the actual attainment year is likely to be 2017, time 
and resource limitations dictated use of pre-existing model runs, which all focused on 2020.  In addition, we do not 
have emission inventory projections for 2017; such projections are done for 5-year intervals. 
 
ES-3 
Our assessment of the lower bound NO2 target NAAQS includes several key elements, 
including specification of baseline NO2 emissions and concentrations; development of 
illustrative control strategies to attain the standard in 2020; and analyses of the control costs 
and health benefits of reaching the 50 ppb lower bound alternative.  Additional information on 
the methods employed by the Agency for this RIA is presented below. 
 
Overview of Baseline Emissions Forecast and Baseline NO2 Concentrations 
 
The baseline emissions and concentrations for this RIA are based on NOx emissions data 
from the 2002 National Emissions Inventory (NEI), and baseline NO2 concentration values from 
2005-2007 across the community-wide monitoring network.  We used results from the 
community multi-scale air quality model (CMAQ) simulations from the ozone NAAQS RIA to 
calculate the expected reduction in ambient NO2 concentrations between the 2002 base year 
and 2020.  More specifically, design values (i.e. air quality concentrations at each monitor) were 
calculated for 2020 using monitored air quality concentrations from 2002 and modeled air 
quality projections for 2020, countywide emissions inventory data for 2002 and 2005-7, and 
emissions inventory projections for 2020.  These data were used to create ratios between 
emissions and air quality, and those ratios (relative response factors, or RRFs) were used to 
estimate air quality monitor design values for 2020.  The 2020 baseline air quality estimates 
revealed that ten monitors in six counties were projected to exceed a 50 ppb lower bound 
target NAAQS in 2020. 
 
Development of Illustrative Control Strategies 
   
For the lower bound of 50 ppb, we analyzed the impact that additional emissions 
controls applied to numerous sectors would have on predicted ambient NO2 concentrations, 
incremental to the baseline set of controls. Thus the modeled analysis for a revised standard 
focuses specifically on incremental improvements beyond the current standards, and uses 
control options that might be available to states for application by 2020. The hypothetical 
modeled control strategy presented in this RIA is one illustrative option for achieving emissions 
reductions to move towards a national attainment of a tighter standard. It is not a 
recommendation for how a tighter NO2 standard should be implemented, and states will make 
all final decisions regarding implementation strategies once a final NAAQS has been set.  
Generally, we expect that the nation will be able to attain a tighter NO2 NAAQS without 
the addition of new controls beyond those already being planned for the attainment of existing 
PM2.5 and ozone standards by the year 2020.   As States develop their plans for attaining these 
existing standards, they are likely to consider adding controls to reduce NOx, as NOx is a 
ES-4 
precursor to both PM2.5 and ozone.  These controls will also directly help areas meet a tighter 
NO2 standard.   
 
The 2020 baseline air quality estimates revealed that 10 monitors in 6 counties had 
projected design values exceeding 50 ppb.  We then developed a hypothetical control strategy 
that could be adopted to bring the current highest emitting monitor in each of those six 
counties into attainment with a primary standard of 50 ppb by 2020.  Controls for five 
emissions sectors were included in the control analysis:  non-electricity generating unit point 
sources (nonEGU), non-point area sources (area), onroad mobile sources (onroad), and 
nonroad mobile sources (nonroad) and electricity generating unit point sources (EGU). Finally, 
we note that because it was not possible, in this analysis, to bring all areas into attainment with 
the alternative standard of 50 ppb in all areas using only identified controls.  For two monitor 
areas we estimated the cost of unspecified emission reductions.  In chapter 4 we discuss these 
areas in more detail. 
 
Analysis of Benefits 
 
Our analysis of the benefits associated with the 50 ppb target includes benefits related 
to reducing NO2 concentrations, and the ancillary benefits of reducing concentrations of 
particulate matter (PM).  For the primary benefits analysis, we use the Environmental Benefits 
Mapping and Analysis Program (BenMAP) to estimate the health benefits occurring as a result 
of implementing alternative NO2 NAAQS levels.  Although BenMAP has been used extensively in 
previous RIAs to estimate the health benefits of reducing exposure to PM2.5 and ozone, this is 
the first RIA to use BenMAP to estimate the health benefits of reducing exposure to NO2.   
 
The primary input to the benefits assessment is the estimated changes in ambient air 
quality expected to result from a simulated control strategy or attainment of a particular 
standard.  CMAQ projects both design values at NO2 monitors and air quality concentrations at 
12km grid cells.  To estimate the benefits of fully attaining the standards in all areas, EPA 
employed the “monitor rollback” approach to approximate the air quality change resulting from 
just attaining alternative NO2 NAAQS at each design value monitor.  This approach relies on 
data from the existing NO2 monitoring network and the VNA interpolation method (inverse 
distance squared) to adjust the CMAQ-modeled NO2 concentrations such that each areas area 
just attains the 50 ppb standard alternative.   
 
We then selected health endpoints to be consistent with the conclusions of the 
Integrated Science Assessment (ISA) for NO2 .  In this analysis, we only estimated the benefits 
for those endpoints with sufficient evidence to support a quantified concentration-response 
ES-5 
relationship using the information presented in the NO2 ISA, which contains an extensive 
literature review for several health endpoints related to NO2 exposure.  Based on our review of 
this information, we quantified three short-term morbidity endpoints that the NO2 ISA 
identified as “sufficient to infer a likely causal relationship”: asthma exacerbation, respiratory-
related emergency department visits, and respiratory-related hospitalizations.  After identifying 
the health endpoints to quantify in this analysis, we then selected concentration-response 
functions and valuation functions based on criteria detailed in chapter 5.  The valuation 
functions, ambient concentrations, and population data in the monitor areas are combined in 
BenMAP to provide the benefits estimates for this analysis. 
 
In addition, because NOx is also a precursor to PM2.5, reducing NOx emissions in the 
projected non-attainment areas will also reduce PM2.5 formation, human exposure, and the 
incidence of PM2.5-related health effects.  In this analysis, we estimated the co-benefits of 
reducing PM2.5 exposure for the alternative standards.  Due to analytical limitations, it was not 
possible to provide a comprehensive estimate of PM2.5-related benefits.  Instead, we used the 
“benefit-per-ton” method to estimate these benefits.  The PM2.5 benefit-per-ton estimates 
provide the total monetized human health benefits (the sum of premature mortality and 
premature morbidity) of reducing one ton of PM2.5 from a specified source.  EPA has used a 
similar technique in previous RIAs, including the recent Ozone NAAQS RIA (U.S. EPA, 2008a) and 
Portland Cement NESHAP RIA (U.S. EPA, 2009).   
 
Analysis of Costs 
 
Consistent with our development of the illustrative control strategies described above, 
our analysis of the costs associated with the 50 ppb lower bound alternative NAAQS focuses on 
NOx emission controls for nonEGU , area, EGU, and  mobile sources.   
NonEGU and area source controls largely include measures from the AirControlNET 
control technology database.  For these sources, we estimated costs based on the cost 
equations included in AirControlNET.  The identified controls strategy for nonEGU Point and 
Area sources incorporated annualized engineering cost per ton caps. These caps were defined 
as the upper cost per ton for controls of nonEGU point and area sources. The caps used were 
originally developed for the Ozone NAAQS analysis, where NOx controls were also applied.  The 
number of applied control measures was much larger for that analysis, and therefore provides a 
more robust estimate of what a potential cap on NOx costs would look like.   
ES-6 
The EGU analysis included in this RIA utilizes the latest version of the integrated 
planning model (IPM) v3.0 as part of the updated modeling platform.1  IPM v3.0 includes input 
and model assumption updates in modeling the power sector and incorporates Federal and 
State rules and regulations adopted before September 2006 and various new source review 
(NSR) settlements. The NOx control technology options used in IPM v3.0 include Selective 
Catalytic Reduction (SCR) and Selective Non-Catalytic Reduction (SNCR) systems. It is important 
to note that beyond these emission control options, IPM offers other compliance options for 
meeting emission limits. These include fuel switching, re-powering, and adjustments in the 
dispatching of electric generating units.  
For onroad and nonroad mobile sources, costs, in terms of dollars per ton emissions 
reduced, were applied to emission reductions calculated for the onroad and nonroad mobile 
sectors that were generated using the National Mobile Inventory Model (NMIM). NMIM is an 
EPA model for estimating air emissions from highway vehicles and nonroad mobile equipment. 
NMIM uses current versions of EPA’s model for onroad mobile sources, MOBILE6, and nonroad 
mobile sources, NONROAD, to calculate emission inventories.2
 
Finally, as indicated in the above discussion on illustrative control strategies, 
implementation of the NOx control measures identified from AirControlNET and other sources 
does not result in attainment with the selected NAAQS in several areas.  In these areas, 
additional unspecified emission reductions might be necessary to reach a 50 ppb target.  In 
order to bring these monitor areas into attainment, we calculated controls costs using a fixed 
cost per ton approach similar to that used in the ozone RIA analysis.   
 
ES.3  Results of Analysis
 
Air Quality 
 
Table ES.1. shows the projected ambient NO2 concentrations for 2020 after application of 
identified controls.  It also shows the additional tons of emission reduction needed from 
unidentified controls. 
                                                          
1 http://www.epa.gov/airmarkets/progsregs/epa-ipm/past-modeling.html. 
2 More information regarding the National Mobile Inventory Model (NMIM) can be found at http://www.epa.gov/otaq/nmim.htm
ES-7 
 
Table ES.1. Identified Controls Emission Reductions and Ambient Concentrations in 2020. 
State County NOx Emission 
Reductions in 2020     
(tons/year) 
Design Values Post Application 
of Identified Controls (99th 
percentile 1-hr daily max ppb) 
NOx Emission Reductions 
Needed Beyond Identified 
Controls (tons/year) 
CA Los Angeles -- 52.5 18,000 
CO Adams 8,400 48.0  
LA East Baton Rouge 5,300 50.2  
TX El Paso 4,400 59.6 5,600 
UT Salt Lake 2,600 50.3  
VA Charles City 47 47.9  
 
Benefit and Cost Estimates 
 
Tables ES.2 and ES.3 presents total national primary estimates of costs and benefits for a 
3% discount rate and a 7% discount rate. 
Table ES.2:  Summary of Total Costs for Alternative Standard 50 ppb in 2020  
(Millions of 2006$)a, b 
  3% Discount Ratec 7% Discount Rate 
Identified Control Costs  $36 $44 
Monitoring Costs  $7.1 $7.1 
Fixed Cost ($10,000/ton) $240 $240 
Fixed Cost ($15,000/ton) $350 $350 Extrapolated Costs 
Fixed Cost ($20,000/ton) $470 $470 
Fixed Cost ($10,000/ton) $270 $280 
Fixed Cost ($15,000/ton) $390 $400 Total Costs 
Fixed Cost ($20,000/ton) $510 $510 
a All estimates rounded to two significant figures. As such, totals will not sum down columns. 
b All estimates provided reflect the engineering cost of the identified control strategy analysis, incremental to a 
2020 baseline of compliance with the current PM2.5 and Ozone standards. 
c Total annualized costs were calculated using a 3% discount rate for controls which had a capital component and 
where equipment life values were available. For the identified control strategy, data for calculating annualized 
costs at a 3% discount was available for point sources. Therefore, the total annualized identified control cost value 
presented in this referenced cell is an aggregation of engineering costs at 3% and 7% discount rate. 
 
The total benefits estimates include NO2-related benefits as well as PM2.5 co-benefits.  
The two estimates use the unadjusted effect estimates (no-threshold) from two epidemiology 
studies examining the relationship between PM2.5 and premature mortality using large 
population cohorts: the American Cancer Society cohort (Pope et al., 2002) and the Harvard Six 
Cities cohort (Laden et al., 2006).   
 
ES-8 
Table ES.3.  Summary of Total Benefits in 2020 (Millions of 2006$) 
  3% Full 
Attainment 
7% Full 
Attainment 
3% Partial 
Attainment 
7% Partial 
Attainment 
NO2 $6.2 $6.2 $5.9 $5.9 
PM2.5     
Pope et al $230 $210 $130 $120 
Laden et al $570 $520 $310 $280 
TOTAL with Pope $240 $220 $130 $120 
TOTAL with Laden  $580 $520 $310 $280 
*All estimates are for the analysis year (2020) and are rounded to two significant figures.  These benefits estimates 
do not include several important benefits categories, including NO2-related premature mortality, ecosystem 
effects from nitrogen deposition, ozone-related health effects, or improvements in visibility. 
 
The net benefits were calculated by subtracting the total cost estimate from the two 
estimates of total benefits.  Table ES.4 shows net benefits of the selected NAAQS and 
alternative standards.   
 
Table ES.4 Summary of Net Benefits for Alternative Standard 50 ppb in 2020  
(Millions of 2006$) 
 3% Discount Rate 7% Discount Rate 
Total RIA Costs + Monitoring Costs $390 + $7.1 $400 + $7.1 
Total Benefits a $240 - $580 $220 - $520 
Total $(160) - $180 $(190) - $110 
a These benefits estimates do not include several important benefits categories, including NO2-related premature 
mortality, ecosystem effects from nitrogen deposition, ozone-related health effects, or improvements in visibility. 
 
ES.4.  Caveats and Limitations 
 
Air Quality Data, Modeling and Emissions 
 
• Current PM2.5 and Ozone Controls in Baseline:  Our 2020 analysis year baseline assumes 
that States will put in place the necessary control strategies to attain the current PM2.5 
and ozone standards.   Some of the control strategies employed as part of the ozone 
RIA, in particular, were of necessity highly uncertain. As States develop their plans for 
attaining these standards, their NOx control strategies may differ significantly from our 
analysis. 
 
• Use of Existing CMAQ Model Runs:  This analysis represents a screening level analysis.  
We did not conduct new regional scale modeling specifically targets to NO2; instead we 
ES-9 
relied upon impact ratios developed from model runs used in the analysis underlying 
the ozone NAAQS. 
   
• Analysis Year of 2020:  Data limitations necessitated the choice of an analysis year of 
2020, as opposed to the presumptive implementation year of 2017.  Emission inventory 
projections are available for 5-year increments; i.e. we have inventories for 2015 and 
2020, but not 2017.  In addition, the CMAQ model runs upon which we relied were also 
based on an analysis year of 2020. 
 
• Unknown controls:  We have limited information on available controls for some of the 
monitor areas included in this analysis.  For example, a full set of identified controls 
were applied to Los Angeles County in the Ozone NAAQS RIA; because this analysis is 
incremental, this left no additional identified control measures to be applied, 
particularly because we do not have emission reduction estimates for the Port of Long 
Beach in our analysis.   
 
• Limited monitoring network: For the current monitoring community-wide monitoring 
network, the universe of monitors exceeding the target NAAQS levels is very small.   
Once a network of near-roadway monitors is put in place, there could be more potential 
nonattainment areas than have been analyzed in this RIA. 
   
• Actual State Implementation Plans May Differ from our Simulation:  In order to reach 
attainment with each selected NAAQS, each state will develop its own implementation 
plan implementing a combination of emissions controls that may differ from those 
simulated in this analysis.  This analysis therefore represents an approximation of the 
emissions reductions that would be required to reach attainment and should not be 
treated as a precise estimate.   
 
• Uncertainty associated with unspecified emission reductions: As indicated above, some 
areas are expected to rely on unspecified emission reductions to reach attainment with 
the standards.  The cost of implementing these measures, though estimated here based 
on the costs for identified controls, is uncertain. 
 
Costs 
 
• We do not have sufficient information for all of our known control measures to calculate 
cost estimates that vary with an interest rate. We are able to calculate annualized costs 
at an interest rate other than 7% (e.g., 3% interest rate) where there is sufficient 
ES-10 
information—available capital cost data, and equipment life—to annualize the costs for 
individual control measures. For the vast majority of nonEGU point source control 
measures, we do have sufficient capital cost and equipment life data for individual 
control measures to prepare annualized capital costs using the standard capital recovery 
factor. Hence, we are able to provide annualized cost estimates at different interest 
rates for the point source control measures. 
 
• There are some unquantified costs that are not adequately captured in this illustrative 
analysis. These costs include the costs of federal and State administration of control 
programs, which we believe are less than the alternative of States developing 
approvable SIPs, securing EPA approval of those SIPs, and Federal/State enforcement. 
Additionally, control measure costs referred to as “no cost” may require limited 
government agency resources for administration and oversight of the program not 
included in this analysis; those costs are generally outweighed by the saving to the 
industrial, commercial, or private sector. The Agency also did not consider transactional 
costs and/or effects on labor supply in the illustrative analysis.  
 
Benefits   
 
• Benefits are most uncertain for the Los Angeles and El Paso areas because a large 
proportion of the PM2.5-related benefits are based on emission reductions 
attributable to unidentified emission controls.  It is possible that new technologies 
might not meet the specifications, development timelines, or cost estimates 
provided in this analysis, thereby increasing the uncertainty in when and if such 
benefits would be truly achieved. 
 
• The gradient of ambient NO2 concentrations is difficult to estimate due to the 
sparsity of the monitoring network.  The 12km CMAQ grid, which is the air quality 
modeling resolution, may be too coarse to accurately estimate the potential near-
field health benefits of reducing NO2 emissions.  These uncertainties may under- or 
over-estimate benefits.  
 
• The interpolation techniques used to estimate the full attainment benefits of the 
alternative standards contributed some uncertainty to the analysis.  The great 
majority of benefits estimated for the 50 ppb standard alternative were derived 
through interpolation.  As noted previously in chapter 5, these benefits are likely to 
be more uncertain than if we had modeled the air quality scenario for both NO2 and 
PM2.5.  In general, the VNA interpolation approach will under-estimate benefits 
ES-11 
because it does not account for the broader spatial distribution of air quality 
changes that may occur due to the implementation of a regional emission control 
program. 
 
• There are many uncertainties associated with the health impact functions used in 
this modeling effort.  These include: within study variability; across study variation; 
the application of concentration-response (C-R) functions nationwide; extrapolation 
of impact functions across population; and various uncertainties in the C-R function, 
including causality and thresholds.  These uncertainties may under- or over-estimate 
benefits.  
 
• Co-pollutants present in the ambient air may have contributed to the health effects 
attributed to NO2 in single pollutant models.  Risks attributed to NO2 might be 
overestimated where concentration-response functions are based on single 
pollutant models.  If co-pollutants are highly correlated with NO2, their inclusion in 
an NO2 health effects model can lead to misleading conclusions in identifying a 
specific causal pollutant.  Because this collinearity exists, many of the studies 
reported statistically insignificant effect estimates for both NO2 and the co-
pollutants.  Where available, we have selected multipollutant effect estimates to 
control for the potential confounding effects of co-pollutants; these include NYDOH 
(2006), Schwartz et al. (1994) and O’Conner et al. (2007).  The remaining studies 
include single pollutant models.   
 
• This analysis is for the year 2020, and projecting key variables introduces 
uncertainty.  Inherent in any analysis of future regulatory programs are uncertainties 
in projecting atmospheric conditions and source level emissions, as well as 
population, health baselines, incomes, technology, and other factors.   
 
• This analysis omits certain unquantified effects due to lack of data, time and 
resources.  These unquantified endpoints include other health effects, ecosystem 
effects, and visibility.  EPA will continue to evaluate new methods and models and 
select those most appropriate for estimating the benefits of reductions in air 
pollution.  Enhanced collaboration between air quality modelers, epidemiologists, 
toxicologists, ecologists, and economists should result in a more tightly integrated 
analytical framework for measuring benefits of air pollution policies. 
  
ES-12 
• PM2.5 co-benefits represent a substantial proportion of total monetized benefits 
(97% to 99% of total benefits for the 50 ppb standard), and these estimates are 
subject to a number of assumptions and uncertainties. 
   
• PM2.5 co-benefits were derived through benefit per-ton estimates, which do not 
reflect local variability in population density, meteorology, exposure, baseline health 
incidence rates, or other local factors that might lead to an over-estimate or under-
estimate of the actual benefits of controlling directly emitted fine particulates. 
   
• We assume that all fine particles, regardless of their chemical composition, are 
equally potent in causing premature mortality.  This is an important assumption, 
because PM2.5 produced via transported precursors emitted from EGUs may differ 
significantly from direct PM2.5 released from diesel engines and other industrial 
sources, but no clear scientific grounds exist for supporting differential effects 
estimates by particle type. 
  
• We assume that the health impact function for fine particles is linear within the 
range of ambient concentrations under consideration.  Thus, the estimates include 
health benefits from reducing fine particles in areas with varied concentrations of 
PM2.5, including both regions that are in attainment with fine particle standard and 
those that do not meet the standard down to the lowest modeled concentrations. 
  
• To characterize the uncertainty in the relationship between PM2.5 and premature 
mortality (which typically accounts for 85% to 95% of total monetized benefits), we 
include a set of twelve estimates based on results of the expert elicitation study in 
addition to our core estimates.  Even these multiple characterizations omit the 
uncertainty in air quality estimates, baseline incidence rates, populations exposed 
and transferability of the effect estimate to diverse locations.  As a result, the 
reported confidence intervals and range of estimates give an incomplete picture 
about the overall uncertainty in the PM2.5 estimates.  This information should be 
interpreted within the context of the larger uncertainty surrounding the entire 
analysis. 
 
ES-13 
