 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act; 
Establishment of Exchanges and Qualified Health Plans 
(CMS-9989-P) and Standards Related to Reinsurance, 
Risk Corridors and Risk Adjustment (CMS-9975-P) 
Preliminary Regulatory Impact Analysis
(CMS-9989-P2) 
Center for Consumer Information & Insurance Oversight 
July 2011
  
 
  
 2 
SUMMARY: 
This document announces the impact statement for the proposed rules entitled “Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act; Establishment of Exchanges and Qualified Health Plans,” 
and “Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act; Standards Related to Reinsurance, Risk 
Corridors and Risk Adjustment,” which are published in the Federal Register.  
  
 
  
3
Table of Contents 
I. Executive Orders 12866 and 13563                                                                                           4 

II. Estimates of the Impact of Exchanges                                                                                       7 

III. Benefits 11 

IV. Costs 15 

V. Impacts of the Proposed Rule on Standards Related to Reinsurance, Risk Corridors and Risk 

Adjustment                                                                                                                     30 

VI. Alternatives Considered 39 

VII. Limitations of Analysis                                                                                                   42 

VIII. Accounting Statement                                                                                                     44 

IX. Citations 44 

  

  
 
 
 
 4 

IMPACT ANALYSIS:
I. Executive Orders 12866 and 13563
We have examined the impacts of these regulations under Executive Order 12866 on 
Regulatory Planning and Review (September 30, 1993) and  Executive Order 13563 on 
Improving Regulation and Regulatory Review (February 2, 2011).   
Executive Orders 12866 and 13563 direct agencies to assess all costs and benefits of 
available regulatory alternatives and, if regulation is necessary, to select regulatory approaches 
that maximize net benefits (including potential economic, environmental, public health and 
safety effects, distributive impacts, and equity).  A regulatory impact analysis (RIA) must be 
prepared for rules with economically significant effects ($100 million or more in any 1 year). 
Section 3(f) of Executive Order 12866 defines a “significant regulatory action” as an action that 
is likely to result in a rule that may:  
(1) Have an annual effect on the economy of $100 million or more in any one 
year or adversely affect in a material way a sector of the economy, productivity, 
competition, jobs, the environment, public health or safety, or State, local or tribal 
government or communities [also referred to as “economically significant”]; 
(2) Create a serious inconsistency or otherwise interfere with an action taken or
planned by another agency; 
(3) Materially alter the budgetary impacts of entitlement grants, user fees, or loan 
programs or the rights and obligations of recipients thereof; or  
(4) Raise novel legal or policy issues arising out of legal mandates, the President’s 
priorities, or the principles set forth in [Executive Order 12866]. 
  
 
 
 
 5 
OMB has determined that this rule is “economically significant” within the meaning of 
section 3(f)(1) of Executive Order 12866, because it is likely to have an annual effect of $100 
million in any one year.  Accordingly, we have prepared a Regulatory Impact Analysis that 
presents the costs and benefits of these proposed rulemakings. 
This analysis focuses on an initial set of proposed requirements for the establishment of 
Affordable Insurance Exchanges (Exchanges), Qualified Health Plans (QHPs) and the Small 
business Health Options Program (SHOP).  The notices of proposed rulemaking (NPRMs) 
described in this impact analysis implement provisions related to Exchanges, including 
reinsurance, risk adjustment and risk corridors.  The NPRMs set forth proposed standards for 
States that seek to establish an Exchange and for health insurance issuers.  Specifically, the 
NPRMs propose: (1) standards for States with respect to the establishment and operation of an 
Exchange; (2) standards for health insurance issuers with respect to participation in the
Exchange, including the minimum certification requirements for qualified health plan (QHP) 
certification; (3) risk-spreading mechanisms for which health plan issuers both within and 
outside of the Exchange must meet requirements; and (4) basic requirements that employers 
must meet with respect to their voluntary participation in SHOP.  Authority lies primarily in Title
I of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, sections 1301-1302, 1311, 1313, 1321, 1323, 
1331-1334, 1341-1343, 1401, 1402, and 1411-1413. HHS has drafted these proposed 
regulations to implement Congressional mandates in the most economically efficient manner 
possible. 
Need for Regulatory Action
A central aim of Title I of the Affordable Care Act is to expand access to health insurance 
coverage through the establishment of Exchanges.  The number of uninsured Americans is rising 
  
 
 6 

due to lack affordable insurance, barriers to insurance for people with pre-existing conditions, 
and high prices due to limited competition and market failures.  Millions of people without 
health insurance use health care services for which they do not pay, shifting the uncompensated 
cost of their care to health care providers.  Providers pass much of this cost to insurance 
companies, resulting in higher premiums that make insurance unaffordable to even more people.  
The Affordable Care Act includes a number of policies to address these problems, including the 
creating of Affordable Insurance Exchanges.
Starting in 2014, individuals and small businesses will be able to purchase private health 
insurance through State-based competitive marketplaces called Affordable Insurance Exchanges, 
or “Exchanges.”  Exchanges will offer Americans competition, choice, and clout.  Insurance 
companies will compete for business on a level playing field, driving down costs.  Consumers 
will have a choice of health plans to fit their needs.  And Exchanges will give individuals and 
small businesses the same purchasing clout as big businesses.  The Departments of Health and 
Human Services, Labor, and the Treasury (the Departments) are working in close coordination to 
release guidance related to Exchanges in several phases.  The first in this series was a Request 
for Comment relating to Exchanges, published in the Federal Register on August 3, 2010 (75 FR 
45584). Second, Initial Guidance to States on Exchanges was issued on November 18, 2010.  
Third, a proposed rule for the application, review, and reporting process for waivers for State 
innovation was published in the Federal Register on March 14, 2011 (76 FR 13553). Fourth, 
two proposed regulations are being published in the Federal Register to implement components 
of the Exchange and health insurance premium stabilization policies in the Affordable Care Act.   
Subjects included in the Affordable Care Act to be addressed in subsequent rulemaking 
include (but are not limited to): standards for individual eligibility for participation in the 
  
 
 
 
                                                 
 
   
 7 

Exchange, advance payments of the premium tax credit, cost-sharing reductions, and related 
health programs and appeals of eligibility determinations; standards with respect to ongoing 
Federal oversight of Exchanges and actions necessary to ensure their financial integrity; and 
standards for Exchanges and QHP issuers related to quality, among others.  
The budget and coverage effects described in this analysis also include provisions that 
will be implemented by other Departments.  For example, section 1401 of the Affordable Care 
Act contains the provision that pertains to the establishment and administration of the premium
tax credits that will primarily be implemented by the Department of Treasury.  The Departments 
of Labor and the Treasury have primary jurisdiction over employer responsibility provisions in 
section 1513 of the Affordable Care Act. This analysis will serve as the base for estimating the 
non-tax and non-Medicaid impacts of these interrelated provisions.   
II. Estimates of the Impact of Exchanges
This preliminary impact analysis references the estimates of the CMS Office of the 
Actuary (OACT) (CMS, April 22, 2010), but primarily uses the underlying assumptions and 
analysis completed by the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) and the staff of the Joint 
Committee on Taxation.  Their modeling effort accounts for all of the interactions among the 
interlocking pieces of the Affordable Care Act including its tax policies, and estimates premium
effects that are important to assessing the benefits of the NPRM.  A description of CBO’s 
methods used to estimate budget and enrollment impacts is available elsewhere.1  The CBO 
estimates are not significantly different than the comparable components produced by OACT.  
Based on our review, we expect that the requirements in these NPRMs will not substantially alter 
CBO’s estimates of the budget impact of Exchanges or enrollment. The proposed requirements 
1 CBO. “CBO’s Health Insurance Simulation Model: A Technical Description.” (2007, October).
  
 
 
 8 

are well within the parameters used in the modeling of the Affordable Care Act and do not 
diverge from assumptions embedded in the model.  Our review and analysis of the proposed 
requirements indicate that the impacts are within the model’s margin of error.   
CBO estimated outlays for the Exchanges and Exchange-related requirements in two 
areas: reinsurance and risk adjustment programs, and estimates of State Planning and 
Establishment Grants for the implementation of State Exchanges.  Below we display the 
estimates for outlays and enrollment by type of health insurance coverage over a five-year period 
(FY 2012 - FY 2016 for outlays and calendar year 2012-2016 for enrollment).  Individuals will 
not begin enrollment in the Exchanges until January 1, 2014.  Hence, while there are no 
Exchange enrollment estimates for 2012 and 2013, other provisions of the law related to the 
preparation for Exchange implementation, such as State grants are estimated.   
Table 1 includes the CBO’s estimates of outlays for reinsurance and risk adjustment, and 
estimates of grants from 2012 to 2016.  It does not include costs related to reduced Federal 
revenues from refundable premium tax credits, which are administered by the Department of the 
Treasury subject to IRS rulemaking, the Medicaid effects, which are subject to future 
rulemaking, or the policies whose offsets led CBO to estimate that the Affordable Care Act 
would reduce the Federal budget deficit by over $200 billion over the next 10 years.  Table 2 
includes the CBO’s estimates of receipts for reinsurance and risk adjustment.
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
  
    
 9 
Table 1. Estimated Outlays for the Affordable Insurance Exchanges FY 2012 - FY2016, in 
billions of dollars  
Year 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 
Reinsurance 
and Risk 
Adjustment 
Program
Paymentsa --- --- 11 18 18 
Grant 
Authority for 
Exchange 
Start up2 0.6 0.8 0.4 0.2 0.0 
a Risk-adjustment payments lag receipts shown in Table 2 by one quarter. 
Source: CBO 
CBO.2011 Letter to Hon. John Boehner. Feb. 18, 2011 http://www.cbo.gov/ftpdocs/120xx/doc12069/hr2.pdf
Accessed on 7/6/11
CBO. 2011. Letter to Hon. Nancy Pelosi. March 20, 2010. 
http://www.cbo.gov/ftpdocs/113xx/doc11379/AmendReconProp.pdf. Accessed on 7/1/11
Table 2. Estimated Receipts for the Affordable Insurance Exchanges FY 2012 - FY2016, in 
billions of dollars  
Year 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 
Reinsurance 
and Risk 
Adjustment 
Program
Receipts a --- --- 12 16 18 
a Risk-adjustment payments shown in Table 1 lag receipts by one quarter. 
Source: CBO. 2011. Letter to Hon. Nancy Pelosi. March 20, 2010. 
http://www.cbo.gov/ftpdocs/113xx/doc11379/AmendReconProp.pdf 
Because Exchanges do not begin operation until 2014, there are no outlays for reinsurance and 
risk adjustment in 2012 and 2013.  CBO estimates that risk adjustment payments and collections 
are equal in the aggregate, but that risk adjustment payments lag revenues by one quarter.  CBO 
2 OACT estimates that the initial start-up costs for Exchanges will be $4.4 billion for 2011-2013 (Sisko, A.M., et al., 
“National Health Spending Projections: The Estimated Impact of Reform through 2019,” Health Affairs, 29, no. 10
(2010): 1933-1941. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
   
    
 10 

did not score the impact of risk corridors, but assumed collections would equal payments to plans 
in the aggregate.
CBO’s estimate of the number of people receiving tax credits through Exchanges under 
the Affordable Care Act is based in part on the assumption that Exchanges would be operational 
by January 2014. Participation rates among potential enrollees are expected to be lower in the 
first few years (beginning in 2014) as employers and individuals adjust to the features of the 
Affordable Care Act and Exchanges become fully operational.  
Table 3 contains the estimates of the number of people enrolled in Exchanges from 2012 
through 2016.  These estimates show that there will be nearly 22 million people enrolled in 
Exchanges by the year 2016, and that there will be 32 million fewer uninsured due to the 
combined impact of all of the provisions of the Affordable Care Act.   
Table 3. Estimated Number of People Enrolled in Exchanges 2012-2016, in millions by 
Calendar Year 
Year 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 
Total Exchange 
Enrollment3 --- --- 9 14 22 
Exchange 
Enrollees 
Receiving Tax 
Credits 
--- ---- 8 12 18 
Employment-
Based 
Coverage 
Purchased 
Through 
Exchanges
--- --- 3 2 3 
Change to 
Uninsured 
Coverage^4 
-3 -3 -21 -26 -32 
3 OACT estimates that total Exchange enrollment will be 16.9 million in 2014, 18.6 million in 2015, and 24.8 

million in 2016. 

4 OACT estimated that the number of uninsured covered will be 26.2 million in 2014, 29.5 million in 2015, and 32.1
 
million in 2016. 

  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 11 

^ Figure includes total effects of Affordable Care Act on change in number of uninsured individuals. 
Totals may not add up due to rounding. 
Source: 

CBO. 2011. CBO March 2011 Baseline: Health Insurance Exchanges.
 
http://www.cbo.gov/budget/factsheets/2011b/HealthInsuranceExchanges.pdf. Accessed on 4/29/2011 

CBO’s March 2011 Baseline: Health Insurance Exchanges. 
http://www.cbo.gov/budget/factsheets/2011b/HealthInsuranceExchanges.pdf Accessed on June 30, 2011. 
CBO’s March 2011 baseline: Health Insurance Exchanges. March 18, 2011.
III. Benefits
This RIA accompanies proposed rules that implement key provisions of the Affordable 
Care Act related to Affordable Insurance Exchanges, including risk adjustment, reinsurance, and 
risk corridors. It is difficult to discuss the benefits of these provisions in isolation.  The 
overarching goal of Exchanges and related policies in the Affordable Care Act is to make 
affordable health insurance available to individuals without access to affordable employer-
sponsored coverage. Different elements of the Affordable Care Act work together to achieve 
this goal. Affordable Insurance Exchanges, which create competitive marketplaces where 
individuals and small businesses can shop for coverage, reduce the unit price of insurance for the 
average consumer by pooling risk and promoting competition. Risk adjustment, reinsurance, and 
risk corridors as envisioned in the NPRM play a critical role in ensuring the success of the 
Exchanges. Risk corridors encourage health insurance issuers to offer QHPs on Exchanges in the 
first three years of their operation by ensuring that all issuers share the risk associated with initial 
uncertainty in the pricing of QHPs. Reinsurance protects health insurance issuers from the risk of 
high-cost individuals, enabling issuers to offer coverage at a lower premium.  Risk adjustment 
plays an ongoing role in ensuring that Exchanges are not harmed by adverse selection.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
   
 12 

There are of course many other provisions of the Affordable Care Act that are integral to 
the goal of expanding coverage, such as the premium tax credits.  Here, we do not attempt to 
isolate the benefits associated with a particular provision of the Affordable Care Act.  Instead, 
we will discuss the evidence on the benefits of having affordable health insurance coverage.  We
present quantitative evidence whenever it is available and rely on qualitative discussion when it 
is not. 
Evidence on the Impact of Health Insurance Coverage
The best available evidence on how health insurance affects medical care utilization, 
health, and financial security comes from a recent evaluation of an expansion of Oregon’s 
Medicaid program.5  In 2008, Oregon conducted a lottery to expanded access to uninsured adults 
with incomes below 100 percent of the Federal Poverty Level.  Approximately 10,000 low-
income adults were newly enrolled in Medicaid as a result.  Comparing outcomes for those who 
won the lottery with outcomes for those who did not win yields an estimate of the benefits of 
having coverage. The evaluation concluded that for low-income uninsured adults, coverage has 
the following benefits: 
 Significantly higher utilization of preventive care (mammograms, cholesterol 
monitoring, etc.), 
 A significant increase in the probability of having a regular office or clinic for 
primary care, and 
 Significantly better self-reported health. 
While there are limitations on the ability to extrapolate from these results to the likely impacts of
coverage expansions as a result of the Affordable Care Act – in particular, the Oregon 
5 Amy Finkelstein, et al, “The Oregon Health Insurance Experiment: Evidence from the First Year,” National 
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 17190, July 2011. 
  
 
                                                 
 
  
 13 

expansions targeted a population that is lower income, on average, than those likely to gain 
coverage through Exchanges – these results provide solid evidence of quantifiable health and 
financial benefits associated with coverage expansions for a population of non-elderly adults. 
The results of the Oregon study are consistent with prior research, which has found that 
health insurance coverage improves health outcomes.  The Institute of Medicine (2002) analyzed 
several population studies and found that people under the age 65 who were uninsured faced a 25 
percent higher risk of mortality than those with private coverage.  This pattern was found when 
comparing deaths of uninsured and insured patients from heart attack, cancer, traumatic injury, 
and HIV infection.6  The Institute of Medicine also concluded that insurance leads to better 
clinical outcomes for diabetes, cardiovascular disease, end-stage renal disease, HIV infection and 
mental illness if they have health insurance, and that uninsured adults were less likely to have 
regular checkups, recommended health screening services and a usual source of care to help 
manage their disease than a person with coverage.   
Health Insurance Improves Financial Security 
Another important benefit of health insurance is improved financial security.  
Comprehensive health insurance coverage provides a safety net against the potentially high cost 
of medical care, and the presence of health insurance can mitigate financial risk.  The Oregon 
study found people who gained coverage were less likely to have unpaid medical bills referred to 
a collection agency. Again, this study is consistent with prior research showing the high level of 
financial insecurity associated with lack of insurance coverage.  A recent analysis found that 
more than 30 percent of the uninsured report having zero (or negative) financial assets and uninsured 
families at the 90th percentile of the asset distribution report having total financial assets below 
6 Institute of Medicine, Care without coverage: too little, too late (National Academies Press, 2002). 
  
 
  
 
 
 
                                                 
 
  
  
 
     
     
  
 14 

$13,000 – an amount that can be quickly depleted with a single hospitalization.7  Other research
indicates that uninsured individuals who experience illness suffer an average a loss of 30 percent 
to 50 percent of assets relative to households with insured individuals.8 
Decreased Uncompensated Care
The improved financial security provided by health insurance also has benefits for 
providers, as insured patients can pay their medical bills.  The Oregon study found that coverage 
significantly reduces the level of unpaid medical bills sent to a collection agency.9  Most of these 
bills are never paid, so this reduction in unpaid bills means that one of the important benefits of 
expanded health insurance coverage, such as the coverage that will be provided through the 
Exchanges, is a reduction in the level of uncompensated care provided.   
Again, the results of the Oregon study are also consistent with other evidence.  For 
example, subsequent to the enactment of health reform in Massachusetts in 2006,10 the 
Massachusetts government realized annual savings of about $250 million from lower payments 
to hospitals for uncompensated care for the uninsured and underinsured.11  Payments and 
utilization of the uncompensated care pool/health safety net trust fund have decreased and the 
rate of non-urgent emergency department visits declined by 2.6 percent among patients with 
premium assistance for coverage and uninsured patients in 2008 compared to 2006.12 
Lower Premiums
7 ASPE. The Value of Health Insurance: Few of the Uninsured Have Adequate Resources to Pay Potential Hospital 

Bills. (2011). 

8 Cook, K. et al., "Does major illness cause financial catastrophe?," Health Services Research 45, no. 2 (2010). 

9 Finkelstein, Amy et al., "The Oregon Health Insurance Experiment: Evidence from the First Year," National
 
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series No. 17190(2011). 

10 Chapter 58 of the Acts of 2006 of the Massachusetts General Court. 

11Massachusetts Division of Health Care Finance and Policy, "2009 Annual Report Health Safety Net."

12 Smulowitz, Peter B. et al., "Emergency Department Utilization After the Implementation of Massachusetts Health
 
Reform," Annals of Emergency Medicine In Press, Corrected Proof. 

  
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
                               
                   
 15 

The Exchanges and policies associated with them would also, according to CBO’s letter 
to Evan Bayh from November 30, 2009, reduce premiums for the same benefits compared to 
prior law. It estimated that, in 2016, people purchasing non-group coverage through the 
Exchanges would pay 7 to 10 percent less due to the healthier risk pool that results from the 
coverage expansion. An additional 7 to 10 percent in savings would result from gains in 
economies of scale in purchasing insurance and lower administrative costs from elimination of 
underwriting, decreased marketing costs, and the Exchanges’ simpler system for finding and 
enrolling individuals in health insurance plans.13  CBO also estimates that premiums for small 
businesses purchasing through the Exchanges would be up to 2 percent lower than they would be 
without the Affordable Care Act, for comparable reasons.  CBO estimated that the administrative 
costs to health plans (described in greater detail below) would be more than offset by savings 
resulting from lower overhead due to new policies to limit benefit variation, prohibit “riders,” 
and end underwriting. Premium savings to individuals and small businesses allow for alternative 
uses of income and resources, such as increasing retirement savings for families or investing in 
new jobs for small businesses.  
IV. Costs
This section discusses the costs of implementing these proposed rules.  This discussion is 
divided into two parts – costs of requirements on Exchanges (part 155 of the Exchange NPRM) 
and costs of requirements on issuers of QHPs (part 156 of the Exchange NPRM).  The costs and 
impact for the reinsurance, risk adjustment and risk corridors programs (part 153 of the Premium
Stabilization NPRM) are addressed in part V of this RIA.   
Part 155: Requirements on Exchanges
13 Congressional Budget Office, "Letter to the Honorable Evan Bayh: An Analysis of Health Insurance Premiums 
Under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act " (Washington2009). 
  
 
 16 
This section discusses the impact of part 155 of the Exchange NPRM, particularly as it 
relates to administrative expenses and health plan certification.  States seeking to operate an 
Exchange will incur administrative expenses as a result of implementing and subsequently 
maintaining Exchanges in accordance with the requirements in this proposed rule.  It is important 
to note that although States have the option to establish and operate an Exchange, there is no 
Federal requirement that each State establish an Exchange.  Any costs of the initial 
implementation of Exchanges will be funded through State Planning and Establishment Grants 
authorized under section 1311(a) of the Affordable Care Act.  Table 1 shows that total grant 
outlays are estimated at $2 billion dollars until grants cease at the end of calendar year 2014.  
After this initial phase of Exchange planning and implementation, the law requires that 
Exchanges be self-sustaining. 
The maintenance of Exchanges beginning in 2015 requires another source of funding.  
Specific funding sources are left to the discretion of the Exchange and can be structured in 
several different ways including, but not limited to, assessments on health insurance issuers or 
other user fees. The Exchange may charge user fees or assessments to fund their ongoing 
operations and maintain broad discretion in determining how to structure these assessments or 
user fees, either by assessing a fee as a percentage of premiums or on a per capita basis.  For 
example, the Commonwealth Connector in Massachusetts requires issuers to pay a fee that is 
structured as a percent of premium.  The administrative costs of operating an Exchange will 
almost certainly vary by the number of enrollees in the Exchange due to economies of scale, 
variation in the scope of the Exchange’s activities, and variation in average premium in the 
Exchange’s service area.
  
   
  
 
 17 
Subpart B of part 155 of the Exchange proposed rule sets forth general requirements 
related to the establishment of Exchanges prior to and after 2014, including the approval process 
for Exchanges, governance principles for the Exchange, and requirements on regional and 
subsidiary Exchanges.  The Exchange rule proposes that each State choosing to establish an 
Exchange shall submit an Exchange plan and a readiness assessment.  The rule also proposes to 
that States that opt for a non-profit or independent authority Exchange establish a governance 
structure for it.
Subpart C of part 155 of the Exchange proposed rule primarily sets forth the minimum 
functions that each Exchange must perform. To operate effectively, in the early phases of 
establishment, each Exchange will most likely pursue one or more of these activities: hire 
Exchange personnel, including a chief executive officer or executive director, information 
technology personnel, financial management personnel, policy analysts, and other general 
support staff. Each Exchange may invest in physical office space to house the Exchange 
operations. As stated previously, the estimate in Table 1 of grant authority for States setting up 
an Exchange totals nearly $2 billion from 2012-2016, and we assume that the administrative 
costs for start-up and initial implementation of these activities are all subsumed in this estimate 
for State Planning and Establishment Grants. Below, we lay out some estimates of State 
spending for specific components of the Exchange to provide some granularity for the type of 
costs involved. 
Exchange Plan 
In order for an Exchange to be approved, a State will need to submit an Exchange plan 
that provides information on how it will meet all of the requirements for the approval of an 
Exchange. As discussed in the Collection of Information Requirements, we estimate that it will 
  
 
 
 
 18 

take a State approximately 160 hours (approximately one month) for the time and effort needed 
to develop the plan and submit to HHS.  We estimate minimal burden requirements for 
developing the Exchange plan as States will be gathering most of the information needed for the 
plan through the planning and establishment grants provided by HHS. 
States already report to HHS on the activities they are undertaking with Exchange grant 
funds based on eleven core areas of Exchange planning, as presented in the Department’s 
funding opportunity announcement, including: business operations, legislation and governance, 
stakeholder consultation and program integration.  States report on progress in establishment of 
their Exchanges, which will provide a foundation from which States can develop the Exchange 
plan. This streamlined approach will reduce the administrative burden on States related to 
approval of an Exchange. 
Information Technology (IT) Infrastructure 
We have not provided State-specific estimates related to establishment and approval of an 
Exchange due to the impact of State flexibility on Exchange establishment.  This flexibility will 
lead to broad variation among States in the scope of certain activities, primarily in relation to the 
building and adaptation of IT systems relative to current systems, as well as any evidence from
State enabling legislation on the specific role the Exchange will play, and the costs that will be 
associated with that role.  However, as an example of IT costs, the Cooperative Agreements to 
Support Innovative Exchange Information Technology Systems (Early Innovator grants) are 
listed in Table 4, below. The Early Innovator grants were made to a handful of States to develop 
efficient and replicable IT systems that can provide the foundation for other States’ work in this 
area. These amounts vary from $6 million to $48 million per State.  We believe that the low-end 
cost of $6 million for Maryland may not be representative of an average State as it is based on 
  
 
 
 
 19 

the project proposal Maryland outlined in the Early Innovator application.  Maryland may 
request additional funds from the Exchange Planning and Establishment grants and costs vary by 
State based on reasons including population of the State, the system that will be implemented, 
and the State’s current IT systems. 
These Early Innovator grants are the first IT grants provided to States.  As more States 
develop IT systems to support Exchange functionality, we expect the cost of developing these 
systems to decline, capitalizing on the investments made by these initial grantee States.  As a 
result, States that subsequently invest in an IT infrastructure may have lower costs.  
Administrative costs for IT systems will likely vary depending on current State systems as well 
as the approaches Exchanges take to building and streamlining their eligibility and other systems.   
Table 4. Cooperative Agreements to Support Innovative Exchange Information Technology 
Systems Award Amounts by Grantee (in millions of dollars) 
Grantee Recommended Award Amount 
University of Massachusetts Medical School (New 
England consortium) 36 
Wisconsin Department of Health Services 38 
Oregon Health Authority 48 
Kansas Insurance Department 32 
Maryland Dept of Health and Mental Hygiene 6 
New York Department of Health 27 
Subpart C of Part 155 of the Exchange rule also proposes requirements for consumer 
assistance tools to support the Exchange, including an Exchange website, a call center, and an 
electronic calculator. The Affordable Care Act requires that every Exchange operate a toll-free 
  
 
                                                 
 
  
 20 

telephone hotline to respond to requests for assistance, maintain an Internet website through 
which enrollees and applicants of QHPs may obtain standardized comparative information on 
QHPs, establish and make available a calculator to determine the actual cost of coverage after the 
application of any advance payments of the premium tax credit and any cost-sharing reduction, 
and provide a quality rating to each QHP.  As such, the Exchange will develop the above-
mentioned tools and integrate them into other systems and resources provided by the Exchange 
to accurately convey and display information to applicants and enrollees about costs and 
coverage in QHPs. 
According to December 2010 research by the Pew Internet and American Life Project, 83 
percent of adult internet users utilize the Internet to find health information and 66 percent buy 
products online.14  Additionally, 67 percent of adult internet users in the US visit a local, state, or 
federal government website.15  There is the potential for great variability across Exchanges in the 
opportunity to create robust web resources, which may replace more labor-intensive 
administrative processes.  For example, Exchanges may elect to create functionality for 
individuals to manage a personalized account, receive notices and other information online, or 
provide the opportunity for web chats that may reduce the need for paper and in-person 
resources. The initial start-up costs for creating state-of-the-art web resources to educate 
individuals by allowing them to compare plan options and calculate their costs online may be 
significant.  Ultimately, however, such costs could result in lower ongoing costs of the Exchange 
and lower distribution costs of health insurance in general.  While HHS is providing grant 
funding for the implementation of Exchanges and the development of IT systems, States will be 
responsible for the maintenance costs.  In addition to the cost impact of web tools, the Exchange 
14 Pew Internet & Life Project, "Trend Data,"  http://www.pewinternet.org/Trend-Data/Online-Activities-Daily.aspx.
15 Ibid. 
  
 
 
 
  
 
                                                 
 
  
  
 21 

will incur additional administrative expenses to develop and operate a call center and any 
contracting costs associated with this function. 
Navigators 
Subpart C of part 155 of the Exchange rule also proposes requirements on the Navigator 
program.  Exchanges are required to have Navigator programs, and are given substantial 
flexibility in designing these programs.  Funding for Navigators is provided by grants from
Exchange funds separate from the Exchange Planning and Establishment Grants.  We expect 
Navigators to increase access to and enrollment in QHPs.  For instance, Navigators will provide 
an access point to the Exchange for individuals who lack easy access to technology, such as 
computers and telephones.   
Estimating the impact of Navigator programs on enrollment is difficult due to the level of
flexibility States have when creating the programs.  Medicare’s existing State Health Insurance 
Assistance Program (“SHIP”) offers a comparable example to the Navigator program.  SHIPs are 
grant-funded, State-based offices that provide education, outreach, and assistance to Medicare 
beneficiaries. Although the population served by SHIPs is different from the population 
Navigators will serve, SHIP operating data provides a baseline comparison throughout this 
section of analysis. CMS estimates that SHIPs have reached 4.7 million people through outreach 
events and one-on-one counseling in the 2009 grant year.16  In the same year, SHIPs conducted 
54,656 public information and outreach events.17 
Notifications
16 Office of External Affairs and Beneficiary Services, Unpublished, "FY 2010 SHIP Basic Grant Funding," (Center
 
for Medicare & Medicaid Services, 2009). 

17 Ibid. 

  
 22 
The Exchange must also provide notifications to applicants, enrollees, and employers 
regarding enrollment and eligibility-related information or actions taken by the Exchange.  These 
notices may communicate eligibility determinations, annual open enrollment periods, rights to 
appeal or other information.  The Exchange must develop procedures to support these required 
notifications and their accompanying processes.  Exchanges may reduce administrative costs 
associated with notices where these interactions can take place in electronic or automated format.  
As discussed in the Collection of Information Requirements, estimates related to notices 
throughout the proposed rule for Exchanges take into account the time and effort needed to 
develop the notice and make it an automated process to be sent out when appropriate.  As such, 
we estimate that it will take approximately 16 hours annually for the time and effort to develop 
and submit a notice when appropriate.  This estimate is slightly higher than the 8 hours estimated 
for notices discussed in the Medicare Part D rule and reflects the additional functions of the 
Exchange program.  Cost estimates for approximately 13 notices from the Exchange are 
approximately $11,000 for each Exchange. 
Finally, notices, applications and forms must be written in plain language and provided in 
a manner that provides meaningful access to limited English proficient individuals and ensures 
effective communication for people with disabilities.  Exchanges may face administrative costs 
when developing their notices, applications and forms to meet this requirement.   
Enrollment Standards 
In subpart E, we propose the Exchange must transmit information to the issuer of the 
QHP selected by an applicant to enable the issuer of the QHP to enroll the applicant.  The 
Exchange NPRM lays out an annual enrollment period during which individuals will make 
insurance selections.  While we anticipate that the Exchange and QHP issuers will need to allow 
  
 23 

for a high capacity of systems use during the initial and annual open enrollment periods, these 
systems will also need to be available throughout the year to accommodate special enrollment 
periods. 
Exchange enrollment systems will need to support enrollment and termination of 
coverage functions including data transfer functions.  In turn, this function must be in alignment 
with industry privacy and security standards, including HIPAA.  We anticipate that many private 
and State data systems currently comply with industry privacy standards, and therefore, it will 
not be an extensive burden to comply with this standard.   
Initial start up and coordination of processes including data sharing may require 
significant resources initially as the Exchange initiates outreach, education, and engagement 
strategies. In addition, to facilitate seamless transitions for enrollees, the Exchange will need to 
coordinate with Pre-Existing Condition Insurance Plan (PCIP) to support the transition of PCIP 
enrollees into the Exchange, ensuring no lapses in coverage.   
Application Process 
Subpart E of part 155 addresses the application process.  The Affordable Care Act 
requires the Exchange to collect specific types of information to determine eligibility.  In 
accordance with the Affordable Care Act, all QHP issuers must use a uniform enrollment form.  
Further, it specifies that HHS must create a form that may be used to apply for applicable State 
insurance affordability programs.  HHS plans to propose a single, streamlined eligibility 
application that applicants must complete to have their eligibility determined for enrollment in a 
QHP. Exchanges may either adopt the model application or develop their own application with 
HHS approval. The Exchange must make the application accessible to applicants and enrollees 
  
 
  
 
 
                                                 
 
  
 
   
 
 24 

both electronically and in paper form. Exchanges may experience administrative savings to the 
extent that they can encourage the broad use of an electronic or automated application process.   
SHOP
Subpart H of part 155 describes general requirements related to the establishment of the 
SHOP, including certification standards and a set of minimum functions.  Generally, SHOP has 
the same functionality as the rest of the Exchange, except as described below. Therefore, we 
estimate the additional administrative cost of building and operating a SHOP to be greatly 
reduced in comparison to building and operating an Exchange.  As shown in Table 3, SHOP is 
projected to enroll nearly three million employees by 2016.  According to the U.S. Census 
Bureau, in 2008 there were 42.1 million employees employed by employers with fewer than 100 
employees in the United States.18  Currently, 67.4 percent of small employers with between 3 
and 100 employees offer employer-sponsored health insurance coverage.19  The establishment of 
SHOP in conjunction with tax incentives for some employers will provide new opportunities for 
employers to offer affordable health insurance to their employees.
Enrollment in the small group market will be sensitive to premiums.  Unlike for 
individuals who receive advance payments of the premium tax credit, the employer or employee 
will pay the marginal cost of coverage in the small group market.  The Exchange NPRM 
proposes additional flexibility to each Exchange regarding the design of the SHOP.  Exchanges 
may choose to merge the individual and small group markets.  Based on the relative size and risk 
of the two markets, this decision may significantly impact the price of coverage.  
18 Bureau, U.S. Census, "Number of Firms, Number of Establishments, Employment, and Annual Payroll by
 
Enterprise Employment Size for the United States and States, Totals:  2008," (Washington2008). 

19 Claxton, G. et al., Employer Health Benefits, 2010 Annual Survey (Menlo Park: Henry J. Kaiser Family
 
Foundation, Health Research and Educational Trust, 2010). 

  
  
 
 25 

The SHOP will interact with employers as well as the employees who will be enrolling in  
coverage in a QHP.  This dual role requires a website, application, and support suited to the 
needs of employers as well as employees, and billing administration functions appropriate for the 
needs of small employers offering many health plans. All of these requirements could be built as 
extensions of the Exchange, or as entirely separate systems.  
Given that SHOP functionality is so similar to the functionality of the rest of the 
Exchange, including enrollment of qualified employees and certification of QHPs, much of the 
IT and enrollment infrastructure can be reused.  While the criteria for certifying a QHP for the 
SHOP may be slightly different, the certification process is identical.  Therefore, plan 
management processes can be reused for the SHOP.  With the large amount of flexibility 
Exchanges have in implementing these requirements for SHOP, the cost incurred from designing 
and implementing these SHOP functions varies based upon the State’s vision for building its 
SHOP.  Operating both an Exchange and the SHOP under the same administrative entity would 
reduce the cost of running the Exchange.  Alternatively, Exchanges may decide that the needs of 
the small business community are unique and can best be served best through a governance 
structure that is entirely different.   
Certification of QHPs 
Subpart K of part 155 of the Exchange rule proposes standards for the processes for 
certification, recertification, and decertification of QHPs.  To perform these processes, 
Exchanges will undertake various administrative functions.  The Exchange will collect data and 
information from health insurance issuers to facilitate the evaluation of plan benefit packages, 
rates, networks and quality information.  The Exchange may apply additional criteria and may 
negotiate with issuers before certifying QHPs. On an ongoing basis, Exchanges will collect 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 26 

benefit, rate, network information, and other data from QHP issuers to facilitate the use of 
consumer tools such as the calculator and the plan comparison tool.  This information will 
support QHP compliance as well as support the recertification of QHPs.  
Subpart K of part 155 also proposes Exchange standards related to offering the QHPs.  
These standards have the potential to affect the administrative costs of some issuers.  Some QHP 
issuers will be more prepared than others and will incur fewer costs.  For example, if data 
reporting functions required for certification already exist within the QHP issuer, there would be 
no additional cost to building this functionality.
An Exchange has considerable flexibility in determining the certification standards it will 
use to determine whether health plans should be certified as QHPs.  The administrative costs for 
this function will vary based on the operating model selected.  For example, if an Exchange 
chooses to accept any qualified plan in the QHP certification process, it may require fewer 
administrative resources because the Exchange will not be performing competitive evaluations of
plans. Alternatively, if an Exchange chooses to engage in selective contracting or other forms of 
active selection, it could incur higher administrative costs.  Some of these costs could be offset if 
the Exchange contracts with a small number of QHPs, which would reduce the resources that an
Exchange would devote to managing and communicating with QHPs.  While start-up 
administrative costs for this process are included in the total estimated amount for the Exchange 
Planning and Establishment Grants, ongoing costs, including recertification and other ongoing 
operating costs, will be funded by revenue generated by the Exchange. 
Costs of Part 156: Requirements on QHP Issuers
Part 156 of the Exchange NPRM proposes requirements on QHP issuers for participation 
in an Exchange. The cost of participating in an Exchange is an investment for QHP issuers, with 
  
  
                                                 
 
  
  
 27 

substantial benefits expected to accrue to QHP issuers.  The Exchange will function as an 
important distribution channel for QHPs.  QHP issuers currently fund their own sales and 
marketing efforts.  As a centralized outlet to attract and enroll consumers, the Exchanges will 
supplement and reduce incremental health plan sales and marketing costs.  These savings could 
be passed along to consumers in the form of reduced premiums.  We estimate market reforms of 
the Affordable Care Act as well as administrative efficiencies from economies of scale and risk 
pooling will reduce insurance rates per unit of coverage for individuals and small groups.20 
Other administrative efficiencies that could lead to lower QHP premiums inside the Exchange 
include: streamlining of the eligibility process for the advance payments of the premium tax 
credit, customer service functions performed by the Exchange for QHP related issues, and the 
premium aggregation function of SHOP.  
Accreditation 
Subpart C of part 156 proposes that QHP issuers must be accredited on the basis of local 
performance of its QHPs by an accrediting entity recognized by HHS.  For health plan issuers in 
States that already require accreditation, this process is a standard procedure and will add 
minimal administrative cost.  Depending on a State’s requirements, accreditation may be less 
common among issuers in the commercial market and Medicaid managed care organizations.  
The accreditation requirement may have some cost to health plan issuers that are not already 
accredited, but the accreditation process will build on procedures already performed by the 
health plan issuer. Health plan issuers without systems and processes set up to deal with 
accreditation will face a greater burden. 
20 Congressional Budget Office, "Letter to the Honorable Evan Bayh: An Analysis of Health Insurance Premiums
 
Under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act ". 

Gabel, J. et al., "Generosity and adjusted premiums in job-based insurance: Hawaii is up, Wyoming is down," 

Health Affairs 25, no. 3 (2006).  

  
 
 
 
                                                 
 
   
  
 28 
Depending on the size of the health plan issuer and the accrediting body, the cost of 
accreditation may vary: with the National Committee for Quality Assurance (NCQA), the cost
may range from $40,000 to $100,000 per issuer for a three year accreditation; with URAC, the 
cost is $27,000 for a two-year accreditation.21  It should be noted that these are estimates, as 
accreditation costs for QHP issuers may differ from current pricing by accrediting bodies to date.  
These costs will be distributed across QHPs and should not have a significant effect on
premiums.  We expect the increase will diminish over time as the QHP issuer becomes more 
efficient in gaining accreditation.  Annual accreditation requirements will be more costly than 
requiring accreditation less frequently. 
Network Adequacy Standards 
The Exchange NPRM proposes wide discretion for Exchanges in setting network 
adequacy standards for participating health insurance issuers.  An Exchange may determine that 
compliance with relevant State law and licensure requirements is sufficient for a QHP issuer to 
participate in the Exchange. In such case, the network adequacy standard would have no impact 
on premiums.  Since the Exchange will be able to set additional standards in accordance with 
current provider market characteristics and consumer needs, there could be a minimal impact on 
premiums.  
In any State in which the Exchange sets significantly more extensive network adequacy 
standards than those already enforced as a part of State licensure, participating health insurance 
issuers may need to seek additional provider contracts in order to develop their provider 
networks in accordance with these standards.  In some markets, issuers may need to contract
with additional providers at higher reimbursement rates to meet the more extensive network 
21 Mays, Glen. "Can Accreditation Work in Public Health? Lessons from Other Service Industries" 2005. 
  
 
 
 
 
 29 

adequacy requirements.  This may result in higher rates than would have otherwise resulted 
under less extensive network adequacy requirements.   
In general, the network adequacy standards are aimed at maintaining a basic level of
consumer protection, but allow for participating health insurance issuers to compete on these 
factors, with the goal of promoting higher quality of care and lower premiums.  In turn, the 
Exchange NPRM proposes that QHP issuers contract with a sufficient number of essential 
community providers to provide timely access to services for low-income and medically 
underserved individuals. The proposed definition of essential community providers includes a 
broad range of providers to meet the needs of the low-income and medically underserved 
individuals.  It is anticipated that this requirement will not add significant cost to QHP 
premiums, since it is not required that all of the providers be given a contract.  
As with all types of providers, essential community providers may be less numerous in 
certain areas, particularly rural areas.  In urban and suburban settings in particular, we anticipate 
that the broad range of essential community providers will enable a QHP issuer to integrate a 
sufficient number in its provider network.  In rural areas, participating health insurance issuers 
have fewer options of essential community providers to include in their provider networks, and 
they may need to offer higher rates in order to attract those providers.   
Premium Rating Rules 
Affordable Care Act requirements help stabilize the relative risk of each market.  By 
requiring parity in pricing, issuers cannot create price incentives for healthy individuals to prefer 
one market to another, a behavior that could be destabilizing.  We expect this requirement to 
significantly improve the comparative health of the Exchange’s risk pool, and prevent adverse 
selection that has plagued some small health insurance markets and health insurance purchasing 
  
 
 
 
                                                 
 
  
  
 30 

cooperatives. In addition, QHP issuers must pool risk for their plans both inside and outside of 
the Exchange. 
V. Impacts of the Proposed Rule on Standards Related to Reinsurance, Risk Corridors and Risk 
Adjustment
The Reinsurance, Risk Corridors and Risk Adjustment (“Premium Stabilization”) NPRM 
proposes rules and guidelines for the two transitional risk-sharing programs, reinsurance and risk 
corridors, as well as for the risk adjustment program that will continue beyond the first three 
years of Exchange operation. The purpose of these programs is to protect issuers, particularly 
QHP issuers, from the negative effects of adverse selection and to protect consumers from
increases in premiums due to uncertainty for issuers.  
In theory, insurers charge premiums for expected costs plus a risk premium, in order to 
build up reserve funds in case medical costs are higher than expected.22  Payments through 
reinsurance, risk adjustment, and risk corridors reduce the increased risk of financial loss that 
health insurance issuers might otherwise expect to incur in 2014 due to market reforms such as 
guaranteed issue and the elimination of medical underwriting.  These payments reduce the risk to 
the issuer and the issuer can pass on a reduced risk premium to enrollees.   
The Affordable Care Act structures reinsurance and risk adjustment as State-run 
programs with Federal guidelines on methodology, while it establishes risk corridors as a 
Federally-run program.  Table 1 shows the estimated Federal cost of reinsurance and risk 
adjustment will be $11 billion in 2014, $18 billion in 2015 and $18 billion in 2016.  These 
outlays are offset by reinsurance and risk adjustment program receipts of $12 billion in 2014, 
$16 billion in 2015 and $18 billion in 2016 (Table 2).  Reinsurance and risk adjustment 
22 Swartz, K. and Fund, C., Reinsurance: How States Can Make Health Coverage More Affordable for Employers
and Workers (Commonwealth Fund, 2005).
  
  
 
 
 31 

payments lag revenues by one quarter.  In the aggregate, reinsurance and risk adjustment are 
budget neutral, meaning that contributions from some issuers fund disbursements to other 
issuers. CBO did not separately estimate the program costs of risk corridors, but assumed 
aggregate collections from some issuers would offset payments made to other issuers.  
This section analyzes the administrative costs and premium impacts of these three 
programs to mitigate the negative effects of adverse selection.
Reinsurance
The Affordable Care Act requires the implementation of a three-year temporary 
reinsurance program for the years 2014, 2015 and 2016.  Each State that operates an Exchange 
must establish or enter into a contract with an applicable not-for-profit reinsurance entity to carry 
out this program.  A State that does not operate an Exchange may elect to establish a reinsurance 
program under the Affordable Care Act.  If a State does not operate an Exchange and does not 
elect to operate its own reinsurance program, HHS will establish the reinsurance program to 
perform all the reinsurance functions for that State.   
The Affordable Care Act authorizes an annual reinsurance pool of $10 billion in 2014, $6 
billion in 2015, and $4 billion in 2016. It also requires annual contributions to the U.S. Treasury 
of $2 billion, $2 billion, and $1 billion, respectively.  These program costs are funded by
contributions from issuers, including TPAs for self-insured plans.  Section 1341(b)(3) of the 
Affordable Care Act sets contribution levels for the program on a national basis.  HHS proposes 
to establish a national contribution rate that totals $12 billion in 2014.  Reinsurance entities may 
elect to collect additional contributions if the State decides the amount collected according to the 
contribution rate is not sufficient to fund required reinsurance payments (§153.220(b)(3)) or to 
fund the administrative requirements of the reinsurance entity.  Alternatively, reinsurance entities 
  
   
 
 
 32 

can decrease payments if they did not collect enough funds in contributions to make payments 
for reinsurance claims submitted (§153.240(b)(2)).
Reinsurance entities bear the majority of administrative costs for reinsurance, although 
the State must ensure that the reinsurance entity is compliant with the program requirements.  A 
State may have more than one reinsurance entity, and two or more States may jointly enter into 
an agreement with the same reinsurance entity to carry out reinsurance in all States.  
Administrative costs will increase if multiple reinsurance entities are established within a State, 
whereas administrative efficiencies can be found if multiple States contract with one reinsurance 
entity.
The Premium Stabilization NPRM proposes a percent of premium method by which to 
collect reinsurance contributions, although a per capita approach was also considered.  The 
percent of premium method allows States with higher premium costs to collect more money 
towards reinsurance. A flat, per capita amount would have a slightly adverse impact on the low-
price catastrophic and child-only plans that will be a form of coverage in 2014.   
Reinsurance payments will be made to issuers of individual insurance coverage on the
basis of their high-cost enrollees, excluding grandfathered health plans.  HHS will propose and 
publish an annual payment notice that contains the formula for calculating payments.  Payments 
will be based on a portion of costs incurred above an attachment point, subject to a cap.  The 
proposal to reinsure high costs rather than disease status may reduce insurer incentive to control 
costs because the insurer will face only the partial cost of high cost individuals instead of 
receiving a payment based on medical condition regardless of claims cost.  However, use of a 
reinsurance cap, as well as the requirement for health insurance issuer cost-sharing above the 
attachment point and below the cap, may incentivize health insurance issuers to control costs. 
  
   
                                                 
 
 
    
 
 33 

 Additionally, the approach based on cost is simpler to implement and more familiar to health 
insurance issuers, and thus will likely result in savings in administrative costs as compared to 
condition-based reinsurance. The program costs of reinsurance are reflected in changes to health 
insurance premiums.  All health insurance issuers contribute to the reinsurance pool, while only 
health insurance issuers with plans in the individual market are eligible to receive payments.  
Thus, the temporary reinsurance program is redistributive from the non-individual market to the 
individual market. This serves to stabilize premiums in the individual market while having a 
minimal impact on large group issuers.  Reinsurance will attenuate individual market rate 
increases that might otherwise occur because of the immediate enrollment of high risk 
individuals, potentially including, at the State’s discretion, those currently in State high risk 
pools. In 2014, the cost of contributions to the reinsurance pool will be passed on to enrollees 
through premium increases of about one percent of premiums in the total market; the benefits of 
reinsurance will result in premium decreases in the individual market expected to be between 10 
and 15 percent.23 
Evidence from the Healthy New York (“Healthy NY”) program supports the magnitude 
of these estimates.  In 2001, the State of New York began operating Healthy NY and required all 
HMOs in the State to offer policies for which small businesses and low-income individuals 
would be eligible. The program contained a “stop-loss” reinsurance provision designed to lower 
premiums for enrollees.  The State would pay the insurer 90 percent of annual medical claims for 
enrollees that were between $30,000 and $100,000. Premiums for Healthy NY were about 15 
percent to 30 percent less than comparable HMO policies in the small group market.24  This 
23Actuarial Research Corporation, "Reinsurance attachment point estimates," (Annandale2010). 

24 Swartz, K. and Keenan, P.S., Healthy New York: Making Insurance More Affordable for Low-Income Workers
 
(The Commonwealth Fund., 2001).
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
  
 34 

trend has continued. In 2009, the unadjusted medical loss ratio (MLR) in Healthy NY across 
participating plans was 120 percent in 2009. After reinsurance payments were made, the 
adjusted MLR dropped to 84 percent.25 
The reinsurance program permits early and prompt payment of reinsurance during the 
benefit year. This is important to the program’s ability to maintain stable premiums in the 
individual market since risk adjustment and risk corridors are likely to be calculated after the 
benefit year. Reinsurance may offer timely financial relief to health insurers that experience the 
most adverse selection in the first year of implementation.  As the reinsurance contributions 
required under law decrease in 2015 and 2016, their impact on premiums should decline, 
tracking with the decreased uncertainty in the market.  The individual market will become more 
stable as health plans learn their expected risk under new insurance rules and become better able 
to price to their expected risk.
Risk Corridors
The risk corridor program is a temporary, three-year program that applies to QHPs 
offered in the Exchange or purchased from an issuer or broker.  The Affordable Care Act 
establishes risk corridors as a Federal program; consequently, the Premium Stabilization NPRM 
proposes to operate risk corridors under Federal rules with no State variation.  The risk corridor 
program will protect against rate setting uncertainty in the Exchange by limiting the extent of
issuer losses (and gains).
QHP issuers must annually submit to HHS data on premiums collected and allowable 
costs, and make available to HHS any data to support auditing.  This data will be collected in 
standard formats specified by HHS and HHS will seek to leverage existing data reporting as 
25 Burns & Associates, Inc. Independent Report on the Healthy NY Program for Calendar Year 2010. (Phoenix, 
2010). 
  
 
 35 

much as possible. Risk corridors act as an after-the-fact adjustment to premiums based on the 
health insurance issuer’s experience.  They are designed to protect QHP issuers in the individual 
and small group market against inaccurate rate setting.  Due to uncertainty about the population 
during the first years of Exchange operation, plans may not be able to predict accurately their 
risk, and their premiums may reflect costs that are ultimately much lower or much higher than 
predicted, as reflected in overall profitability.  For these plans, risk corridors are designed to shift 
cost from plans that overestimate their risk to plans that underestimate their risk.  The threshold 
for risk corridor payments and charges is reached when a QHP issuer’s allowable costs reach 
plus or minus three percent of the target amount.  An issuer of a QHP plan whose gains are 
greater than three percent of the issuer’s projections must remit charges to HHS, while HHS 
must make payments to an issuer of a QHP plan that experiences losses greater than three 
percent of the issuer’s projections.   
Risk Adjustment
Risk adjustment is a permanent program, administered by States that operate a HHS-
approved Exchange, with risk adjustment criteria and methods established by HHS, with States 
having the option of proposing alternative methodologies.  Risk adjustment is applied to health 
plans offered in the individual and small group markets, both inside and outside of the Exchange, 
except for grandfathered plans. A State that does not operate an Exchange cannot operate risk 
adjustment, although a State operating an Exchange can elect not to run risk adjustment.  For 
States that do not operate an Exchange, or do not elect to operate risk adjustment, HHS will 
administer the risk adjustment functions.  The Exchange may operate risk adjustment, although a 
State may also elect to have an entity other than the Exchange perform the risk adjustment 
functions, provided that the selected entity meets the requirements to operate risk adjustment.  
  
 36 

Similar to the approach for reinsurance, multiple States may contract with a single entity to 
administer risk adjustment, provided that risk is pooled at the State level.  Having a single entity 
administer risk adjustment in multiple States may provide administrative efficiencies.  
HHS will specify a Federally-certified risk adjustment model.  States may use this model 
or develop and propose alternate risk adjustment models that meet Federal standards.  Once HHS 
approves an alternate risk adjustment model, it will be considered a Federally-certified model 
that any State may elect to use.  States that elect to develop their own risk adjustment methods 
will have increased administrative costs.  Developing a risk adjustment model requires complex 
data analysis, including population simulation, predictive modeling, and model calibration.  
States that elect to use Federal methods would likely reduce administrative costs.  
States have the flexibility to merge the individual and small group markets into one risk 
pool or keep them separate for the purposes of risk adjustment.  Risk adjustment must be 
conducted separately in unmerged markets.  Developing the technology infrastructure required 
for data submission will likely require an administrative investment.  The risk adjustment process 
will require significant amounts of demographic and diagnostic data to run through a risk 
assessment model in order to determine individual risk scores that form the basis for plan and 
State averages. The Premium Stabilization NPRM proposes that data to run risk adjustment be 
collected at the State level. States may vary the amount and type of data collected, provided that 
States meet specified data collection standards.  Any State with an all-payer claims database may 
request an exception from the data collection minimum standards.  
Administrative costs will vary across States and health insurance issuers depending on 
the sophistication of technical infrastructure and prior experience with data collection and risk 
adjustment.  States and issuers that already have systems in place for data collection and 
  
 
 
 
                                                 
 
 
 
 
  
 37 

reporting will have reduced administrative costs.  For example, issuers that already report 
encounter data for Medicare Advantage (MA) or Medicaid Managed Care may see minimal 
additional administrative burden for risk adjustment.  MA organizations will be required to 
submit encounter data beginning in 2012.26  All 40 States with capitated Medicaid Managed Care 
Organizations collect encounter data from managed care organizations.27  Some States risk-
adjust in their Medicaid Managed Care programs.  Also, States that have all-payer claims
databases have existing infrastructure to support risk adjustment.  As of 2010, 13 States had 
operational all-payer claims databases.28  Reported annual State funding to establish an all-payer 
claims database system ranges from $350,000 to $2 million.29  States with all-payer or multi-
payer claims databases may need to modify their systems to meet the requirements of risk 
adjustment, however, these modification costs will be less than establishment costs.  States and 
issuers that do not have existing technical capabilities will have larger administrative costs 
related to developing necessary infrastructure.   
Issuer characteristics, such as size and payment methodology, will also impact 
administrative costs.  In general, national issuers will be better prepared for the requirements of
risk adjustment than local issuers.  Additionally, administrative costs may be greater for issuers 
where providers are paid by capitation and where they do not receive claims or encounter data as 
they will have to modify their systems to account for the information required for risk 
adjustment. 
26 Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services, "Announcement of Calendar Year (CY) 2012 Medicare Advantage 

Capitation Rates and Medicare Advantage and Part D Payment Policies and Final Call Letter," (Baltimore2011). 

27 Office of the Inspector General. Medicaid Managed Care Encounter Data: Collection and Use. (2009).
 
28 Miller, Patrick B, et al. All-Payer Claims Databases. (Robert Woods Johnson Foundation. , 2010). 

29 Council, APCD, "Cost and Funding Considerations for a Statewide All-Payer Claims Database (APCD). ," 

(2011). 

  
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
   
 38 
We propose that States audit a sample of data from all issuers that submit data for risk 
adjustment each year.  We further propose that States may extrapolate results from the sample to 
adjust the average actuarial risk for the plan.  This approach is consistent with the approach now 
used in Medicare.  
Risk adjustment transfers dollars from health plans with the lowest risk to health plans
with the highest risk.  From 2014 through 2016, it is estimated that $22 billion will be transferred 
between issuers.30  Risk adjustment protects against overall adverse selection by allowing 
insurers to set premiums according to the average actuarial risk in the individual and small group 
market without respect to the type of risk selection the insurer would otherwise expect to 
experience with a specific product offering in the market.  This should lower the risk premium
and allow issuers to price their products conservatively, closer to the average actuarial risk in the 
market.  In addition, it mitigates the incentive for health plans to avoid unhealthy members.   
The risk adjustment program also serves to level the playing field inside and outside of 
the Exchange as payments and charges are applied to all individual and small group plans.  This 
mitigates the potential for excessive premium growth within the Exchange due to anticipated 
adverse selection. 
VI. Alternatives Considered 
As section 1321 of the Affordable Care Act describes, States have a great deal of 
flexibility on the operation and enforcement of the Exchange.  Exchange standards aim to: 
promote a level playing field that promotes insurers competing on price and quality, ensure the 
maximum number of eligible people enroll in the Exchange, minimize the number of ineligible 
individuals who are able to enroll, minimize the total cost of establishing Exchange functions, 
30 Analysis based on CBO estimates for reinsurance and risk adjustment and the reinsurance contributions specified 
in section 1341(b)(3) of the Affordable Care Act. 
  
 
 39 

and provide Exchanges with the flexibility to cater to the specific needs of their populations.  
Achieving all of these objectives requires fundamental tradeoffs. Below is a description of key 
areas of State flexibility, alternatives considered, and the effect these decisions have on the 
Federal budget. 
Areas of State Flexibility for the Operation of Exchange
States have a number of options on how to operate their Exchanges.  For instance, States 
have flexibility in how they structure the governance of an Exchange.  If a State operates its own 
Exchange, the Exchange can be established as a government agency or a not-for-profit entity per 
section 1311(d) (1) of the Affordable Care Act.  If the Exchange is formed as a government 
entity, States have the option of establishing it as part of an existing agency (such as, the 
Department of Insurance or Medicaid Agency) or creating a new, standalone entity.  
A State also has flexibility in determining how many Exchanges will cover the State’s 
service area.  The State can join with other States to form a regional Exchange or operate a 
number of smaller, geographically distinct subsidiary Exchanges.  In addition to geographical 
choices, the State has to decide whether to create a separate governance structure for SHOP.  The 
Exchange also has choices in determining how much education, marketing, and outreach to 
provide. Additionally, States have flexibility on certain other areas within Federal benchmarks.  
For example, the Exchange has latitude in the number, type, and standardization of plans it 
certifies and accepts into the Exchange.  States also have flexibility in determining network 
adequacy standards and in the establishment of risk adjustment models and data collection for 
the risk adjustment and reinsurance programs.   
Finally, the Affordable Care Act requires that Exchanges must be self-sustaining by 
2015, but grants States freedom in how that is achieved.  Some examples of funding strategies 
  
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
     
 
 
 40 

for Exchanges include: assessments on insurers; direct charges of individuals and employers; or 
through a State’s general fund. 
Alternative #1: Uniform Standard for Operations of Exchanges
Under this alternative, HHS would require a single standard for State operations of 
Exchanges. The proposed regulation offers States the choice of whether to establish an 
Exchange, how to structure governance of the Exchange, whether to join with other States to 
form a regional Exchange, and how much education and outreach to engage in, among other 
factors. This alternative model would restrict State flexibility to some extent, requiring a more 
uniform standard that States must enact in order to achieve certification.  This model could 
reduce Federal oversight costs as there would less variation to monitor across Exchanges.  
Second, it is possible that a uniform model is more cost-efficient or more effective at providing 
coverage than other models States may design.  However, in order for this model to be more 
effective, the uniform standard would need to be effective regardless of individual State 
differences (e.g., market structure, local business needs, demographic differences, etc.).  
Additionally, it assumes that State policy experimentation would not lead to the discovery of 
more effective policies.  However, research has noted that State differences will likely impact 
Exchange needs and functions.31  Furthermore, there is substantial literature that notes that 
certain State Exchange policies will be emulated in other States if they are successful; therefore, 
policies that promote State innovation can be highly effective.32 
Alternative #2: Uniform Standard for Certifying Health Insurance Coverage
31 Corlette, Sabina and JoAnn Volk. 2011 . Active Purchasing for Health Exchanges: An Analysis of Options:
 
Georgetown University: Health Policy Institute. 

32 Volden, Craig. 2006. “States as Policy Laboratories: Emulating Success in the Children’s Health Insurance 

Program” American Journal of Political Science. P. 294-312.
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
     
 
 41 
Under this alternative, there would be a single uniform standard for certifying QHPs. 
QHPs would need to meet a single standard in terms of benefit packages, network adequacy, 
premiums, etc.  HHS would set these standards in advance of the certification process and QHPs 
would either meet those standards and thereby be certified or would fail to meet those standards 
and therefore would not be available to enrollees.  This approach might provide cost savings in 
terms of administrative burden on Exchanges as there would be no need (or ability) to negotiate 
with potential QHPs. This approach could be problematic, however, as uniform national 
standards might not match local needs.  Exchanges might be more effective if they have the 
opportunity to recruit additional plans if there is a concentrated market,33 or to set higher 
standards in markets where competition is already intense.  Secondly, this approach could reduce 
Exchanges’ and QHP issuers’ ability to innovate.  For example, new approaches such as tiered 
networks might appeal to some Exchanges that wish to experiment with health care quality 
improvement and delivery system reform.  Given the advantages a State flexibility approach 
provides, we selected it over Alternatives #1 and #2. 
Effects of State Flexibility on the Federal Budget
The Federal budget should be affected in multiple ways by the flexibility States are 
afforded in the operation of Exchanges.  Estimates in this analysis predict costs arising from
cost-sharing reductions, and outlays for risk adjustment and reinsurance programs and grants for 
Exchanges; tax credits and Medicaid costs are separately calculated, as are the offsets that 
resulted in CBO projecting that the Affordable Care Act would reduce the Federal budget deficit.  
State flexibility in the design and implementation of Exchanges, however, could affect both total 
enrollment as well as the administrative and health plan costs as described in those sections.  For 
33 Corlette, Sabina and JoAnn Volk. 2011. Active Purchasing for Health Exchanges: An Analysis of Options:
Georgetown University: Health Policy Institute. 
  
 
 
 
 
 42 

example, selective contracting with only some health plans could bring down all premiums in the 
Exchange through competition, resulting in lower total advanced premium tax credits. 
VII. Limitations of Analysis  
The previous analyses apply a qualitative analysis to the results of CBO’s 
microsimulation model of the Affordable Care Act.  Although we believe these estimates are 
both fair and realistic, they are based on a predictive economic model and are therefore subject to 
fundamental uncertainty.  Ultimately, the Affordable Care Act requires the creation of 
Exchanges, which are State markets for the purchase of health insurance in the individual and 
small group market through which enrollees may be eligible for a new tax credit program that 
will increase insurance coverage.  With limited previous data and experiences, there is greater 
uncertainty in estimating the impacts of implementing the Affordable Care Act and the 
Exchanges than in estimating implications of modifying a previously existing program.  
Every predictive model has some level of uncertainty.  Economic models are particularly 
subject to uncertainty because they rely on the inherently unpredictable behavior of economic 
actors, individuals deciding what they want to buy.  Many variables that are not measurable 
contribute to these decisions, including future income, changes in health risk, cultural norms, etc.  
Changes in economic conditions (including the distribution of income) or productivity would 
affect the estimates of any predictions on the effects of the Affordable Care Act.  For example, 
external changes to the economy could affect income that, in turn, could affect the estimated 
number of individuals who are eligible for cost-sharing reductions in the Exchanges.  
Additionally, future health care cost trends could differ from projections, which could, in turn, 
affect individual decisions on what to buy. 
  
 
  
 
                                                 
 
43
 Beyond changes in economic conditions, there are other sources of uncertainty.  One 
limitation of the current analysis is uncertainty about how the Affordable Care Act will affect 
employer-sponsored insurance.  A RAND micro-simulation estimated that the number of firms 
offering employer sponsored insurance would increase from 3.5 million to 4.8 million in 2016.34   
An Urban Institute study estimates that large employer coverage would increase by 2 percent and 
small and medium business coverage would be relatively unchanged.35  A Lewin Group study 
estimated a net reduction in the number of people with employer sponsored coverage of 2.8 
million.36  Moreover, experience in Massachusetts showed an increase in employer-sponsored 
insurance following the introduction of its affordable insurance Exchange.37  Thus, while CBO 
assumes a slight decrease in employer-sponsored insurance, other analyses suggest that 
employer-sponsored insurance could increase. 
VIII. Accounting Statement 
Category Primary Estimate Year Dollar  
Unit Discount 
Rate Period Covered
Benefits 
Annualized 
Monetized 
($millions/year) 
Not estimated 2011 7% 2012-2016 
Not estimated 2011 3% 2012-2016 
Qualitative 
The Exchanges, combined with other actions being taken to implement the 
Affordable Care Act, will improve access to health insurance, with numerous 
positive effects, including earlier treatment and improved morbidity, fewer 
bankruptcies and decreased use of uncompensated care.   The Exchange will 
also serve as a distribution channel for insurance reducing administrative 
costs as a part of premiums and providing comparable information on health 
plans to allow for a more efficient shopping experience. 
Costs 
Annualized 424 2011 7% 2012-2016
 
 
34 Eibner, Christine Federico Girosi, Carter  C. Price, Amado Cordova, Peter Hussey, Alice Beckman, and  Elizabeth 
McGylnn(2010) Establishing State Health Insurance Exchanges. Rand Health 
35 Garret, Bowens and Matthew Buettgens. 2011 “Employer Sponsored Insurance under Health Reform: Reports of 
Its Demise are Premature” Urban Institute 
36 Group, The Lewin, "Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA): Long Term Costs for Gvoernments, 
Employers, Families and Providers," Staff Working Paper # 11(2010). 
37 Long, Sharon and Karen Stockley (2010) Health Reform in Massachusetts An Update As of fall 2009. Urban 
Institute 
  
 
44
Monetized 
($millions/year) 410 2011 3% 2012-2016
Qualitative These costs include grant outlays to States to establish Exchanges. 
Transfers 
Federal Annualized 
Monetized 
($millions/year) 
9925 2011 7% 2012-2016 
9633 2011 3% 2012-2016 
Qualitative Risk Adjustment transfers funds among individual and small group market 
health plan issuers.  
Reinsurance collects funds from all issuers and distributes it to individual 
market issuers. 
   
 
 
 
  

IX. Citations
Actuarial Research Corporation. "Reinsurance attachment point estimates." Annandale, 2010. 
ASPE. The Value of Health Insurance: Few of the Uninsured Have Adequate Resources to Pay 
Potential Hospital Bills. (2011). 
Bureau, U.S. Census. "Number of Firms, Number of Establishments, Employment, and Annual 
Payroll by Enterprise Employment Size for the United States and States, Totals:  2008." 
Washington, 2008. 
Burns & Associates, Inc. Independent Report on the Healthy NY Program for Calendar Year 
2010. (Phoenix, 2010). 
Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services. "Announcement of Calendar Year (CY) 2012 
Medicare Advantage Capitation Rates and Medicare Advantage and Part D Payment 
Policies and Final Call Letter." Baltimore, 2011. 
Claxton, G., B. DiJulio, B. Finder, J. Lundy, M. McHugh, A. Osei-Anto, H. Whitmore, J. 
Pickreign, and J. Gabel. Employer Health Benefits, 2010 Annual Survey. Menlo Park: 
Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, Health Research and Educational Trust, 2010. 
Congressional Budget Office. "Letter to the Honorable Evan Bayh: An Analysis of Health 
Insurance Premiums Under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act ". 
Washington, 2009. 
Cook, K., D. Dranove, and A. Sfekas. "Does major illness cause financial catastrophe?" Health 
Services Research 45, no. 2 (2010): 418-36. 
Council, APCD. "Cost and Funding Considerations for a Statewide All-Payer Claims Database 
(APCD). ." (2011). 
Finkelstein, Amy, Sarah Taubman, Bill Wright, Mira Bernstein, Jonathan Gruber, Joseph P. 
Newhouse, Heidi Allen, Katherine Baicker, and The Oregon Health Study Group. "The 
Oregon Health Insurance Experiment: Evidence from the First Year." National Bureau of 
Economic Research Working Paper Series No. 17190 (2011). 
Gabel, J., R. McDevitt, L. Gandolfo, J. Pickreign, S. Hawkins, and C. Fahlman. "Generosity and 
adjusted premiums in job-based insurance: Hawaii is up, Wyoming is down." Health 
Affairs 25, no. 3 (2006): 832. 
Group, The Lewin. "Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA): Long Term Costs for 
Gvoernments, Employers, Families and Providers." Staff Working Paper # 11 (2010).
  
 
 
 45 

Haider, A.H., D.C. Chang, D.T. Efron, E.R. Haut, M. Crandall, and E.E. Cornwell III. "Race and 
insurance status as risk factors for trauma mortality." Archives of Surgery 143, no. 10 
(2008): 945. 
Institute of Medicine. Care without coverage: too little, too late: National Academies Press, 
2002. 
Levy, H., and D. Meltzer. "The impact of health insurance on health." Annu. Rev. Public Health 
29 (2008): 399-409. 
Massachusetts Division of Health Care Finance and Policy. "2009 Annual Report Health Safety 
Net." Boston, 2009. 
Miller, Patrick B, et al. All-Payer Claims Databases. (Robert Woods Johnson Foundation. , 
2010). 
Office of External Affairs and Beneficiary Services, Unpublished. "FY 2010 SHIP Basic Grant 
Funding." Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services, 2009. 
Office of the Inspector General. Medicaid Managed Care Encounter Data: Collection and Use. 
(2009). 
Pew Internet & Life Project. "Trend Data."  http://www.pewinternet.org/Trend-Data/Online-
Activities-Daily.aspx. 
Smulowitz, Peter B., Robert Lipton, J. Frank Wharam, Leon Adelman, Scott G. Weiner, Laura 
Burke, Christopher W. Baugh, Jeremiah D. Schuur, Shan W. Liu, Meghan E. McGrath, 
Bella Liu, Assaad Sayeh, Mary C. Burke, J. Hector Pope, and Bruce E. Landon. 
"Emergency Department Utilization After the Implementation of Massachusetts Health 
Reform." Annals of Emergency Medicine In Press, Corrected Proof. 
Swartz, K., and C. Fund. Reinsurance: How States Can Make Health Coverage More Affordable 
for Employers and Workers: Commonwealth Fund, 2005. 
Swartz, K., and P.S. Keenan. Healthy New York: Making Insurance More Affordable for Low-
Income Workers: The Commonwealth Fund., 2001. 
Weissman, J.S., and J.A. Bigby. "Massachusetts Health Care Reform—Near-Universal Coverage 
at What Cost?" New England Journal of Medicine 361, no. 21 (2009): 2012-15. 
