Wednesday, 
July 29, 2009 
Part III 
Department of 
Education 
Race to the Top Fund; State Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund Program; Institute of 
Education Sciences; Overview 
Information; Grant Program for Statewide 
Longitudinal Data Systems; Notice Inviting 
Applications for New Awards Under the 
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act 
of 2009; Notices 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00001 Fmt 4717 Sfmt 4717 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37804 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
[Docket ID ED–2009–OESE–0006] 
RIN 1810–AB07 
Race to the Top Fund 
AGENCY: Department of Education. 
ACTION: Notice of proposed priorities, 
requirements, definitions, and selection 
criteria. 
Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance 
(CFDA) Number: 84.395A. 
SUMMARY: The Secretary of Education 
(Secretary) proposes priorities, 
requirements, definitions, and selection 
criteria for the Race to the Top Fund. 
The Secretary may use these priorities, 
requirements, definitions, and selection 
criteria in any year in which this 
program is in effect. 
DATES: We must receive your comments 
on or before August 28, 2009. We 
encourage you to submit comments well 
in advance of this date. 
ADDRESSES: Submit your comments 
through the Federal eRulemaking Portal 
or via postal mail, commercial delivery, 
or hand delivery. We will not accept 
comments by fax or by e-mail. Please 
submit your comments only one time in 
order to ensure that we do not receive 
duplicate copies. In addition, please 
include the Docket ID and the term 
‘‘Race to the Top’’ at the top of your 
comments. 
• Federal eRulemaking Portal: Go to 
http://www.regulations.gov to submit 
your comments electronically. 
Information on using Regulations.gov, 
including instructions for accessing 
agency documents, submitting 
comments, and viewing the docket, is 
available on the site under ‘‘How To Use 
This Site.’’ A direct link to the docket 
page is also available at http://
www.ed.gov/programs/racetothetop. 
• Postal Mail, Commercial Delivery, 
or Hand Delivery. If you mail or deliver 
your comments about these proposed 
priorities, requirements, definitions, and 
selection criteria, address them to Office 
of Elementary and Secondary Education 
(Attention: Race to the Top Fund 
Comments), U.S. Department of 
Education, 400 Maryland Avenue, SW., 
Room 3W329, Washington, DC 20202. 
• Privacy Note: The Department’s 
policy for comments received from 
members of the public (including those 
comments submitted by mail, 
commercial delivery, or hand delivery) 
is to make these submissions available 
for public viewing in their entirety on 
the Federal eRulemaking Portal at 
http://www.regulations.gov. Therefore, 
commenters should be careful to 
include in their comments only 
information that they wish to make 
publicly available on the Internet. 
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Beth 
Yeh, U.S. Department of Education, 400 
Maryland Avenue, SW., Room 6W219, 
Washington, DC 20202. Telephone: 
202–205–3775 or by e-mail: 
racetothetop@ed.gov. Note that we will 
not accept comments by e-mail. 
If you use a telecommunications 
device for the deaf (TDD), call the 
Federal Relay Service (FRS), toll free, at 
1–800–877–8339. 
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 
Invitation to Comment: We invite you 
to submit comments regarding this 
notice. To ensure that your comments 
have maximum effect in developing the 
notice of final priorities, requirements, 
definitions, and selection criteria, we 
urge you to identify clearly the specific 
proposed priority, requirement, 
definition, or selection criterion that 
each comment addresses. We encourage 
you to submit comments in advance of 
the date by which they must be 
received. 
We invite you to assist us in 
complying with the specific 
requirements of Executive Order 12866 
and its overall requirement of reducing 
regulatory burden that might result from 
these proposed priorities, requirements, 
definitions, and selection criteria. Please 
let us know of any further ways we 
could reduce potential costs or increase 
potential benefits while preserving the 
effective and efficient administration of 
the program. 
During and after the comment period, 
you may inspect all public comments 
about this notice by accessing 
Regulations.gov. You may also inspect 
the comments in person, in Room 
3W329, 400 Maryland Avenue, SW., 
Washington, DC, between the hours of 
8:30 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Eastern time, 
Monday through Friday of each week 
except Federal holidays. 
Assistance to Individuals with 
Disabilities in Reviewing the 
Rulemaking Record: On request, we will 
provide an appropriate accommodation 
or auxiliary aid to an individual with a 
disability who needs assistance to 
review the comments or other 
documents in the public rulemaking 
record for this notice. If you want to 
schedule an appointment for this type of 
accommodation or auxiliary aid, please 
contact the person listed under FOR 
FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT. 
Purpose of Program: The Race to the 
Top Fund, authorized under the 
American Recovery and Reinvestment 
Act of 2009 (ARRA), provides 
approximately $4.3 billion for 
competitive grants to States to 
encourage and reward States that are 
creating the conditions for education 
innovation and reform; implementing 
ambitious plans in the four education 
reform areas described in the ARRA; 
and achieving significant improvement 
in student outcomes, including making 
substantial gains in student 
achievement, closing achievement gaps, 
improving high school graduation rates, 
and ensuring student preparation for 
success in college and careers. 
Program Authority: American Recovery 
and Reinvestment Act of 2009, Division A, 
Section 14006, Public Law 111–5. 
Background for Proposed Priorities, 
Requirements, Definitions, and 
Selection Criteria 
The Statutory Context 
On February 17, 2009, President 
Obama signed into law the ARRA, 
historic legislation designed to stimulate 
the economy, support job creation, and 
invest in critical sectors, including 
education. The ARRA lays the 
foundation for education reform by 
supporting investments in innovative 
strategies that are most likely to lead to 
improved results for students, long-term 
gains in school and school system 
capacity, and increased productivity 
and effectiveness. 
The ARRA provides $4.3 billion for 
the Race to the Top Fund (referred to in 
the statute as the State Incentive Grant 
Fund). This is a competitive grant 
program designed to encourage and 
reward States that are implementing 
significant education reforms across 
four ‘‘assurance’’ areas. Specifically, 
section 14006(a)(2) of the ARRA 
requires States to have made significant 
progress in the following four education 
reform areas in order to receive a grant: 
implementing standards and 
assessments, improving teacher 
effectiveness and achieving equity in 
teacher distribution, improving 
collection and use of data, and 
supporting struggling schools. In 
addition, as required by section 
14006(c) of the ARRA, States that 
receive a Race to the Top grant must use 
at least 50 percent of the award to 
provide subgrants to local educational 
agencies (LEAs), including public 
charter schools identified as LEAs under 
State law, based upon LEAs’ relative 
shares of funding under Part A of Title 
I of the Elementary and Secondary 
Education Act of 1965, as amended 
(ESEA). LEAs that choose to participate 
in their State’s Race to the Top proposal 
must agree to fully implement the 
State’s proposed plan and to use their 
funding under this grant in support of 
that plan. 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00002 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4703 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37805 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
1 This statute, rather than relevant sections of the 
ESEA, is referenced because it provides the most 
recent listing of NAEP subgroups. We propose using 
the NAEP to monitor overall increases in student 
achievement and decreases in the achievement gap 
over the course of this grant because the NAEP 
provides a way to report consistently across Race 
to the Top grantees as well as within a State over 
time as the State transitions from its current 
assessments to the high-quality assessments (as 
defined in this notice). 
The ARRA also requires that the 
Governor apply on behalf of a State 
seeking a Race to the Top grant, and 
section 14005(c) of the ARRA 
specifically requires that a Race to the 
Top application: 
• Describe the status of the State’s 
progress in each of the four education 
reform areas, and the strategies the State 
is employing to help ensure that 
students in the subgroups described in 
section 1111(b)(2)(C)(v)(II) of the ESEA 
(i.e., economically disadvantaged 
students, students from major racial and 
ethnic groups, students with 
disabilities, and students with limited 
English proficiency) who have not met 
the State’s proficiency targets continue 
making progress toward meeting the 
State’s student academic achievement 
standards; 
• Describe the achievement and 
graduation rates (as described in section 
1111(b)(2)(C)(vi) of the ESEA and as 
clarified in 34 CFR 200.19(b)(1)) of 
public elementary and secondary school 
students in the State, and the strategies 
the State is employing to help ensure 
that all subgroups of students identified 
in section 1111(b)(2)(C)(v)(II) of the 
ESEA continue making progress toward 
meeting the State’s student academic 
achievement standards; 
• Describe how the State would use 
its grant funding to improve student 
academic achievement in the State, 
including how it will allocate the funds 
to give priority to high-need LEAs (as 
defined in this notice); and 
• Include a plan for evaluating the 
State’s progress in closing achievement 
gaps. 
In this notice, we propose additional 
specific priorities, requirements, 
definitions, and selection criteria 
regarding the applications that 
individual States submit for 
approximately $4 billion of Race to the 
Top funds. At a later date, we may 
announce a separate Race to the Top 
Standards and Assessment competition, 
for approximately $350 million, to 
support the development of assessments 
by consortia of States. 
Structure of Race to the Top 
Race to the Top will reward States for 
having created the conditions for reform 
(as measured through the State Reform 
Conditions Criteria proposed in this 
notice) and for increasing student 
achievement. Race to the Top will also 
provide incentives for States to develop 
and implement comprehensive reform 
strategies that are integrated across the 
four ARRA education reform areas and 
lead to improved student outcomes (as 
measured through the Reform Plan 
Criteria proposed herein). The 
Department expects successful 
applicants to clear a high bar on both 
State Reform Conditions and Reform 
Plan Criteria. Proposed State Reform 
Conditions and Reform Plan Criteria are 
described in detail in the Proposed 
Selection Criteria section of this notice. 
To ensure that the State’s Race to the 
Top plans (which the State will describe 
in its application in response to the 
Reform Plan Criteria) are 
comprehensive, coherent, and 
measurable, we propose that States 
describe their approaches and, where 
appropriate, set annual targets for each 
of the Reform Plan Criteria. 
Note: The proposed annual targets are set 
forth in the Appendix to this notice. These 
targets are specific to Race to the Top, and 
they are in addition to, not a replacement for, 
the existing annual requirements under the 
ESEA.) The annual targets should be 
achievable but sufficiently ambitious to 
support a successful Race to the Top grant 
application. 
Under the statute, at least 50 percent 
of the funds under a State’s Race to the 
Top grant must be provided to LEAs 
based on LEAs’ relative shares of 
funding under part A of Title I of the 
ESEA. The remaining funds are 
available to the State for State-level 
activities and for disbursements to LEAs 
and other eligible entities under such 
formulas, competitive processes, or 
other mechanisms as the State may 
propose in its plan. We propose that a 
State incorporate into its plan the 
activities that LEAs will undertake to 
advance the four education reform 
areas. 
Timing of Applications and Awards 
The Department plans to make Race 
to the Top grants in two phases. States 
that are ready to apply may do so in 
Phase 1, which will open in late 
calendar year 2009. States that need 
more time—for example, to engage in 
planning with and secure commitments 
from superintendents, school boards, 
principals, teachers, union leaders, and 
community supporters, or others—may 
apply in Phase 2, which will open in 
late Spring of calendar year 2010. States 
that apply in Phase 1 but are not 
awarded grants may reapply for funding 
in Phase 2, together with States that are 
applying for the first time in Phase 2. 
Phase 1 grantees may not apply for 
additional funding in Phase 2. We will 
announce specific deadlines for both 
Phase 1 and Phase 2 in subsequent 
notice(s) inviting applications for funds 
under this program. 
I. Proposed Priorities 
Background: The Secretary proposes 
five priorities for the Race to the Top 
competition. We are proposing to 
designate Proposed Priority 1 as an 
absolute priority, Proposed Priority 2 as 
a competitive preference priority, and 
Proposed Priorities 3 through 5 as 
invitational priorities. We may choose, 
in the notice of final priorities, 
requirements, definitions, and selection 
criteria, to change the designation of any 
of these priorities to absolute, 
competitive preference, or invitational 
priorities, or to include the substance of 
these priorities in the selection criteria. 
Under an absolute priority, as 
specified by 34 CFR 75.105(c)(3), we 
would consider only applications that 
meet the priority. Under a competitive 
preference priority, we would give 
competitive preference to an application 
by (1) awarding additional points, 
depending on the extent to which the 
application meets the priority (34 CFR 
75.105(c)(2)(i)); or (2) selecting an 
application that meets the priority over 
an application of comparable merit that 
does not meet the priority (34 CFR 
75.105(c)(2)(ii)). With an invitational 
priority, we would signal our interest in 
receiving applications that meet the 
priority; however, consistent with 34 
CFR 75.105(c)(1), we would not give an 
application that meets an invitational 
priority preference over other 
applications. 
Proposed Priority 1: Absolute Priority— 
Comprehensive Approach to the Four 
Education Reform Areas 
To meet this priority, the State’s 
application must comprehensively 
address each of the four education 
reform areas specified in the ARRA to 
demonstrate that the State and its 
participating LEAs are taking a systemic 
approach to education reform. The 
State’s application must describe how 
the State and participating LEAs intend 
to use Race to the Top and other funds 
to implement comprehensive and 
coherent policies and practices in the 
four education reform areas, and how 
these are designed to increase student 
achievement, reduce the achievement 
gap across student subgroups (as 
described in section 303(b)(2)(G) of the 
National Assessment of Educational 
Progress Authorization Act (NAEP) 1), 
and increase the rates at which students 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00003 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4703 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37806 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
2 See, e.g. Kane, Thomas J., Jonah E. Rockoff, and 
Douglas O. Staiger (2006), ‘‘What Does Certification 
Tell Us About Teacher Effectiveness? Evidence 
from New York City,’’ NBER Working Paper No. 
12155; Rivkin, Steven G., Eric A. Hanushek, and 
John F. Kain (2005), ‘‘Teachers, Schools, and 
Academic Achievement,’’ Econometrica, 73(2), 
417–458; Rockoff, Jonah. E. (2004), ‘‘The Impact of 
Individual Teachers on Students’ Achievement: 
Evidence from Panel Data,’’ American Economic 
Review 94(2), 247–52; Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development (2004), ‘‘Teachers 
Matter: Attracting, Developing and Retaining 
Effective Teachers’’, p. 3; Leithwood, Kenneth, 
Karen Seashore Louis, Stephen Anderson, and Kyla 
Wahlstrom (2004), ‘‘How Leadership Influences 
Student Learning,’’ Wallace Foundation Learning 
from Leadership Project; Aaronson, Daniel, Lisa 
Barrow, and William Sander (2003), ‘‘Teacher and 
Student Achievement in the Chicago Public High 
Schools,’’ Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Working 
Paper 2002–28. 
3 Rivkin, Hanushek, and Kain (2005). Kane, 
Rockoff, and Staiger (2006). Aaronson, Barrow, and 
Sander (2003). 
4 For example, Rockoff et al. find that even using 
a detailed data set on incoming teacher 
characteristics allows them to predict only about 12 
percent of the variance of the expected distribution 
of teacher effectiveness. Jonah E. Rockoff, Brian A. 
Jacob, Thomas J. Kane, and Douglas O. Staiger 
(2008), ‘‘Can You Recognize an Effective Teacher 
When You Recruit One?’’ NBER Working Paper No. 
14485. Similarly, Goldhaber et al. show that the 
variance in student achievement due to 
unobservable teacher variables is 40 times greater 
than the variance due to observable teacher 
variables. Dan Goldhaber, Dominic Brewer, and 
Deborah J. Anderson (1999), ‘‘A three-way error 
components analysis of educational 
productivity,’’ Education Economics 7 (3): 199–208. 
5 Kane, Rockoff, and Staiger (2006). Aaronson, 
Barrow, and Sander (2003). 
graduate from high school prepared for 
college and careers. 
Proposed Priority 2: Competitive 
Preference Priority—Emphasis on 
Science, Technology, Engineering, and 
Mathematics (STEM) 
To meet this priority, the State’s 
application must describe plans to 
address the need to (i) offer a rigorous 
course of study in mathematics, 
sciences, technology, and engineering; 
(ii) cooperate with industry experts, 
museums, universities, research centers, 
or other STEM-capable community 
partners to prepare and assist teachers 
in integrating STEM content across 
grades and disciplines, in promoting 
effective and relevant instruction, and 
in offering applied learning 
opportunities for students; and (iii) 
prepare more students for advanced 
study and careers in the sciences, 
technology, engineering, and 
mathematics, including addressing the 
needs of underrepresented groups and 
of women and girls in the areas of 
science, technology, engineering and 
mathematics. 
Proposed Priorities 3 Through 5: 
Proposed Priority 3—Invitational 
Priority— Expansion and Adaptation of 
Statewide Longitudinal Data Systems 
The Secretary is particularly 
interested in applications in which the 
State plans to expand statewide 
longitudinal data systems to include or 
integrate data from special education 
programs, limited English proficiency 
programs, early childhood programs, 
human resources, finance, health, 
postsecondary, and other relevant areas, 
with the purpose of allowing important 
questions related to policy or practice to 
be asked and answered. 
The Secretary is also particularly 
interested in applications in which 
States propose working together to 
adapt one State’s statewide longitudinal 
data system so that it may be used, in 
whole or in part, by other State(s), rather 
than having each State build or continue 
building such system(s) independently. 
Proposed Priority 4—Invitational 
Priority—P–20 Coordination and 
Vertical Alignment 
The Secretary is particularly 
interested in applications in which the 
State plans to address how early 
childhood programs, K–12 schools, 
postsecondary institutions, and 
workforce organizations will coordinate 
to improve all parts of the education 
system and create a more seamless P–20 
route for students. Vertical alignment 
across P–20 is particularly critical at 
each point where a transition occurs 
(e.g., between early childhood and K– 
12, or between K–12 and post 
secondary) to ensure that students 
exiting one level are prepared for 
success, without remediation, in the 
next. 
Proposed Priority 5—Invitational 
Priority—School-Level Conditions for 
Reform and Innovation 
The Secretary is particularly 
interested in applications in which the 
State’s participating LEAs provide 
schools, where appropriate, with 
flexibilities and autonomies conducive 
to reform and innovation, such as— 
(i) Selecting staff; 
(ii) Implementing new structures and 
formats for the school day or year that 
expand learning time; 
(iii) Placing budgets under the 
schools’ control; 
(iv) Awarding credit to students based 
on student performance instead of 
instructional time; and 
(v) Providing comprehensive services 
to high-need students (e.g., through 
local partnerships, internal staffing, and 
contracts with outside providers). 
II. Requirements 
The Secretary proposes the following 
requirements for this program. We may 
apply these requirements in any year in 
which this program is in effect. 
A. Eligibility Requirements 
Background: We are proposing two 
eligibility requirements for Race to the 
Top applicants. First, we propose that a 
State must have an approved 
application under both Phase 1 and 
Phase 2 of the State Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund (Stabilization) program of the 
ARRA in order to be eligible to receive 
an award from the Race to the Top 
competition. Section 14005(d) of the 
ARRA requires a State that receives 
funds under the Stabilization program 
to provide assurances in the same four 
education reform areas that will be 
advanced by the Race to the Top grant. 
We therefore believe that it would be 
inconsistent to award a Race to the Top 
grant, which requires a determination 
that a State has made significant 
progress in the four education reform 
areas, to a State that has not met 
requirements for receiving funds under 
the Stabilization program. 
Second, we propose that to be eligible 
under this program, a State must not 
have any legal, statutory, or regulatory 
barriers to linking student achievement 
or student growth data to teachers for 
the purpose of teacher and principal 
evaluation. Research indicates that 
teacher quality is a critical contributor 
to student learning and that there is 
dramatic variation in teacher quality.2 
Yet it is difficult to predict teacher 
quality based on the qualifications that 
teachers bring to the job. Indeed, 
measures such as certification, master’s 
degrees, and years of teaching 
experience have limited predictive 
power on this point.3 Therefore, one of 
the most effective ways to accurately 
assess teacher quality is to measure the 
growth in achievement of a teacher’s 
students;4 5 and by aggregating the 
performance of students across teachers 
within a school, to assess principal 
quality. Current law in a number of 
States presents an obstacle to efforts to 
improve teacher quality by prohibiting 
data regarding student achievement 
from being tied to teachers for the 
purposes of evaluation. This capability 
is fundamental to Race to the Top 
reforms and to the requirement in 
section 14005(d)(2) of the ARRA that 
States take actions to improve teacher 
effectiveness. Without this legal 
authority, States would not be able to 
execute reform plans relating to several 
selection criteria in this notice (see 
Selection Criteria (C)(2) through (C)(5)), 
because these plans must require LEAs 
and schools to determine which 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 20:41 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00004 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4703 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37807 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
teachers and principals are effective 
using student achievement data. 
Proposed Eligibility Requirements: We 
propose the following requirements that 
a State must meet in order to be eligible 
to receive funds under this program. 
(a) In order for the State to be eligible 
for the Race to the Top Phase 1 
competition, the State’s applications for 
funding under Phase 1 and Phase 2 of 
the Stabilization program must be 
approved by the Department by 
December 31, 2009. In order for the 
State to be eligible for the Race to the 
Top Phase 2 competition, the State’s 
application for funding under Phase 1 
and Phase 2 of the Stabilization program 
must be approved by the Department 
prior to the State submitting its Race to 
the Top Phase 2 application. 
(b) The State does not have any legal, 
statutory, or regulatory barriers to 
linking data on student achievement (as 
defined in this notice) or student growth 
(as defined in this notice) to teachers 
and principals for the purpose of 
teacher and principal evaluation. 
B. Application Requirements 
Background: Section 14005(c) of the 
ARRA requires that certain information 
(as discussed earlier in this notice) be 
included in States’ Race to the Top 
applications. Consistent with those 
requirements and the need for 
additional information that will ensure 
a fair and accurate peer review of the 
grant applications, we propose the 
following requirements for the 
application a State would submit to the 
Department for funding under this 
program. 
The Department recognizes that 
requests for data and information 
should reflect an integrated and 
coordinated approach among the 
various ARRA programs, particularly 
the State Fiscal Stabilization, Race to 
the Top, School Improvement Grants, 
and Statewide Longitudinal Data 
Systems grant programs. Accordingly, 
the Department will continue to 
evaluate our requests for data and 
information under this program in 
context with the other ARRA programs. 
Proposed Application Requirements 
(a) The State’s application must be 
signed by the Governor, the State’s chief 
school officer, and the president of the 
State board of education. 
(b) The State must describe the 
progress it has made to date in each of 
the four education reform areas, 
including how the State has used ARRA 
and other Federal and State funding 
over the last several years to pursue 
reforms in these areas (as described in 
Overall Selection Criterion (E)(1)). 
(c) The State must provide financial 
data to show whether and to what 
extent the percentage of the total 
revenues available to the State (as 
defined in this notice) that were used to 
support elementary, secondary, and 
public higher education for FY 2009 
increased, decreased, or remained the 
same compared to FY 2008 (as 
described in Overall Selection Criterion 
(E)(2)). 
(d) The State must describe its 
statewide support from stakeholders 
and LEAs, including public charter 
schools identified as LEAs under State 
law (as described in Overall Selection 
Criterion (E)(3)). 
(e) The State must include a budget 
that details how it will use grant funds 
and other resources to meet targets and 
perform related functions, including 
how it will use funds awarded under 
this program to— 
(1) Achieve its targets for improving 
student achievement and graduation 
rates and for closing achievement gaps 
(as described in Overall Selection 
Criterion (E)(4)); and 
(2) Give priority to high-need LEAs 
(as defined in this notice), in addition 
to providing 50 percent of the grant to 
participating LEAs based on their 
relative shares of funding under part A 
of Title I of the ESEA as required under 
section 14006(c) of the ARRA. 
(f) The State must provide, for each 
State Reform Conditions Criterion 
(listed later in this notice), a description 
of the State’s current status in meeting 
that Criterion, and at a minimum, the 
information requested as supporting 
evidence for the Criterion. The 
Appendix to this notice contains a table 
listing the proposed evidence. 
(g) The State must provide, for each 
Reform Plan Criterion (listed later in 
this notice) a detailed plan for use of 
grant funds that includes, but need not 
be limited to— 
(1) The key activities to be 
undertaken; 
(2) The goals and rationale for the 
activities, which may include but need 
not be limited to evidence of the past 
effectiveness of those activities, as 
documented in research or through the 
effective implementation of an activity 
in one or more States, LEAs, or schools 
(which may include charter schools); 
(3) The timeline for implementing the 
activities; 
(4) The party or parties responsible for 
implementing the activities; 
(5) The resources the State will use to 
support the activities (e.g., funding, 
personnel, systems); 
(6) The State’s annual targets, where 
applicable, with respect to the 
performance measures aligned to the 
Criterion for the four school years 
beginning with the 2010–2011 school 
year. The Appendix to this notice 
contains a table listing the proposed 
performance measures. Where plans are 
proposed for reform efforts not covered 
by a performance measure specified by 
the Department, States are encouraged 
to propose performance measures and 
annual targets for those efforts; and 
(7) The information requested as 
supporting evidence, if any (as 
described in the Appendix), for the 
Criterion, together with any additional 
information the State believes will be 
helpful to peer reviewers. 
(h) The State must submit a 
certification from the State Attorney 
General, or other chief State legal 
officer, that the State’s description of, 
and statements and conclusions 
concerning, State law (for example, with 
respect to the Eligibility Requirement 
regarding teacher effectiveness or any of 
the applicable Selection Criteria) in its 
application are complete, accurate, and 
constitute a reasonable interpretation of 
State law. 
C. Annual Report and Performance 
Measures 
The Secretary proposes core 
performance measures for evaluating the 
performance of States receiving funds 
under this program. See the Appendix 
to this notice for the proposed 
performance measures. 
In addition, a State receiving funds 
under this program must submit to the 
Department an annual report which may 
include, in addition to the standard 
elements, a description of the State’s 
and its LEAs’ progress to date on their 
goals, timelines, and budgets, as well as 
actual performance compared to the 
annual targets the State established in 
its application with respect to each 
performance measure. 
Further, a State receiving funds under 
this program and its participating LEA 
are accountable for meeting the goals, 
timelines, budget, and annual targets 
established in the application; adhering 
to an annual fund drawdown schedule 
that is tied to meeting these goals, 
timelines, budget, and annual targets; 
and fulfilling and maintaining all other 
conditions for the conduct of the 
project. 
The Department will monitor a State’s 
and its participating LEAs’ progress in 
meeting its goals, timelines, budget, and 
annual targets and in fulfilling other 
applicable requirements. To support a 
collaborative process between the State 
and the Department, the Department 
may require that applicants who are 
selected to receive an award enter into 
a written performance or cooperative 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00005 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4703 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37808 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
6 A State’s responses to proposed Indicator (c)(2) 
and Descriptor (c)(1) in its Stabilization program 
Phase 2 application may contain information 
responsive, in part, to this State Reform Conditions 
Criterion, to which the State may refer and 
incorporate in its Race to the Top application. 
7 A State’s responses to proposed Indicator (c)(2) 
and Descriptor (c)(1) in its Stabilization program 
Phase 2 application may contain information 
responsive, in part, to this State Reform Conditions 
Criterion, to which the State may refer and 
incorporate in its Race to the Top application. 
8 A State’s responses to proposed Indicators 
(c)(1)–(c)(13) and Descriptor (c)(1) in its 
Stabilization program Phase 2 application may 
contain information related to this Reform Plan 
Criterion, to which the State can refer and build 
upon in its Race to the Top application. 
9 The State’s responses to proposed Indicator 
(b)(1) and requirements II.c.1.A and II.c.1.B.(i–iii) in 
its Stabilization program Phase 2 application may 
contain information responsive, in part, to this State 
Reform Conditions Criterion, to which the State can 
refer and build upon in its Race to the Top 
application. 
agreement with the Department. If the 
Department determines that a State is 
not meeting its goals, timelines, budget, 
or annual targets or is not fulfilling 
other applicable requirements, the 
Department will take appropriate action, 
which could include a collaborative 
process between the Department and the 
State, or enforcement measures with 
respect to this grant such as placing the 
State in high-risk status, putting the 
State on reimbursement payment status, 
or delaying or withholding funds. 
D. Other Program Requirements 
We propose the following additional 
requirements for States receiving funds 
under this program: 
(a) The State and its participating 
LEAs must use funds under this 
program to participate in a national 
evaluation of the program, if the 
Department chooses to conduct one. In 
addition, the Department is seeking 
comment on whether a State should, 
instead of or in addition to a national 
evaluation, be required to conduct its 
own evaluation of its program activities 
using funds under this program. The 
Department will announce in the notice 
inviting applications the evaluation 
approach(es) that will be required. 
(b) The State must participate in all 
applicable technical assistance activities 
that may be conducted by the 
Department or its designees. 
(c) The State must make freely 
available all of the outputs (e.g., 
materials, tools, processes, systems) that 
it or its designated partners produce 
related to its grant, including by posting 
the outputs on any Web site identified 
or sponsored by the Department. 
III. Selection Criteria 
The Secretary proposes the following 
criteria for reviewing applications 
submitted under this program. We may 
apply one or more of these criteria in 
any year in which this program is in 
effect. In the notice inviting 
applications, the application package, or 
both, we will announce the maximum 
number of points assigned to each 
criterion. 
As discussed elsewhere in this notice, 
we propose using two types of selection 
criteria—State Reform Conditions 
Criteria and Reform Plan Criteria—to 
rate a State’s application for Race to the 
Top funds. State Reform Conditions 
Criteria will be used to assess a State’s 
past progress and its success in creating 
conditions for reform in specific areas 
related to the four ARRA education 
reform areas. The Reform Plan Criteria 
will be used to assess States’ plans for 
future efforts in the four ARRA 
education reform areas. 
In the Appendix, we list both the 
minimum evidence, if any, that the 
State must provide to assist the 
Department and peer reviewers in 
determining whether a State’s 
application meets each Criterion, and 
the performance measures, if any, for 
each Reform Plan Criterion. States may 
submit additional information if they 
deem it to be relevant and useful. In 
addition, States that have submitted the 
requested information to the 
Department for other programs are 
welcome to indicate that they would 
like a specific previous submission to be 
used as evidence, or they may provide 
an updated submission. 
For each Reform Plan Criterion, peer 
reviewers will also consider the extent 
to which States, where applicable, set 
ambitious yet achievable annual targets 
against the performance measure, to 
support the State’s plan. Grantees will 
report their progress with respect to 
these performance measures and annual 
targets as part of their annual reports. 
Proposed Selection Criteria 
A. Standards and Assessments 
Note: Under this reform area, we are 
proposing several Criteria that will be 
different for applications submitted under 
Phase 1 and Phase 2. Where the Criteria are 
different, we have so indicated. 
State Reform Conditions Criteria 
(A)(1) Developing and adopting 
common standards: 6 
(i) For Phase 1 applications: The 
extent to which the State has 
demonstrated commitment to improving 
the quality of its standards by 
participating in a consortium of States 
that is working toward jointly 
developing and adopting, by June 2010, 
a common set of K–12 standards (as 
defined in this notice) that are 
internationally benchmarked and that 
build toward college and career 
readiness by the time of high school 
graduation, and the extent to which this 
consortium includes a significant 
number of States. 
(ii) For Phase 2 applications: Whether 
the State has demonstrated commitment 
to improving the quality of its standards 
by adopting, as part of a multi-State 
consortium, a common set of K–12 
standards (as defined in this notice) that 
are internationally benchmarked and 
that build toward college and career 
readiness by the time of high school 
graduation, and the extent to which this 
consortium includes a significant 
number of States. 
(A)(2) Developing and implementing 
common, high-quality assessments: 7 
Whether the State has demonstrated a 
commitment to improving the quality of 
its assessments by participating in a 
consortium of States that is working 
toward jointly developing and 
implementing common, high-quality 
assessments (as defined in this notice) 
aligned with the consortium’s common 
set of K–12 standards (as defined in this 
notice) that are internationally 
benchmarked and that build toward 
college and career readiness by the time 
of high school graduation, and the 
extent to which this consortium 
includes a significant number of States. 
Reform Plan Criteria 
(A)(3) Supporting transition to 
enhanced standards and high-quality 
assessments: 8 The extent to which the 
State, in collaboration with its 
participating LEAs, has a high-quality 
plan for supporting a statewide 
transition to and implementation of (a) 
internationally benchmarked K–12 
standards that build toward college and 
career readiness by the time of high 
school graduation, and (b) high-quality 
assessments (as defined in this notice) 
tied to these standards. State or LEA 
activities might include: Aligning high 
school exit criteria and college entrance 
requirements with the new assessments; 
developing, disseminating, and 
implementing curricular frameworks 
and materials, formative and interim 
assessments (as defined in this notice), 
and professional development materials; 
and engaging in other strategies that 
translate the standards and information 
from assessments into classroom 
practice. 
B. Data Systems to Support Instruction 
State Reform Conditions Criteria 
(B)(1) Fully implementing a statewide 
longitudinal data system: 9 The extent to 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00006 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4703 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37809 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
10 A State’s responses to proposed Indicator (b)(2) 
and requirements II.c.2.A and II.c.2.B(i–iii) in its 
Stabilization program Phase 2 application may 
contain information related to this Reform Plan 
Criterion, to which the State can refer and build 
upon in its Race to the Top application. 
11 A State’s responses to proposed Indicator (b)(2) 
and requirements II.c.2.A and II.c.2.B(i–iii) in its 
Stabilization program Phase 2 application may 
contain information related to this Reform Plan 
Criteria, to which the State can refer and build upon 
in its Race to the Top application. 
12 A State’s responses to proposed Indicators 
(a)(2) and (a)(5) and Descriptors (a)(1) and (a)(2) in 
its Stabilization program Phase 2 application may 
contain information related to this Reform Plan 
Criterion, to which the State can refer and build 
upon in its Race to the Top application. 
13 A State’s response to proposed Indicator (a)(1) 
in its Stabilization program Phase 2 application 
may contain information related to this Reform Plan 
Criterion, to which the State can refer and build 
upon in its Race to the Top application. 
14 A State’s responses to proposed Indicator (d)(6) 
in its Stabilization program Phase 2 application 
may contain information related to this Reform Plan 
Criterion, to which the State can refer and build 
upon in its Race to the Top application. 
which the State has a statewide 
longitudinal data system that includes 
all of the elements specified in section 
6401(e)(2)(D) of the America 
COMPETES Act (as defined in this 
notice). 
Reform Plan Criteria 
(B)(2) Accessing and using State 
data: 10 The extent to which the State 
has a high-quality plan to ensure that 
data from the State’s statewide 
longitudinal data system are accessible 
to, and used to inform and engage, as 
appropriate, key stakeholders (e.g., 
parents, students, teachers, principals, 
LEA leaders, community members, 
unions, researchers, and policymakers); 
that the data support decision-makers in 
the continuous improvement of 
instruction, operations, management, 
and resource allocation; and that they 
comply with the applicable 
requirements of the Family Educational 
Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA). 
(B)(3) Using data to improve 
instruction: 11 The extent to which the 
State, in collaboration with its 
participating LEAs, has a high-quality 
plan to— 
(i) Increase the use of instructional 
improvement systems (as defined in this 
notice) that provide teachers, principals, 
and administrators with the information 
they need to inform and improve their 
instructional practices, decision- 
making, and overall effectiveness; and 
(ii) Make these data, together with 
statewide longitudinal data system data, 
available and accessible to researchers 
so that they have detailed information 
with which to evaluate the effectiveness 
of instructional materials, strategies, and 
approaches for educating different types 
of students (e.g., students with 
disabilities, limited English proficient 
students, students whose achievement 
is well below or above grade level), in 
a manner that complies with the 
applicable requirements of FERPA. 
C. Great Teachers and Leaders 
State Reform Conditions Criteria 
(C)(1) Providing alternative pathways 
for aspiring teachers and principals: 
The extent to which the State has in 
place legal, statutory, or regulatory 
provisions that allow alternative routes 
to certification (as defined in this 
notice) for teachers and principals, 
particularly routes that allow for 
providers in addition to institutions of 
higher education; and the extent to 
which these routes are in use. 
Reform Plan Criteria 
(C)(2) Differentiating teacher and 
principal effectiveness based on 
performance: 12 The extent to which the 
State, in collaboration with its 
participating LEAs, has a high-quality 
plan and ambitious yet achievable 
annual targets to (a) Determine an 
approach to measuring student growth 
(as defined in this notice); (b) employ 
rigorous, transparent, and equitable 
processes for differentiating the 
effectiveness of teachers and principals 
using multiple rating categories that 
take into account data on student 
growth (as defined in this notice) as a 
significant factor; (c) provide to each 
teacher and principal his or her own 
data and rating; and (d) use this 
information when making decisions 
regarding— 
(i) Evaluating annually and 
developing teachers and principals, 
including by providing timely and 
constructive feedback and targeted 
professional development; 
(ii) Compensating and promoting 
teachers and principals, including by 
providing opportunities for teachers and 
principals who are highly effective (as 
defined in this notice) to obtain 
additional compensation and 
responsibilities; and 
(iii) Granting tenure to and dismissing 
teachers and principals based on 
rigorous and transparent procedures for 
awarding tenure (where applicable) and 
for removing tenured and untenured 
teachers and principals after they have 
had ample opportunities to improve but 
have not done so. 
(C)(3) Ensuring equitable distribution 
of effective teachers and principals: 13 
The extent to which the State has a 
high-quality plan and ambitious yet 
achievable annual targets to increase the 
number and percentage of highly 
effective teachers and principals (as 
defined in this notice) in high-poverty 
schools (as defined in this notice), and 
to increase the number and percentage 
of effective teachers (as defined in this 
notice) teaching hard-to-staff subjects 
including mathematics, science, special 
education, English language proficiency, 
and other hard-to-staff subjects 
identified by the State or LEA. Plans 
may include, but are not limited to, the 
implementation of incentives and 
strategies in areas such as recruitment, 
compensation, career development, and 
human resources practices and 
processes. 
(C)(4) Reporting the effectiveness of 
teacher and principal preparation 
programs: The extent to which the State 
has a high-quality plan and ambitious 
yet achievable annual targets to link a 
student’s achievement data to the 
student’s teachers and principals, to 
link this information to the programs 
where each of those teachers and 
principals was prepared for 
credentialing, and to publicly report the 
findings for each credentialing program 
that has twenty or more graduates 
annually. 
(C)(5) Providing effective support to 
teachers and principals: The extent to 
which the State, in collaboration with 
its participating LEAs, has a high- 
quality plan to use rapid-time (as 
defined in this notice) student data to 
inform and guide the support provided 
to teachers and principals (e.g., 
professional development, time for 
common planning and collaboration) in 
order to improve the overall 
effectiveness of instruction; and to 
continuously measure and improve both 
the effectiveness and efficiency of those 
supports. 
D. Turning Around Struggling Schools 
State Reform Conditions Criteria 
(D)(1) Intervening in the lowest- 
performing schools and LEAs: The 
extent to which the State has the legal, 
statutory, or regulatory authority to 
intervene directly in the State’s 
persistently lowest-performing schools 
(as defined in this notice) and in LEAs 
that are in improvement and corrective 
action status. 
(D)(2) Increasing the supply of high- 
quality charter schools: 14 
(i) The extent to which the State has 
a charter school law that does not 
prohibit or effectively inhibit increasing 
the number of charter schools in the 
State (as measured by the percentage of 
total schools in the State that are 
allowed to be charter schools) or 
otherwise restrict student enrollment in 
charter schools. 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00007 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4703 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37810 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
15 A State’s responses to proposed Indicators 
(d)(3)–(d)(5) in its Stabilization program Phase 2 
application may contain information related to this 
Reform Plan Criterion, to which the State can refer 
and build upon in its Race to the Top application. 
16 A State’s responses to proposed Indicator 
(c)(11) in its Stabilization program Phase 2 
application may contain information related to this 
Reform Plan Criterion, to which the State can refer 
and build upon in its Race to the Top application. 
(ii) The extent to which the State has 
statutes and guidelines regarding how 
charter school authorizers approve, 
monitor, hold accountable, reauthorize, 
and close charter schools, including the 
extent to which such statutes or 
guidelines require that student 
academic achievement be a factor in 
such activities and decisions, and the 
extent to which charter school 
authorizers in the State have closed or 
not renewed ineffective charter schools. 
(iii) The extent to which the State’s 
charter schools receive equitable 
funding, compared to traditional public 
schools, and a commensurate share of 
local, State, and Federal program and 
revenue sources. 
(iv) The extent to which the State 
provides charter schools with facilities 
funding (for leasing facilities, 
purchasing facilities, or making tenant 
improvements), assistance with 
facilities acquisition, access to public 
facilities, the ability to share in bonds 
and mill levies, or other supports; and 
the extent to which the State does not 
impose any facility-related requirements 
on charter schools that are stricter than 
those applied to traditional public 
schools. 
Reform Plan Criteria 
(D)(3) Turning around struggling 
schools: 15 The extent to which the State 
has a high-quality plan and ambitious 
yet achievable annual targets to (i) 
identify at least the lowest-achieving 
five percent of the persistently lowest- 
performing schools (as defined in this 
notice) or the lowest-achieving five 
schools, whichever is larger; and (ii) 
support its LEAs in turning around 
these schools by— 
• Putting in place new leadership and 
a majority of new staff, new governance, 
and improved instructional programs, 
and providing the school with 
flexibilities such as the ability to select 
staff, control its budget, and expand 
student learning time; or 
• Converting them to charter schools 
or contracting with an education 
management organization (EMO); or 
• Closing the school and placing the 
school’s students in high-performing 
schools; or 
• To the extent that these strategies 
are not possible, implementing a school 
transformation model that includes: 
Hiring a new principal, measuring 
teacher and principal effectiveness (as 
defined in this notice), rewarding 
effective teachers and principals (as 
defined in this notice), and improving 
strategies for recruitment, retention, and 
professional development; 
implementing comprehensive 
instructional reform, including an 
improved instructional program and 
differentiated instruction; and extending 
learning time and community-oriented 
supports, including more time for 
students to learn and for teachers to 
collaborate, more time for enrichment 
activities, and on-going mechanisms for 
family and community engagement. 
E. Overall Selection Criteria 
State Reform Conditions Criteria 
(E)(1) Demonstrating significant 
progress: The extent to which the State 
has, over the past several years— 
(i) Made progress to date in each of 
the four education reform areas; 
(ii) Used ARRA and other Federal and 
State funding to pursue reforms in these 
areas; 
(iii) Created, through law or policy, 
conditions favorable to education 
reform and innovation; 
(iv) Increased student achievement 
and decreased the achievement gap, as 
reported on the NAEP since 2003; and 
increased graduation rates. 
(E)(2) Making education funding a 
priority: The extent to which the 
percentage of the total revenues 
available to the State (as defined in this 
notice) that were used to support 
elementary, secondary, and public 
higher education for FY 2009 was 
greater than or equal to the percentage 
of the total revenues available to the 
State (as defined in this notice) that 
were used to support elementary, 
secondary, and public higher education 
for FY 2008. 
(E)(3) Enlisting statewide support and 
commitment: The extent to which the 
State has demonstrated commitment, 
support, and/or funding from the 
following key stakeholders: 
(i) The State’s teachers’ union(s) and 
charter school authorizers; 
(ii) Other State and local leaders (e.g., 
business, community, civil rights, and 
education association leaders); 
(iii) Grant-making foundations and 
other funding sources; and 
(iv) LEAs, including public charter 
schools identified as LEAs under State 
law, with special emphasis on the 
following: High-need LEAs (as defined 
in this notice); participation by LEAs, 
schools, students, and students in 
poverty; and the strength of the 
Memoranda of Understanding between 
LEAs and the State, which must at a 
minimum be signed by the LEA 
superintendent (or equivalent), the 
president of the local school board (if 
relevant), and the local teachers’ union 
leader (if relevant). 
Reform Plan Criteria 
(E)(4) Raising achievement and 
closing gaps: 
(i) Achievement gains: The extent to 
which the State has set ambitious yet 
achievable targets for increasing its 
students’ achievement results overall 
and by student subgroup (as described 
in section 303(b)(2)(G) of the National 
Assessment of Educational Progress 
Authorization Act) in reading and 
mathematics, as reported by the NAEP; 
annual targets using other assessments 
may be submitted as well. 
(ii) Gap closing: The extent to which 
the State has set ambitious yet 
achievable targets for decreasing the 
reading and mathematics achievement 
gaps between subgroups (as described in 
section 303(b)(2)(G) of the National 
Assessment of Educational Progress 
Authorization Act), as reported, at a 
minimum, by the NAEP; annual targets 
using other assessments may be 
submitted as well. 
(iii) Graduation rate: 16 The extent to 
which the State has ambitious yet 
achievable annual targets for increasing 
graduation rates (as defined in this 
notice) overall and by student subgroup 
(consistent with section 
1111(b)(2)(C)(v)(II) of the ESEA). 
(E)(5) Building strong statewide 
capacity to implement, scale, and 
sustain proposed plans: The extent to 
which the State has a high-quality 
overall plan that demonstrates how it 
has, and will continue to build, the 
capacity to— 
(i) Effectively and efficiently oversee 
the grant, including administering and 
disbursing funds, and, if necessary, 
taking appropriate enforcement actions 
to ensure that participating LEAs 
comply with the State’s plan and 
program requirements; 
(ii) Support the success of 
participating LEAs, ensure the 
dissemination of effective practices, and 
hold participating LEAs accountable for 
progress; 
(iii) Use the economic, political, and 
human capital resources of the State to 
continue the reforms funded under the 
grant after the period of funding has 
ended; 
(iv) Collaborate with other States on 
key elements of or activities in the 
State’s application; and 
(v) Coordinate, reallocate, or 
repurpose education funds from other 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00008 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4703 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37811 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
sources to align with the State’s Race to 
the Top goals, as outlined in its plans. 
IV. Definitions 
The Secretary proposes the following 
definitions for terms not defined in the 
ARRA (or, by reference, in the ESEA). 
We may apply these definitions in any 
year in which this program is in effect. 
Proposed Definitions 
Alternative certification routes means 
pathways to certification that are 
authorized under the State’s laws or 
regulations that allow the establishment 
and operation of teacher and 
administrator preparation programs in 
the State that have the following 
characteristics: (a) Can be provided by 
various types of qualified providers, 
including both institutions of higher 
education and other providers; (b) 
provide a clinical/student teaching 
experience; (c) significantly limit the 
amount of coursework required or have 
options to test-out of courses; and (d) 
award the level of certification that 
permits a candidate who successfully 
completes the program to teach or lead 
in public schools within the State. 
Common set of K–12 standards means 
a set of content standards that define 
what students must know and be able to 
do, and that are identical across all 
States in a consortium. Notwithstanding 
this, a State may supplement the 
common standards with additional 
standards, provided that the additional 
standards do not exceed 15 percent of 
the State’s total standards for that 
content area. 
Effective principal means a principal 
whose students, overall and for each 
subgroup (described in section 
1111(b)(2)(C)(v)(II) of the ESEA), 
demonstrate acceptable rates (e.g., at 
least one grade level in an academic 
year) of student growth (as defined in 
this notice). States may supplement this 
definition as they see fit so long as 
principal effectiveness is judged, in 
significant measure, by student growth 
(as defined in this notice). 
Effective teacher means a teacher 
whose students achieve acceptable rates 
(e.g., at least one grade level in an 
academic year) of student growth (as 
defined in this notice). States may 
supplement this definition as they see 
fit so long as teacher effectiveness is 
judged, in significant measure, by 
student growth (as defined in this 
notice). 
Formative assessment means an 
assessment process that is embedded in 
instruction and is used by teachers and 
students to provide instant feedback on 
student understanding and to adjust 
ongoing teaching and learning 
accordingly. 
Graduation rate means the four-year 
adjusted cohort graduation rate as 
defined by 34 CFR 200.19(b)(1)(i). A 
State may also use, as a supplement to 
this rate, extended adjusted cohort 
graduation rates (consistent with 34 CFR 
200.19(b)(1)(v)) that are approved by the 
Secretary. 
Highly effective principal means a 
principal whose students, overall and 
for each subgroup (described in section 
1111(b)(2)(C)(v)(II) of the ESEA), 
demonstrate high rates (e.g., more than 
one grade level in an academic year) of 
student growth (as defined in this 
notice). States may supplement this 
definition as they see fit so long as 
principal effectiveness is judged, in 
significant measure, by student growth 
(as defined in this notice). 
Highly effective teacher means a 
teacher whose students achieve high 
rates (e.g., more than one grade level in 
an academic year) of student growth (as 
defined in this notice). States may 
supplement this definition as they see 
fit so long as teacher effectiveness is 
judged, in significant measure, by 
student growth (as defined in this 
notice). 
High-need LEA means an LEA with 
one or more high-poverty schools (as 
defined in this notice). 
High-poverty school means, consistent 
with section 1111(h)(1)(C)(viii) of the 
ESEA, a school in the highest quartile of 
schools in the State with respect to 
poverty level, using a measure of 
poverty determined by the State. 
High-quality assessment means an 
assessment designed to measure a 
student’s understanding of, and ability 
to apply, critical concepts through the 
use of a variety of item types, formats, 
and administration conditions (e.g., 
open-ended responses, performance- 
based tasks, use of technology). Such 
assessments are structured to enable 
measurement of student achievement 
(as defined in this notice) and student 
growth (as defined in this notice); are of 
high technical quality (e.g., are valid, 
reliable, and aligned to standards); and 
include the assessment of students with 
disabilities and limited English 
proficient students. 
Instructional improvement systems 
means tools that provide teachers, 
principals, and administrators with 
meaningful support for a cycle of 
continuous instructional improvement, 
including activities such as: 
instructional planning; gathering 
information (e.g., through formative 
assessments (as defined in this notice), 
interim assessments (as defined in this 
notice), and looking at student work); 
analyzing information with the support 
of rapid-time (as defined in this notice) 
reporting; using this information to 
inform decisions on appropriate next 
steps; and evaluating the effectiveness 
of the actions taken. 
Interim assessment means an 
assessment given at regular and 
specified intervals throughout the 
school year, and designed to evaluate 
students’ knowledge and skills relative 
to a specific set of academic standards, 
and the results of which can be 
aggregated (e.g., by course, grade level, 
school, or LEA) in order to inform 
teachers and administrators at the 
student, classroom, school, and LEA 
levels. 
Persistently lowest-performing schools 
means Title I schools in improvement, 
corrective action, or restructuring in the 
State and the secondary schools (both 
middle and high schools) in the State 
that are equally as low-achieving as 
these Title I schools and are eligible for, 
but do not receive, Title I funds. When 
considering which schools are the 
lowest-achieving, the State must 
consider both the absolute performance 
of schools on the State assessments in 
reading/language arts and mathematics 
and whether schools have made 
progress on those assessments. 
Rapid-time, in reference to reporting 
and availability of school- and LEA- 
level data, means that data is available 
quickly enough to inform current 
lessons, instruction, and related 
supports; in most cases, this will be 
within 72 hours of an assessment or 
data gathering in classrooms, schools, 
and LEAs. 
Student achievement means, at a 
minimum— 
(a) For tested grades and subjects: A 
student’s score on the State’s assessment 
under section 1111(b)(3) of the ESEA; 
and 
(b) For non-tested grades and subjects: 
An alternative measure of student 
performance (e.g., student performance 
on interim assessments (as defined in 
this notice), rates at which students are 
on track to graduate from high school, 
percentage of students enrolled in 
Advanced Placement courses who take 
Advanced Placement exams, rates at 
which students meet goals in 
individualized education programs, 
student scores on end-of-course exams). 
Student growth means the change in 
achievement data for an individual 
student between two points in time. 
Growth may be measured by a variety of 
approaches, but any approach used 
must be statistically rigorous and based 
on student achievement (as defined in 
this notice) data, and may also include 
other measures of student learning in 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00009 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4703 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37812 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
order to increase the construct validity 
and generalizability of the information. 
Total revenues available to the State 
means either (a) projected or actual total 
State revenues for education and other 
purposes for the relevant year; or (b) 
projected or actual total State 
appropriations for education and other 
purposes for the relevant year. 
America COMPETES Act elements (as 
specified in section 6401(e)(2)(D)) 
means: (1) A unique statewide student 
identifier that does not permit a student 
to be individually identified by users of 
the system; (2) student-level enrollment, 
demographic, and program participation 
information; (3) student-level 
information about the points at which 
students exit, transfer in, transfer out, 
drop out, or complete P–16 education 
programs; (4) the capacity to 
communicate with higher education 
data systems; (5) a State data audit 
system assessing data quality, validity, 
and reliability; (6) yearly test records of 
individual students with respect to 
assessments under section 1111(b) of 
the ESEA (20 U.S.C. 6311(b)); (7) 
information on students not tested by 
grade and subject; (8) a teacher 
identifier system with the ability to 
match teachers to students; (9) student- 
level transcript information, including 
information on courses completed and 
grades earned; (10) student-level college 
readiness test scores; (11) information 
regarding the extent to which students 
transition successfully from secondary 
school to postsecondary education, 
including whether students enroll in 
remedial coursework; and (12) other 
information determined necessary to 
address alignment and adequate 
preparation for success in 
postsecondary education. 
Final Priorities, Requirements, 
Definitions, and Selection Criteria 
We will announce the final priorities, 
requirements definitions, and selection 
criteria, in a notice in the Federal 
Register. We will determine the final 
priorities, requirements, definitions, and 
selection criteria after considering 
responses to this notice and other 
information available to the Department. 
This notice does not preclude us from 
proposing additional priorities, 
requirements, definitions, or selection 
criteria, subject to meeting applicable 
rulemaking requirements. 
Note: This notice does not solicit 
applications. In any year in which we choose 
to use one or more of these priorities, 
requirements, definitions, and selection 
criteria, we invite applications through a 
notice in the Federal Register. 
Executive Order 12866 
Under Executive Order 12866, the 
Secretary must determine whether this 
regulatory action is ‘‘significant’’ and 
therefore subject to the requirements of 
the Executive Order and subject to 
review by OMB. Section 3(f) of 
Executive Order 12866 defines a 
‘‘significant regulatory action’’ as an 
action likely to result in a rule that may 
(1) have an annual effect on the 
economy of $100 million or more, or 
adversely affect a sector of the economy, 
productivity, competition, jobs, the 
environment, public health or safety, or 
State, local or Tribal governments, or 
communities in a material way (also 
referred to as an ‘‘economically 
significant’’ rule); (2) create serious 
inconsistency or otherwise interfere 
with an action taken or planned by 
another agency; (3) materially alter the 
budgetary impacts of entitlement grants, 
user fees, or loan programs or the rights 
and obligations of recipients thereof; or 
(4) raise novel legal or policy issues 
arising out of legal mandates, the 
President’s priorities, or the principles 
set forth in the Executive order. 
Pursuant to the Executive order, it has 
been determined that this regulatory 
action will have an annual effect on the 
economy of more than $100 million 
because the amount of government 
transfers provided through the Race to 
the Top Fund will exceed that amount. 
Therefore, this action is ‘‘economically 
significant’’ and subject to OMB review 
under section 3(f)(1) of the Executive 
order. 
The potential costs associated with 
this proposed regulatory action are 
those resulting from statutory 
requirements and those we have 
determined as necessary for 
administering this program effectively 
and efficiently. 
In assessing the potential costs and 
benefits—both quantitative and 
qualitative—of this proposed regulatory 
action, we have determined that the 
benefits of the proposed priorities, 
requirements, definitions, and selection 
criteria justify the costs. 
We have determined, also, that this 
proposed regulatory action does not 
unduly interfere with State, local, and 
Tribal governments in the exercise of 
their governmental functions. 
Need for Federal Regulatory Action 
These proposed priorities, 
requirements, definitions, and selection 
criteria are needed to implement the 
Race to the Top program. The Secretary 
does not believe that the statute, by 
itself, provides a sufficient level of 
detail to ensure that Race to the Top 
truly serves as a mechanism for driving 
significant education reform in the 
States. The authorizing language is very 
brief, and we believe the Congress likely 
expected the Secretary to augment this 
language, through rulemaking, in order 
to give greater meaning to the statutory 
provisions. Additionally, the statute 
expressly provides the Secretary the 
authority to require States to include in 
their application such information as 
the Secretary may reasonably require 
and to determine which States receive 
grants on the basis of other criteria as 
the Secretary determines appropriate. 
In the absence of specific selection 
criteria for Race to the Top grants, the 
Department would use the general 
selection criteria in 34 CFR 75.210 of 
the Education Department General 
Administrative Regulations in selecting 
States to receive grants. The Secretary 
does not believe the use of those general 
criteria would be appropriate for the 
Race to the Top competitions, because 
they do not focus on the educational 
reforms that States must be 
implementing in order to receive a Race 
to the Top grant, on the specific uses of 
funds under Race to the Top, or on the 
plans that the Secretary believes States 
should develop for their Race to the Top 
grants. 
Regulatory Alternatives Considered 
The Department considered a variety 
of possible priorities, requirements, 
definitions, and selection criteria before 
deciding to propose those included in 
this notice. The proposed priorities, 
requirements, definitions, and selection 
criteria are those that best embody the 
Secretary’s concept of how the Race to 
the Top program should operate. The 
proposals would provide States (and 
their LEAs) receiving Race to the Top 
grants with broad flexibility in the 
expenditure of those grants, while 
creating clear criteria for the selection of 
applications and providing greater 
clarity (than is provided in the 
legislation itself) on what must be 
included in a State application and 
what progress States would have to 
make in the four education reform areas 
in order to receive a grant. The Secretary 
believes that the proposals, thus, 
appropriately balance a limited degree 
of Federal prescription with broad 
flexibility in State and local 
implementation. We seek public 
comment on whether we have achieved 
the optimal balance. 
Summary of Costs and Benefits 
The Department believes that the 
proposed priorities, requirements, 
definitions, and selection criteria will 
not impose significant costs on States, 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00010 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4703 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37813 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
or on the LEAs and other entities that 
will receive assistance through the Race 
to the Top Fund. As discussed 
elsewhere, the proposals are intended to 
create a framework for the award of 
approximately $4 billion in support of 
State and local efforts to implement 
critical educational reforms and to 
making substantial gains in student 
achievement, closing achievement gaps, 
improving high school graduation rates, 
and ensuring student preparation for 
success in college and careers. Without 
promulgation of priorities, 
requirements, definitions, and selection 
criteria for the Race to the Top 
competitions, the Department would not 
have clear and defensible criteria for 
making very large grants to States. 
The Department believes that the 
costs imposed on States by the proposed 
priorities, requirements, definitions, and 
selection criteria will be limited to the 
paperwork burden discussed elsewhere 
in this notice. The benefits conveyed on 
a State through its receipt of a grant will 
greatly exceed those costs. In addition, 
even States that apply but are 
unsuccessful in the competitions may 
derive benefits, as the process of 
working with LEAs and other 
stakeholders on the State application 
may help accelerate the pace of 
education reforms in the State. 
Accounting Statement 
As required by OMB Circular A–4 
(available at http:// 
www.Whitehouse.gov/omb/Circulars/ 
a004/a-4.pdf), in the following table, we 
have prepared an accounting statement 
showing the classification of the 
expenditures associated with the 
provisions of this proposed regulatory 
action. This table provides our best 
estimate of the Federal payments to be 
made to States under this program as a 
result of this proposed regulatory action. 
Expenditures are classified as transfers 
to States. 
TABLE—ACCOUNTING STATEMENT 
CLASSIFICATION OF ESTIMATED EX-
PENDITURES 
Category Transfers (in millions) 
Annual Monetized 
Transfers.
$3,956. 
From Whom to Whom Federal Government 
to States. 
As previously explained, ARRA 
provides approximately $4.3 billion for 
the Race to the Top Fund (referred to in 
the statute as State Incentive Grants). In 
this notice, we propose additional 
specific priorities, requirements, 
definitions, and criteria regarding the 
applications that individual States 
submit for approximately $4 billion of 
Race to the Top funds. At a later date, 
we may announce a separate Race to the 
Top Standards and Assessment 
competition, for approximately $350 
million, to support the development of 
assessments by consortia of States. 
Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 
The application requirements and 
selection criteria proposed in this notice 
will require the collection of 
information that is subject to review by 
the Office of Management and Budget 
(OMB) under the Paperwork Reduction 
Act of 1995 (44 U.S.C. 3501–3520). It is 
our plan to offer a comment period for 
the information collection at the time of 
the notice of final priorities, 
requirements, definitions, and selection 
criteria. At that time, the Department 
will submit the information collection 
to OMB for its review and provide the 
specific burden hours associated with 
each of the requirements and selection 
criteria for comment. However, because 
it is likely that the information 
collection will be reviewed under 
emergency OMB processing, the 
Department encourages the public to 
comment on the estimates we are 
providing for the burden hours 
associated with the requirements and 
selection criteria proposed in this 
notice. 
Proposed Application Requirements 
There are eight application 
requirements that the Department 
proposes States must meet when 
submitting their applications. These are: 
(a) The State’s application must be 
signed by the Governor, the State’s chief 
school officer, and the president of the 
State board of education. 
(b) The State must describe the 
progress it has made to date in each of 
the four education reform areas, 
including how the State has used ARRA 
and other Federal and State funding 
over the last several years to pursue 
reforms in these areas (as described in 
Overall Selection Criterion (E)(1)). 
(c) The State must provide financial 
data to show whether and to what 
extent the percentage of the total 
revenues available to the State (as 
defined in this notice) that were used to 
support elementary, secondary, and 
public higher education for FY 2009 
increased, decreased, or remained the 
same compared to FY 2008 (as 
described in Overall Selection Criterion 
(E)(2)). 
(d) The State must describe its 
statewide support from stakeholders 
and LEAs, including public charter 
schools identified as LEAs under State 
law (as described in Overall Selection 
Criterion (E)(3)). 
(e) The State must include a budget 
that details how it will use grant funds 
and other resources to meet targets and 
perform related functions, including 
how it will use funds awarded under 
this program to— 
(1) Achieve its targets for improving 
student achievement and graduation 
rates and for closing achievement gaps 
(as described in Overall Selection 
Criterion (E)(4)); and 
(2) Give priority to high-need LEAs 
(as defined in this notice), in addition 
to providing 50 percent of the grant to 
participating LEAs based on their 
relative shares of funding under part A 
of Title I of the ESEA as required under 
section 14006(c) of the ARRA. 
(f) The State must provide, for each 
State Reform Conditions Criterion 
(listed earlier in this notice), a 
description of the State’s current status 
in meeting that Criterion, and at a 
minimum, the information requested as 
supporting evidence for the Criterion. 
The Appendix to this notice contains a 
table listing the proposed evidence. 
(g) The State must provide, for each 
Reform Plan Criterion (listed earlier in 
this notice) a detailed plan for use of 
grant funds that includes, but need not 
be limited to the activities to be 
undertaken, the goals and rationale for 
the activities, the timeline for 
implementation, the party responsible 
for implementing the activities, the 
resources the State will use to support 
the activities, the State’s annual targets, 
if applicable, for the performance 
measures aligned to the Criterion, and 
the evidence requested in support of 
that Criterion (if any). (See the 
‘‘Proposed Application Requirements’’ 
section for a detailed description of 
these proposed requirements.) 
(h) The State must submit a 
certification from the State Attorney 
General, or other chief State legal 
officer, that the State’s description of, 
and statements and conclusions 
concerning, State law (for example, with 
respect to the Eligibility Requirement 
regarding teacher effectiveness or any of 
the applicable Selection Criteria) in its 
application are complete, accurate, and 
constitute a reasonable interpretation of 
State law. 
Proposed Selection Criteria 
There are 19 selection criteria that the 
Department proposes States may 
address when submitting their 
applications. These are— 
(A)(1) Developing and adopting common 
standards; 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 20:41 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00011 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4703 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37814 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
(A)(2) Developing and implementing 
common, high-quality assessments; 
(A)(3) Supporting transition to enhanced 
standards and high-quality assessments; 
(B)(1) Fully implementing a statewide 
longitudinal data system; 
(B)(2) Accessing and using State data; 
(B)(3) Using data to improve instruction; 
(C)(1) Providing alternative pathways for 
aspiring teachers and principals; 
(C)(2) Differentiating teacher and principal 
effectiveness based on performance; 
(C)(3) Ensuring equitable distribution of 
effective teachers and principals; 
(C)(4) Reporting the effectiveness of teacher 
and principal preparation programs; 
(C)(5) Providing effective support to 
teachers and principals; 
(D)(1) Intervening in the lowest-performing 
schools and LEAs; 
(D)(2) Increasing the supply of high-quality 
charter schools; 
(D)(3) Turning around struggling schools; 
(E)(1) Demonstrating significant progress; 
(E)(2) Making education funding a priority; 
(E)(3) Enlisting statewide support and 
commitment; 
(E)(4) Raising achievement and closing 
gaps; and 
(E)(5) Building strong statewide capacity to 
implement, scale, and sustain proposed 
plans. 
(Please see the ‘‘Proposed Selection 
Criteria’’ section for detailed 
descriptions.) 
We estimate that each SEA would 
spend approximately 642 hours of staff 
time to address the application 
requirements and criteria, prepare the 
application, and obtain necessary 
clearances. The total number of hours 
for all 52 SEAs is an estimated 33,384 
hours (52 SEAs (the 50 States plus the 
District of Columbia and Puerto Rico) 
times 642 hours equals 33,384 hours.) 
We estimate the average total cost per 
hour of the State-level staff who carry 
out this work to be $30.00 an hour. The 
total estimated cost for all States would 
be $1,001,520 ($30.00 × 33,384 hours = 
$1,001,520). 
Regulatory Flexibility Act Certification 
The Secretary certifies that this 
proposed regulatory action will not have 
a significant economic impact on a 
substantial number of small entities. 
The Secretary makes this certification 
because the only entities eligible to 
apply for grants are States, and States 
are not small entities. 
Intergovernmental Review: This 
program is subject to Executive Order 
12372 and the regulations in 34 CFR 
Part 79. One of the objectives of the 
Executive order is to foster an 
intergovernmental partnership and a 
strengthened federalism. The Executive 
order relies on processes developed by 
State and local governments for 
coordination and review of proposed 
Federal financial assistance. 
This document provides early 
notification of our specific plans and 
actions for this program. 
Accessible Format: Individuals with 
disabilities can obtain this document in 
an accessible format (e.g., braille, large 
print, audiotape, or computer diskette) 
on request to the program contact 
person listed under FOR FURTHER 
INFORMATION CONTACT. 
Electronic Access to This Document: 
You can view this document, as well as 
all other documents of this Department 
published in the Federal Register, in 
text or Adobe Portable Document 
Format (PDF) on the Internet at the 
following site: http://www.ed.gov/news/ 
fedregister. 
To use PDF you must have Adobe 
Acrobat Reader, which is available free 
at this site. If you have questions about 
using PDF, call the U.S. Government 
Printing Office (GPO), toll free, at 1– 
888–293–6498; or in the Washington, 
DC, area at (202) 512–1530. 
Note: The official version of this document 
is the document published in the Federal 
Register. Free Internet access to the official 
edition of the Federal Register and the Code 
of Federal Regulations is available on GPO 
Access at: http://www.gpoaccess.gov/nara/ 
index.html. 
Dated: July 22, 2009. 
Arne Duncan, 
Secretary of Education. 
BILLING CODE 4000–01–P 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00012 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4703 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37815 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00013 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4725 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2 EN
29
JY
09
.0
15
</
G
PH
>
m
st
oc
ks
til
l o
n 
D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37816 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00014 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4725 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2 EN
29
JY
09
.0
16
</
G
PH
>
m
st
oc
ks
til
l o
n 
D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37817 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00015 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4725 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2 EN
29
JY
09
.0
17
</
G
PH
>
m
st
oc
ks
til
l o
n 
D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37818 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00016 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4725 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2 EN
29
JY
09
.0
18
</
G
PH
>
m
st
oc
ks
til
l o
n 
D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37819 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00017 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4725 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2 EN
29
JY
09
.0
19
</
G
PH
>
m
st
oc
ks
til
l o
n 
D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37820 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00018 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4725 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2 EN
29
JY
09
.0
20
</
G
PH
>
m
st
oc
ks
til
l o
n 
D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37821 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00019 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4725 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2 EN
29
JY
09
.0
21
</
G
PH
>
m
st
oc
ks
til
l o
n 
D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37822 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00020 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4725 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2 EN
29
JY
09
.0
22
</
G
PH
>
m
st
oc
ks
til
l o
n 
D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37823 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00021 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4725 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2 EN
29
JY
09
.0
23
</
G
PH
>
m
st
oc
ks
til
l o
n 
D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37824 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00022 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4725 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2 EN
29
JY
09
.0
24
</
G
PH
>
m
st
oc
ks
til
l o
n 
D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37825 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00023 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4725 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2 EN
29
JY
09
.0
25
</
G
PH
>
m
st
oc
ks
til
l o
n 
D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37826 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00024 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4725 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2 EN
29
JY
09
.0
26
</
G
PH
>
m
st
oc
ks
til
l o
n 
D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37827 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00025 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4725 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2 EN
29
JY
09
.0
27
</
G
PH
>
m
st
oc
ks
til
l o
n 
D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37828 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00026 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4725 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2 EN
29
JY
09
.0
28
</
G
PH
>
m
st
oc
ks
til
l o
n 
D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37829 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00027 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4725 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2 EN
29
JY
09
.0
29
</
G
PH
>
m
st
oc
ks
til
l o
n 
D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37830 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00028 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4725 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2 EN
29
JY
09
.0
30
</
G
PH
>
m
st
oc
ks
til
l o
n 
D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37831 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00029 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4725 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2 EN
29
JY
09
.0
31
</
G
PH
>
m
st
oc
ks
til
l o
n 
D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37832 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00030 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4725 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2 EN
29
JY
09
.0
32
</
G
PH
>
m
st
oc
ks
til
l o
n 
D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37833 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00031 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4725 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2 EN
29
JY
09
.0
33
</
G
PH
>
m
st
oc
ks
til
l o
n 
D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37834 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00032 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4725 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2 EN
29
JY
09
.0
34
</
G
PH
>
m
st
oc
ks
til
l o
n 
D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37835 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 18:33 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00033 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4725 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2 EN
29
JY
09
.0
35
</
G
PH
>
m
st
oc
ks
til
l o
n 
D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37836 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 20:41 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00034 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4703 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2 EN
29
JY
09
.0
36
</
G
PH
>
m
st
oc
ks
til
l o
n 
D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
37837 Federal Register / Vol. 74, No. 144 / Wednesday, July 29, 2009 / Notices 
1 The Department is awarding Stabilization 
program funds in two phases. In the first phase, the 
Department is awarding 67 percent of a State’s 
Education Stabilization Fund allocation, unless the 
State can demonstrate that additional funds are 
required to restore fiscal year 2009 State support for 
education, in which case the Department will 
award the State up to 90 percent of that allocation. 
In addition, the Department will award 100 percent 
of each State’s Government Services Fund 
allocation in Phase I. The Department will award 
the remainder of a State’s Education Stabilization 
Fund allocation in the second phase. A table listing 
the allocations to States under the Stabilization 
program is available at: http://www.ed.gov/ 
programs/ 
statestabilization/funding.html. 
[FR Doc. E9–17909 Filed 7–24–09; 11:15 am] 
BILLING CODE 4000–01–C 
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
[Docket ID ED–2009–OESE–0007] 
RIN 1810–AB04 
State Fiscal Stabilization Fund 
Program 
Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance 
(CFDA) Numbers: 84.394 (Education 
Stabilization Fund) and 84.397 
(Government Services Fund). 
AGENCY: Department of Education. 
ACTION: Notice of proposed 
requirements, definitions, and approval 
criteria. 
SUMMARY: The Secretary of Education 
(Secretary) proposes requirements, 
definitions, and approval criteria for the 
State Fiscal Stabilization Fund 
(Stabilization) program. The Secretary 
may use one or more of these 
requirements, definitions, and approval 
criteria in awarding funds under this 
program in fiscal year (FY) 2010. The 
requirements, definitions, and approval 
criteria proposed in this notice are 
based on the assurances regarding 
education reform that grantees are 
required to provide in exchange for 
receiving funds under the Stabilization 
program. We take this action to specify 
the data and information that grantees 
must collect and report with respect to 
those assurances and to help ensure 
grantees’ ability to collect and report the 
required data and information. 
DATES: We must receive your comments 
on or before August 28, 2009. 
ADDRESSES: Submit your comments 
through the Federal eRulemaking Portal 
or via postal mail, commercial delivery, 
or hand delivery. We will not accept 
comments by fax or by e-mail. Please 
submit your comments only one time in 
order to ensure that we do not receive 
duplicate copies. In addition, please 
include the Docket ID and the term 
‘‘State Fiscal Stabilization Fund’’ at the 
top of your comments. 
• Federal eRulemaking Portal: Go to 
http://www.regulations.gov to submit 
your comments electronically. 
Information on using Regulations.gov, 
including instructions for accessing 
agency documents, submitting 
comments, and viewing the docket, is 
available on the site under ‘‘How To Use 
This Site.’’ 
• Postal Mail, Commercial Delivery, 
or Hand Delivery. If you mail or deliver 
your comments about these proposed 
requirements, definitions, and approval 
criteria, address them to Office of 
Elementary and Secondary Education 
(Attention: State Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund Comments), U.S. Department of 
Education, 400 Maryland Avenue, SW., 
Room 3E108, Washington, DC 20202– 
6200. 
• Privacy Note: The Department’s 
policy for comments received from 
members of the public (including those 
comments submitted by mail, 
commercial delivery, or hand delivery) 
is to make these submissions available 
for public viewing in their entirety on 
the Federal eRulemaking Portal at http: 
//www.regulations.gov. Therefore, 
commenters should be careful to 
include in their comments only 
information that they wish to make 
publicly available on the Internet. 
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: 
James Butler. Telephone: (202) 260– 
2274 or by e-mail: 
phase2comments@ed.gov. 
If you use a telecommunications 
device for the deaf (TDD), call the 
Federal Relay Service (FRS), toll free, at 
1–800–877–8339. 
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 
Invitation to Comment: We invite you 
to submit comments regarding this 
notice. To ensure that your comments 
have maximum effect in developing the 
notice of final requirements, definitions, 
and approval criteria, we urge you to 
identify clearly the specific proposed 
requirements, definitions, and approval 
criteria that each comment addresses. 
We invite you also to assist us in 
complying with the specific 
requirements of Executive Order 12866 
and its overall requirement of reducing 
regulatory burden that might result from 
these proposed requirements, 
definitions, and approval criteria. Please 
let us know of any further ways we 
could reduce potential costs or increase 
potential benefits while preserving the 
effective and efficient administration of 
this program. 
During and after the comment period, 
you may inspect all public comments 
about this notice by accessing 
Regulations.gov. You may also inspect 
the public comments in person in Room 
3E108, 400 Maryland Avenue, SW., 
Washington, DC, between the hours of 
8:30 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Washington, 
DC, time, Monday through Friday of 
each week except Federal holidays. 
Assistance to Individuals with 
Disabilities in Reviewing the 
Rulemaking Record: On request we will 
provide an appropriate accommodation 
or auxiliary aid to an individual with a 
disability who needs assistance to 
review the comments or other 
documents in the public rulemaking 
record for this notice. If you want to 
schedule an appointment for this type of 
accommodation or auxiliary aid, please 
contact the person listed under FOR 
FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT. 
Purpose of Program: The State Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund program provides 
approximately $48.6 billion in formula 
grants to States to help stabilize State 
and local budgets in order to minimize 
and avoid reductions in education and 
other essential services, in exchange for 
a State’s commitment to advance 
essential education reform in key areas. 
Program Authority: American 
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009, 
Division A, Title XIV—State Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund, Public Law 111–5. 
Proposed Requirements 
Note: The proposed requirements are listed 
following the background for this section. 
Background: Section 14005(d) of 
Division A of the American Recovery 
and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (ARRA) 
requires a State receiving funds under 
the Stabilization program to provide 
assurances in four key areas of 
education reform: (a) Achieving equity 
in teacher distribution, (b) improving 
collection and use of data, (c) standards 
and assessments, and (d) supporting 
struggling schools. For each area of 
reform, the ARRA prescribes specific 
action(s) that the State must assure that 
it will implement. In addition, section 
14005(a) of the ARRA requires a State 
that receives funds under the 
Stabilization program to submit an 
application to the Department 
containing such information as the 
Secretary may reasonably require. In 
this notice, we propose specific data 
and information requirements (the 
assurance indicators and descriptors) 
that a State receiving funds under the 
Stabilization program must meet with 
respect to the statutory assurances. We 
also propose specific requirements for a 
plan that a State must submit (the State 
plan), as part of its application for the 
second phase 1 of funding under the 
Stabilization program, describing its 
ability to collect and report the required 
VerDate Nov<24>2008 20:41 Jul 28, 2009 Jkt 217001 PO 00000 Frm 00035 Fmt 4701 Sfmt 4703 E:\FR\FM\29JYN2.SGM 29JYN2ms
to
ck
st
ill 
on
 D
SK
H9
S0
YB
1P
RO
D 
wi
th
 N
O
TI
CE
S2
