United States Department of Justice 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis 
for Notice of Proposed Rulemaking 
Proposed National Standards to Prevent,
 
Detect, and Respond to Prison Rape
 
Under the Prison Rape Elimination Act (PREA)
 
Docket No. OAG-131
 
RIN 1105-AB34
 
January 24, 2011
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Page 
1. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

4. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

II. Estimating the Quantifiable Unit Benefit of Avoiding a Prison Rape or Sexual 
Introduction and Summary.
I. Determining the Baseline.
Assault. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 61

III.
IV. 
62The Total Expected Monetary Benefit of a 1% Reduction in Prison Rape. . . . . . . . . . . .

Describing and Assessing the Non-quantifiable Benefits of Prison Rape 
Avoidance.  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 72

V. Identifying and Monetizing the Estimated Costs of Complying with the Proposed 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
DOJ Standards..  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 03

VI.  Cost Justification Analysis. 06

VII.  Conclusions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 56

  
 
  
1 
2 
3 
8 
9 
LIST OF TABLES
 
Table Caption Page
 
Baseline Prevalence of Prison Rape and Sexual Abuse by Type of Incident and Type 
51of Facility, 2008. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Victim Compensation Costs of Rape and Abusive Sexual Contact, per Victim in the 
12General Population.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Victim Compensation Costs of Rape and Abusive Sexual Contact, per Victim in 
22 Confinement Settings.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
  
Range of Unit Avoidance Benefits By Type of Victim and Type of Facility 62. . . . . . . . . .

Total Monetary Benefit of a 1% Reduction from the Baseline in the Average Annual
 
4

5
 
62Prevalence of Prison Rape. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Total Expected Compliance Costs, 2012-202 136, By Facility Type. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Estimated Annual Compliance Costs for Standard 115.11, .111, .211, .311
 
6

7
 
73(Cost of PREA Coordinator Positions). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Estimated Annual Compliance Costs for Standard 115.12, .112, .212, .312
 
83(Contractor Compliance). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Estimated Annual Compliance Costs for Standards 115.31-.35, .131-.135, .231-.235,
 
64.331-.335 (Training).. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

10 Estimated Annual Compliance Costs for Standards 115.41-.43, .241-.242, .341-.342
 
84(Screening/Assessment and Placement).. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

11 Estimated Annual Compliance Costs for Standard 115.83, .283, .383 (Mental Health 
25Care).. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

12 Summary of Compliance Costs for Proposed PREA Standards. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55-57
 
13 Expected Upfront and Ongoing Compliance Costs, Nationwide, Per Facility and Per
 
85Inmate.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

14A Expected Compliance Cost Projection, Nationwide, Per Facility Type, Per Year, 
952012-2026, Calculated Using a 3% Discount Rate. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

       
 
15 
Table Caption Page 
14B Expected Compliance Cost Projection, Nationwide, Per Facility Type, Per Year, 
952012-2026, Calculated Using a 7% Discount Rate. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Break-Even Analysis Using Lower-Bound Assumptions of Benefit Value, By Facility 
26Type. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

16 Break-Even Analysis Using Upper-Bound Assumptions of Benefit Value,  By 
36Facility Type. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

17 Comparison of Projected Nationwide Upfront and Ongoing Costs, Commission 
46Recommendations v. Proposed Standards. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

     
  
   
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
        
Introduction and Summary 
In the Prison Rape Elimination Act of 2003 (PREA), Pub. L. No. 108-79, codified at 42 
U.S.C. §§ 15601-15609, Congress directed the Attorney General to promulgate national standards 
for enhancing the prevention, detection, reduction, and punishment of prison rape.  In doing so, 
Congress understood that such standards were likely to require federal, state, and local agencies (as 
well as private entities) that operate inmate confinement facilities to incur costs in implementing the 
standards.  Given the statute’s aspiration to eliminate prison rape in the United States, Congress 
expected that some level of compliance costs would be appropriate, and indeed necessary, to foster 
a zero tolerance approach to prison rape. 
Nevertheless, Congress insisted that PREA’s aims be balanced against a sensitivity to the 
“budgetary circumstances” that often challenge the ability of correctional and law enforcement 
agencies to make major changes to their operating procedures.  42 U.S.C. § 15605(a).  In mandating 
national standards, Congress thus instructed the Attorney General not to adopt any standards “that 
would impose substantial additional costs compared to the costs presently expended by Federal, 
State, and local prison authorities.”  42 U.S.C. § 15607(a)(3).  This statutory obligation of cost-
consciousness requires that the Department investigate the PREA standards’ costs and benefits 
before implementing a final Rule. 
Moreover, separate and apart from what PREA itself requires, under Executive Order 12866, 
Regulatory Planning and Review, as amended without substantial change by Executive Order 13258, 
the Department is required to conduct an Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis (IRIA) to assess the 
benefits and costs of its proposed rule.1/ Similar requirements are found in the Regulatory Flexibility 
Act, 5 U.S.C. §§ 601-610. Such an analysis must include an assessment of both the quantitative and 
qualitative benefits and costs of the proposed regulation, as well as a discussion of potentially 
effective and reasonably feasible alternatives. The purpose of an IRIA is to inform stakeholders in 
the regulatory process of the effects of the proposed rule. 
1/ The Department has determined that this rule is a “significant regulatory action” under EO 12866, 
§ 3(f), and accordingly has submitted this rule to the Office of Management and Budget for review.  OMB Circular A-4 
requires Federal agencies to conduct a benefit-cost analysis for any regulation that is “economically significant”––that 
is, a regulation expected to have an annual impact on the economy of $100 million or more.  See EO 12866, § 3(f)(1). 
The Department has concluded that the economic impact of its adoption of the proposed standards is likely to exceed 
this $100 million threshold, because the standards would potentially affect the management of virtually every inmate 
confinement facility in the nation – facilities which collectively house over 2.4 million individuals at any given time and 
spend more than $74 billion annually. See Bureau of Justice Statistics, Justice Expenditure and Employment Extracts 
2007, “Table 1: percent distribution of expenditure for the justice system by type of government, fiscal year 2007" (Sep. 
20, 2010), available at http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/index.cfm?ty=pbdetail&iid=2315 (last checked September 23, 2010); 
Bureau of Justice Statistics, Direct Expenditures by Criminal Justice Function, 1982-2006, in Justice Expenditure and 
Employment Extracts, available at http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/content/glance/tables/exptyptab.cfm. The proposed rule, 
moreover, “materially alters . . . the rights and obligations of grant recipients,” and “raise[s] novel legal or policy issues.” 
EO 12866, §§ 3(f)(3), (4). 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 1 of 65 
 
 
  
 
  
 
    
 
 
   
 
 
  
    
 
 
 
 
 
This IRIA is divided into seven parts.  Parts I through IV identify and, where possible, 
quantify the benefits of reducing prison rape and sexual abuse.  Specifically, we estimate the 
monetary value to society of reducing the prevalence of prison rape and sexual abuse by 1% from 
the baseline level.  This allows us to determine what percentage reduction would need to ensue in 
order for the expected benefits of the standards to break even with their expected costs.  We also take 
into account an unquantified amount representing the numerous nonmonetizable benefits of reducing 
prison rape and sexual abuse.  Part V then identifies and estimates the costs associated with 
implementing and complying with the PREA standards. Part VI evaluates the reasonableness of the 
proposed standards in light of these costs and benefits.  Part VII offers some concluding 
observations. 
Part I begins with the baseline: the status quo that would continue to apply absent regulatory 
action. We estimate the annual prevalence of four different types of inappropriate sexual contact 
(rape involving force or threat of force; nonconsensual sexual acts involving pressure or coercion; 
abusive sexual contacts; and other staff sexual misconduct), in three different confinement settings 
(adult prisons; adult jails; and juvenile facilities).  We examine the available statistics on the 
prevalence of each type of inappropriate sexual contact and address a number of issues with those 
statistics including:  the problem of serial victimization (prevalence vs. incidence), cross-section vs. 
flow, underreporting of sexual victimization (false negatives), false allegations (overreporting), and 
issues engendered by the complexity of sexual victimization.  We also look at difficulties in 
measuring the prevalence of sexual assault in specific settings, such as community confinement 
facilities and lockups.  We conclude that in 2008 there were at least 69,800 inmates who were raped 
under conditions involving force or threat of force, and more than 216,600 total victims of sexual 
abuse, in America’s prisons, jails, and juvenile detention centers. 
In Part II, we estimate the monetary value of certain benefits of avoiding prison rape and 
sexual abuse. We first list certain quantifiable costs of prison rape to the victim (these costs translate 
to avoidance benefits for purposes of this analysis).  These costs were identified by reviewing the 
literature on the cost of rape generally and then extrapolating the cost of rape in the prison 
environment. We derive a range of values for avoiding each of the four types of inappropriate sexual 
contact identified in Part I, and we do so for both juvenile and adult victims.  For example, we value 
the benefit to an adult of avoiding prison forcible rape as worth $200,000 to $300,000. 
In Part III, we calculate the total expected monetary benefit to society of a 1% reduction from 
the baseline in the average annual prevalence of prison rape.  For each of the four types of 
inappropriate sexual contact and each of the three confinement settings identified in Part I, we 
multiply the baseline prevalence of such events (determined in Part I) by the unit benefit of an 
avoided incident (determined in Part II).  We then multiply this product by 1%.  Thus, for example, 
with respect to avoided rapes involving force, in the adult prison and jail setting, the quantifiable 
benefit to society of a 1% reduction from the baseline is estimated to range from approximately $131 
million to $196 million in 2010 dollars.  Across all four types of sexual contacts in the three 
confinement settings for which prevalence data are available, the quantifiable benefit to society of 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 2 of 65 
  
  
 
     
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
  
a 1% reduction from the baseline is estimated to range from approximately $157 million to $239 
million in 2010 dollars. 
Part IV concludes our assessment of the benefits of the standards by developing a list of some 
of the non-quantifiable benefits of prison rape avoidance, describing both the nature and scale of 
those benefits so that they can be appropriately factored into the analysis. We examine benefits for 
rape victims, for inmates who are not rape victims, for families of inmate rape victims, for prison 
administrators and staff, and for society at large. These intangible benefits include those relating to 
public health and public safety, as well as economic benefits and existence value benefits.  They also 
include avoided rapes and sexual assaults in community confinement and lockup settings, which 
cannot be quantified due to the absence of prevalence statistics in these settings. 
Part V estimates the compliance costs of the PREA standards.  Each of the proposed 
standards (or groups of related standards) is examined to determine what costs correctional agencies 
are likely to incur in implementing and complying with it.  Costs are divided between start-up 
implementation expenses and on-going compliance costs in the out years.  Where possible, we 
differentiate the cost implications in order to distinguish among costs applicable to prisons, jails, 
juvenile facilities, community confinement facilities, and lockups. We discuss the existing sources 
of information for our estimated compliance costs and set forth our methodologies and assumptions 
used in extrapolating nationwide compliance costs from existing data.  We conclude that nationwide, 
compliance with the proposed PREA standards is expected to cost the correctional community 
approximately $213 million in upfront costs and approximately $544 million in annual ongoing 
costs. In present value terms annual compliance costs from 2012 to 2026 are estimated to total $4.2 
billion when a 3% discount rate is used, and $2.7 billion when a 7% discount rate is used. 
In Part VI, we analyze the cost justification of the proposed PREA standards.  First, we 
conduct a break-even analysis, to evaluate whether the costs of PREA compliance are justified by 
the anticipated benefits.  Given that the monetary benefit of a 1% reduction from the baseline in the 
prevalence of prison rape is worth $157 million to $239 million, implementation of the standards 
would have to yield a 0.70-1.07% reduction from the baseline level of prison rape in any given year 
(i.e., from a total of 216,600 incidents to 213,689-214,488) in order for the upfront costs and the 
benefits to break even, without regard to the value of the nonmonetary benefits.  For the ongoing 
annual costs to break even, the standards would have to yield an average annual reduction from the 
baseline of 2.06-3.13% (i.e., reducing the prevalence to 209,239-211,550 incidents per year).  We 
think these breakeven assumptions reflect a realistic and achievable goal with respect to the 
anticipated effectiveness of the standards.  We also examine the cost implications of the most 
obvious alternative to the proposed standards, to wit, the Commission’s proposed standards, and find 
that the standards proposed here appear, at present, to have lower net costs. 
Finally, in Part VII we summarize our analysis and offer some concluding observations. 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 3 of 65 
  
  
   
       
 
     
 
 
  
 
 
I. Determining the Baseline 
For purposes of regulatory impact analysis, a benefit is an incremental improvement in the 
status quo engendered by implementation of the proposed rule.  See OMB Circular A-4, at 2, 15-16. 
Accordingly, to appropriately measure and quantify a proposed regulation’s benefit, one needs first 
to establish the baseline that would apply in the absence of regulation, so that changes to that 
baseline attributable to the regulation can be identified.  Id. In the context of the PREA standards, 
the relevant baseline is the level of rape, sexual assault, and other events of inappropriate sexual 
contact that would exist in America’s prisons, jails, lockups, juvenile detention centers, and 
community confinement settings in the absence of the PREA standards. 
Some commenters at the ANPRM stage2/ – particularly those representing correctional 
agencies – disputed the notion that the sexual assault of inmates is a serious problem in their 
facilities.3/ As elaborated below, however, available data compiled by the Department’s Bureau of 
Justice Statistics (BJS) make it clear that the prevalence of sexual abuse in America’s inmate 
confinement facilities is a problem of substantial magnitude. 
Sources of Baseline Data. In enacting PREA, Congress noted the difficulty of pinpointing 
the exact prevalence of prison rape but concluded that the problem was large: 
Insufficient research has been conducted and insufficient data 
reported on the extent of prison rape.  However, experts have 
conservatively estimated that at least 13 percent of the inmates in the 
United States have been sexually assaulted in prison.  Many inmates 
have suffered repeated assaults.  Under this estimate, nearly 200,000 
inmates now incarcerated have been or will be the victims of prison 
rape.  The total number of inmates who have been sexually assaulted 
in the past 20 years likely exceeds 1,000,000. 
42 U.S.C. § 15601(2).  As of 2003, when PREA was enacted, there were few reliable, empirical data 
available concerning the frequency with which inmates in this country were subjected to sexual 
abuse. One of the purposes of PREA was to solve this problem:  Congress directed BJS to undertake 
2/ In March 2010, the Department issued an Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (ANPRM) which, 
among other things, solicited public comment on the costs and benefits of the Commission’s recommended PREA 
standards.  See 75 Fed. Reg. 11077 (DOJ Mar. 10, 2010). The Department received many comments in response to the 
ANPRM and it has taken those comments into consideration both in developing the proposed standards and during the 
regulatory assessment process. 
3/ See, e.g., Association of State Correctional Administrators, Comments on PREA Standards, Docket 
No. OAG-131, at 1-2 (May 10, 2010) (noting that there are “relatively few documented instances” of sexual assault 
occurring in correctional facilities). 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 4 of 65 
   
 
         
   
 
 
 
   
 
    
 
annual comprehensive studies and statistical reviews aimed at improving the resolution and accuracy 
of estimates of sexual violence in prisons.  See 42 U.S.C. §§ 15602(4), 15603. 
BJS established the National Prison Rape Statistics Program, which collects data in two 
ways.  First, it conducts an annual national review of institutional records documenting allegations 
of sexual violence in adult and juvenile correctional facilities (the Survey of Sexual Violence (SSV)). 
To date, three such annual surveys have been conducted in adult facilities and two in juvenile 
facilities.  The most recent surveys were published in 2007; the results of an even more recent set 
are forthcoming. 4/ These surveys were designed to measure the number of reported allegations of 
inmate-on-inmate and staff-on-inmate sexual misconduct and also to collect detailed information on 
the outcomes of follow-up investigations, including whether the reported incidents were 
substantiated.  Items in the surveys included the circumstances surrounding each alleged incident, 
characteristics of victims and perpetrators, the type of physical force or pressure used, victim 
injuries, and sanctions imposed.  These surveys (which reached facilities housing more than 1.8 
million inmates, or 81% of all inmates held in adult facilities in 2006), provide an understanding of 
what corrections officials know, what information is recorded, how allegations are handled, where 
incidents occur, and how officials respond to allegations brought to their attention. 
Second, BJS developed an annual national survey of inmates (the National Inmate Survey 
(NIS)) and a corresponding annual national survey of juvenile detainees (the National Survey of 
Youth in Custody (NSYC)). Since 2007, these surveys have collected allegations of sexual 
victimization directly from victims, through audio computer-assisted self-interviews administered 
to adult inmates in prisons and jails and to youth held in juvenile correctional facilities.  These 
surveys were also conducted on a very large scale: the most recent adult survey (2008-09) was 
administered to 32,029 inmates in 167 state and federal prisons nationwide, and to 48,066 inmates 
in 286 jails nationwide.5/ The most recent juvenile survey(also 2008-09) was administered to 10,263 
youth held in 195 facilities across the country.6/ 
Together, the two sets of BJS surveys provide more empirical data on the level of sexual 
violence in America’s prisons than existed when PREA was enacted in 2003.  However, the statistics 
based on institutional reports reflect a very different (and much lower) level than do those based on 
inmate reports.  This can perhaps be expected, because only a fraction of incidents of sexual abuse 
in a prison environment will come to the attention of correctional authorities or be reflected in 
4/ Bureau of Justice Statistics, Sexual Violence Reported by Correctional Authorities 2006 (NCJ 218914) 
(August 2007) (hereinafter BJS Adult SSV 2006); Bureau of Justice Statistics, Sexual Violence Reported by Juvenile 
Correctional Authorities 2005-06 (NCJ 215337) (July 2008) (hereinafter BJS Juv. SSV 2005-06). 
5/ Bureau of Justice Statistics, Sexual Victimization in Prisons and Jails Reported by Inmates, 2008-09 
(NCJ 231169) (Aug. 2010) (hereinafter BJS Adult NIS 2008-09). 
6/ Bureau of Justice Statistics, Sexual Victimization in Juvenile Facilities Reported by Youth, 2008-09 
(NCJ 228416) (Jan. 2010) (hereinafter BJS Youth NSYC 2008-09). 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 5 of 65 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
    
 
  
  
 
institutional records.7/ But the existence of a significant difference between the two data sets requires 
a choice to be made as to which set to use, or as to how to reconcile the two sets for purposes of 
assessing the correct baseline. 
In estimating the baseline of prison sexual abuse for purposes of an IRIA, we propose to rely 
on the data from BJS’s inmate-reported surveys rather than those from the facility-reported surveys. 
We do so for several reasons.  First, as BJS itself noted in its reports of allegations compiled from 
institutional administrative records, “given the absence of uniform reporting, caution is necessary 
for accurate interpretation of the survey results. Higher or lower counts among facilities may reflect 
variations in definitions, reporting capacities, and procedures for reporting allegations as opposed 
to differences in the underlying incidence of sexual violence.”  BJS Adult SSV 2006, at 1. 
Second, in all likelihood the institution-reported data significantly undercount the number 
of actual sexual abuse victims in prison, due to the phenomenon of underreporting.  As elaborated 
below in the section on false negatives, for a variety of reasons many sexual abuse victims do not 
or cannot report their abuse to institutional managers.  Indeed, of the adult respondents to the inmate 
surveys, between 69% and 82% of inmates who reported sexual abuse in response to the survey 
stated that they had never reported an incident to correctional managers.  See BJS Adult NIS 2008­
09, at 22-23. Thus, the data drawn from institutional surveys almost certainly misses thousands of 
victims that the inmate surveys capture. 
However, while the BJS inmate-reported data are the most comprehensive statistics available 
on sexual victimization in confinement facilities, even they do not provide a complete picture of the 
phenomenon. Any attempt to use them to define the baseline for purposes of assessing regulatory 
benefit must take into account several limitations. The following sections discuss a number of those 
limitations and explain how we have dealt with them here. 
Prevalence vs. Incidence. One of the thorniest issues involves whether to focus on 
prevalence or incidence.  Prevalence refers to the number of inmates (or more correctly the 
percentage of inmates) who report having been sexually victimized once or more during a given 
period of time while confined, whereas incidence refers to the number of discrete victimization 
events that take place.  The distinction is consequential because a significant percentage of sexually 
victimized inmates report having been victimized more than once.  For example, in the most recent 
BJS study of juvenile facilities, 81% of the youth who reported youth-on-youth victimization 
recounted having been victimized more than once, with 32% reporting more than ten events; 
similarly, 88% of youth who reported staff sexual misconduct reported more than one incident, with 
27% reporting more than ten. BJS Youth NSYC 2008-09, at 12, 14.  Likewise, between one half 
and two thirds of adult inmates who reported sexual abuse in the prison setting claimed to have been 
victimized more than once.  BJS Adult NIS 2008-09, at 21, 23.  The large-scale phenomenon of 
7/ See infra, notes 14 to 15 and accompanying text. 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 6 of 65 
      
             
 
   
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
    
 
 
             
multiple or serial victimization requires a choice to be made as to whether to rely on prevalence data 
or incidence data in defining the regulatory baseline.8/ 
BJS’s institutional record reviews essentially measure reported  incidence, since they identify 
the discrete number of alleged sexual abuse incidents that were reported to and investigated by 
correctional authorities, regardless of whether multiple allegations relate to the same inmate.  By 
contrast, BJS’s inmate surveys primarily measure prevalence, since they identify the number of 
surveyed inmates who report having experienced one or more incidents of sexual abuse during the 
preceding twelve month period.  However, the inmate surveys potentially allow a type of incidence 
data to be extrapolated, since they ask respondents if they have been victimized more than once in 
the preceding twelve months and, if so, to check one of four boxes indicating whether the total 
number of incidents was 2, 3 to 5, 6-10, or 11 or more. 
There are several good reasons to use incidence data.  For one thing, in the statute itself 
Congress intimated a preference for incidence data, repeatedly using that term both in defining BJS’s 
data collection mandate (see, e.g., 42 U.S.C. § 15603) and in enunciating the purpose of the statute 
(see id. at 15602(1)).9/    For another, an approach which relies solely on prevalence without taking 
into account the phenomenon of serial victimization risks understating the suffering, and the 
concomitant cost to society, of inmates who are repeatedly terrorized by sexual predators. 
We nevertheless propose relying on prevalence data rather than incidence data, for a number 
of reasons.  First, for reasons already explained we use BJS’s inmate-reported data (which primarily 
count prevalence) rather than the facility-reported data.  Using these data to estimate incidence 
presents several difficulties.  When victimized inmates report multiple incidents, they are not 
necessarily reporting incidents of the same severity. For example, an inmate might have experienced 
one incident in which she was raped by another inmate using force, two incidents involving 
nonconsensual sexual acts under pressure or coercion, three abusive sexual contacts, and five 
incidents of willing sexual relations with staff.  Because BJS codes inmate responses by the most 
serious type of incident experienced, this inmate would appear in BJS’s statistics as having 
experienced rape involving force or threat of force and will also be listed as having experienced 11 
or more incidents of sexual abuse. Counting these as 11 more incidents of rape involving force 
would overstate the severity of the victim’s experiences.  Absent the ability to break out the survey 
8/ Compare Lori A. Post et al., The Rape Tax: Tangible and Intangible Costs of Sexual Violence, 17 J. 
INTERPERSONAL VIOLENCE 773, 777-79(2002) (“[O]ur study underestimates sexual violence because we used prevalence 
instead of incidence.  Females who have been raped or sexually assaulted are more likely to be assaulted a second time. 
Therefore, calculating the cost of sexual violence using incidents would produce greater numbers.”). 
9/ On the other hand, elsewhere in the statute Congress defined the problem of prison rape in terms of 
its prevalence.  See, e.g., 42 U.S.C. § 15601(2) (“[A]t least 13 percent of the inmates in the United States have been 
sexually assaulted in prison.  Many inmates have suffered repeated assaults.  Under this estimate, nearly 200,000 inmates 
now incarcerated have been or will be the victims of prison rape.  The total number of inmates who have been sexually 
assaulted in the past 20 years likely exceeds 1,000,000.”). 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 7 of 65 
   
  
 
    
      
    
 
  
 
    
  
  
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
responses by type of victimization, any attempt to extrapolate incidence data from BJS’s inmate 
surveys is likely to skew in favor of the most serious incident experienced by each inmate. 
Moreover, in many contexts in which serial victimization occurs over a relatively short period 
of time, it may be difficult to determine when one discrete incident ends and another begins.  This 
phenomenon is exacerbated by the fact that BJS’s inmate surveys ask prisoners to report their 
victimizations retrospectively – that is, to state whether (and the extent to which) they have been 
sexually victimized during the twelve months preceding the survey.  While one would expect an 
inmate to have a strong recollection of whether they were ever victimized during the preceding year, 
inmates who have been victimized multiple times do not always have a clear recollection of how 
many specific times they were victimized during the reporting period.  In fact, studies show that 
individuals have a very difficult time remembering the details of discrete victimization events 
beyond approximately six events.10/ Moreover, the very attempt to mentally relive or recollect each 
discrete event for purposes of counting them is often traumatic for victims, causing them to block 
out or misremember some subset of their experiences. 
In light of these difficulties in extrapolating reliable incidence data from the BJS inmate 
surveys, as well as the limitations in the BJS facility surveys, we propose to use the prevalence data 
drawn from the inmate surveys without adjusting them to account for multiple victimizations 
experienced by individual inmates.  If anything, this decision will result in underestimating the 
problem, and this is consistent with a conservative approach to the estimation of benefits. 
Cross-section v. Flow. Another limitation of the BJS reports is that they only capture data 
from a sampling of inmates who happen to be in the facility on the day(s) the survey is administered, 
missing inmates who may have been in the facility during the survey’s twelve-month reporting 
period but who had been released or transferred before the date(s) of the survey.  Put otherwise, the 
surveys take a cross-sectional view of the prevalence of prison rape rather than one which accounts 
for the flow of inmates through a facility over the period covered by the study. This is a particular 
problem in jails and lockups, where many inmates remain for very short durations: e.g., statistics 
suggest that some 13.5 million releases from jails take place each year, after an average detention 
period of just two to three days.11/   Meanwhile, the average jail inmate who participated in BJS’s 
most recent sexual victimization survey had only been in jail for 3.4 months during the 12 months 
prior to the survey.  BJS Adult NIS 2008-09, at 31.  The problem is less pronounced in prisons, but 
even there inmates responding to the BJS survey had spent an average of 7.9 (for State) to 9 (for 
10/ NATIONAL INST. OF JUSTICE RESEARCH REPORT , VICTIM  COSTS AND CONSEQUENCES: A NEW  LOOK 
at 2 (NCJ 155282) (Jan. 1996), available at www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles/victcost.pdf.
11/ Bureau of Justice Statistics, Jail Inmates at Midyear 2008 – Statistical Tables, Table 4 (NCJ 225709); 
Bureau of Justice Statistics, Mortality in Local Jails 2000-2007, table 4 (NCJ 222988); and unpublished data from the 
2004 Survey of Local Jails. The number of releases for the 12 months ending June 30, 2008, was estimated based on the 
number of admissions during the last week in June times 52, and then rounded. Total admissions exceeded releases by 
approximately 5,400 during the period. 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 8 of 65 
  
 
 
    
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
federal) months in the facility during the 12 months prior to the survey.  The number of inmates 
released from prison during 2008 totaled 735,454.12/ 
It would thus appear inappropriate to rely on the figures from the BJS report without a flow 
adjustment, for that would under-report the baseline prevalence.  We asked BJS to provide estimates 
based on its survey data to take into account the flow of prisoners, so that the baseline figures 
account for all inmates in prisons, jails, and juvenile facilities during the reporting period. 
For prisons, the total number of persons victimized among prisoners released during the 12 
months prior to the survey was estimated based on the average monthly victimization rate by type 
of victimization, multiplied by the number of prison releases (735,454), times the average exposure 
(6 months).  For jails, the total number of persons victimized among persons released during the 12 
months prior to the survey was estimated based on the average daily victimization rate by type of 
victimization (adjusted for the higher rates in first 3 days as reported in the survey), and then 
multiplied by the estimated number of days of exposure (which represented 13,561,000 releases 
times the estimated average length of stay).  
For juvenile facilities, BJS first determined the prevalence of sexual abuse as of the date of 
its survey among juvenile facilities that were not included in the NSYC.13/  It did this by multiplying 
the number of committed youth not sampled in the survey (38,000) by the average daily rate by type 
of victimization, times the estimated average time served by committed youth excluded from the 
survey (119 days).  This number was then added to the total number victimized at juvenile facilities 
included in the survey, from which was derived the combined average daily rate by type of 
victimization. This rate was then multiplied by the estimated number of days of exposure for 
committed youth released during the preceding 12 months. The number of days of exposure was 
estimated by multiplying the number of releases times the estimated length of stay (and adjusting for 
incomplete exposure for youth released in the first 3 months). 
This flow adjustment increases the baseline prevalence figures, especially in jails and 
juvenile detention centers.  For example, when accounting for annual flow, the prevalence of sexual 
abuse in jails in 2008 increases from 24,000 victims to 108,100.  The prevalence in juvenile facilities 
increases from 3,220 to 17,100.  In prisons, the prevalence increases from 64,500 victims to 91,400. 
See Table 1, below. 
12/ Bureau of Justice Statistics, Prisoners in 2008, table 3 (NCJ228417). 
13/ The NSYC included state-owned or operated juvenile facilities and large locally or privately operated 
facilities that held adjudicated youth for at least 90 days.  The survey excluded juvenile detention centers that are 
primarily (>75%) designed to house status offenders, pre-adjudicated youth, and other youth held for periods shorter than 
90 days.  It also excluded smaller (<150 youth) facilities operated by non-State entities regardless of the adjudication 
status of the youth detained.  See BJS Juv. NSYC 2008-09, at 1-2, 15-16. 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 9 of 65 
      
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
     
 
  
 
   
      
 
 
 
 
False negatives and false positives.    The BJS inmate surveys rely solely on self-reporting 
of sexual abuse experiences. This introduces the risk of false negatives, or underreporting, for many 
inmates who have experienced sexual abuse may be unwilling or unable to talk about it.14/  Whether 
a rape occurs inside or outside prison walls, victims are often so mentally and emotionally 
traumatized by their experience that they lack the wherewithal to discuss it.15/   Other victims have 
a difficult time reporting the incident because doing so requires them to relive an experience that was 
traumatic to them, or because they feel shame or embarrassment about the event, or because they live 
in fear of retribution or retaliation from their assailant should they bring the abusive acts to light. See, 
e.g., Dumond, supra note 14, at 154-55. 
In gathering its data, BJS attempted to compensate for the problem of underreporting by 
assuring surveyed inmates that their responses would be kept anonymous and confidential. It also 
used established statistical methods to adjust its results to account for inmates who were selected for 
interviews but who refused to participate.   See BJS Adult NIS 2008-09, at 30.  These measures are 
likely to have at least somewhat mitigated the problem of  false negatives, for between 69% and 
82% of inmates reporting sexual abuse in response to the inmate surveys claimed to have never 
reported an incident to correctional administrators.  See BJS Adult NIS 2008-09, at 22-23.  It is 
nevertheless still likely that the BJS prevalence figures fail to capture a certain percentage of victims 
due to underreporting. 
On the other hand, false positives are also an issue in the prison setting.  Prisoners sometimes 
make false, spurious, or exaggerated allegations about the conduct of staff members or other inmates 
– whether out of spite, for strategic or retaliatory reasons, or simply for their personal amusement. 
BJS’s data from facility surveys suggest that many of the reported allegations of sexual abuse put 
forward by adult inmates involving staff-on-inmate sexual misconduct cannot be proven. 
Approximately  28% proved “unfounded” (meaning that the investigation determined that the alleged 
incident did not actually occur), while another 46% of those allegations proved “unsubstantiated” 
(meaning that the investigation failed to yield sufficient evidence to determine whether or not the 
alleged incident actually occurred). BJS Adult SSV 2006, at 3-4 & Table 2.  Allegations of inmate­
on-inmate sexual abuse among adults are even less likely to be substantiated (14%) and more likely 
to be unfounded (32%).  Id.  Among juveniles, the problem of false allegations of sexual abuse is 
even more pronounced: 46% of staff-on-inmate sexual misconduct allegations, and 39% of inmate­
on-inmate abuse allegations made by juveniles proved unfounded upon investigation (the 
14/ See Robert W. Dumond, The Impact of Prisoner Sexual Violence: Challenges of Implementing Public 
Law 108-79 – The Prison Rape Elimination Act of 2003, 32 J. LEGIS. 142, 147 (2006) (“To fully understand the 
implications of the BJS study, one must recognize that of all categories of crime, rape and sexual violence are known 
to be one of the most underreported, making an accurate assessment of its occurrence difficult.”). 
15/ See Post, supra note 8, at 774 (“Rape and sexual assault have been difficult to research because an 
estimated 50% to 90% of rapes are not reported.  The problem of underreporting contributes to the difficulty of 
estimating the prevalence and incidence, as well as the cost of rape and sexual assault.”). 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 10 of 65 
  
   
 
 
 
                  
  
 
  
 
      
substantiated percentages are 18% and 21%, respectively). BJS Juv. SSV 2005-06,  at 3 & Tables 
3-4. 
BJS’s inmate surveys do not involve any follow-up investigation or substantiation of reported 
incidents.  They do, however, endeavor to minimize the potential for false positives in two ways. 
First, the survey responses are anonymous and confidential and do not call upon inmates to identify 
the names of their abusers, which presumably reduces an inmate’s incentive to fabricate allegations 
of abuse for strategic or retaliatory purposes.  Second, BJS designed their surveys with a number of 
internal checks and controls aimed at identifying and excluding at least some inmates whose 
interview responses suggested (e.g., through inconsistent response patterns) either a lack of sincerity 
or a lack of understanding of the questions.  See, e.g., BJS Adult NIS 2008-09, at 31; BJS Juv. 
NSYC 2008-09, at 6, 17. 
In the end, BJS is essentially agnostic on the issue of false negatives and false positives: 
The NIS-2 collects only allegations of sexual victimization.  Because 
participation in the survey is anonymous and reports are confidential, 
the survey does not permit any follow-up investigation or 
substantiation of reported incidents through review.  Some allegations 
in the NIS-2 may be untrue.  At the same time, some inmates may 
remain silent about sexual victimization experienced in the facility, 
despite efforts of survey staff to assure inmates that their responses 
would be kept confidential.  Although the effects may be offsetting, 
the relative extent of under reporting and false reporting in the NIS-2 
is unknown. 
BJS Adult NIS 2008-09, at 6. We propose to be the same, and to make no adjustment to the BJS 
statistics to account for the possibility of false negatives or false positives. 
We do this because, like BJS, we lack any additional method for measuring the extent of 
underreporting or false reporting.  The data on substantiation from BJS’s institution surveys do 
provide one potential source of information on the degree to which inmate survey responses could 
be discounted for false positives.  But because the incentives for inmates to make false allegations 
of misconduct in reports to prison authorities are far greater than their incentive to fabricate 
responses to a confidential survey, it is not clear to what extent the substantiation data would be 
helpful in pinpointing the true prevalence of prison sexual abuse.  Moreover, in the absence of a 
corresponding source of information to assess the extent of false negatives, it would seem overly 
conservative to adjust the prevalence statistics based solely on the data concerning substantiation of 
allegations.  We believe that the internal methodological controls that BJS has incorporated into its 
inmate surveys to compensate for both underreporting and false reporting are adequate to the task 
and provide an adequate measure of prison rape prevalence for present purposes. 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 11 of 65 
   
 
     
 
   
 
 
    
 
    
  
 
  
 
   
 
The Complexity of Sexual Victimization.  Progress in eliminating prison rape would benefit 
from all stakeholders in the process establishing consistent definitions for the different types of 
sexual victimization that occur in prison settings.  In fact, in the statute itself Congress defined one 
of the purposes of PREA as to “standardize the definitions used for collecting data on the incidence 
of prison rape.”  42 U.S.C. § 15602(5). Thus, in 2004 BJS developed standardized definitions to 
guide its data collection methodologies, and to drive efforts to unify institutional reporting 
procedures across the country.16/
 BJS divides sexual victimizations reported by inmates into six different event categories – 
two for inmate-on-inmate victimizations and four for staff sexual misconduct.  Inmate-on-inmate 
sexual victimizations are divided into “nonconsensual sexual acts” and “abusive sexual contacts 
only.” The former refers to a broad range of conduct, including “unwanted contacts with another 
inmate . . . that involved oral, anal, vaginal penetration, hand jobs, and other sexual acts.”  BJS Adult 
NIS 2009-09, at 7, 32.  “Abusive sexual contacts only,” by contrast, refers to “unwanted contacts 
with another inmate . . . that involved touching of the inmate’s buttocks, thigh, penis, breasts, or 
vagina in a sexual way.”  Id.  Staff sexual misconduct is divided between “unwilling activity” 
(incidents of unwanted sexual contacts)  and “willing activity,” which subsumes contacts 
characterized by the reporting inmate as voluntary, even though all sexual contacts between inmates 
and staff are legally nonconsensual.  Id. Within each of the categories of “willing” and “unwilling” 
contacts with staff, the BJS statistics divide the victimizations into “touching only” and “excluding 
touching.”  Id. “Touching only” equates to “abusive sexual contacts only” in the inmate-on-inmate 
context, while “excluding touching” equates to “nonconsensual sexual acts” in the inmate-on-inmate 
context. Id. 
The BJS definitions work well for the statistical tabulation purposes for which they were 
designed, but they suffer from certain limitations for our current purposes. One aim in this IRIA is 
to assign a unit cost to various types of sexual victimization that occur in prison settings.  As 
elaborated in Part III below, to assign a unit cost to various types of events, we need to account, at 
least to some extent, for the complexity of sexual victimization.  Numerous considerations factor into 
the cost to a victim or to society of a specific incident of sexual victimization.  These include: 
whether the event involved force or threat of force; whether it involved pressure or coercion; whether 
the victim has been victimized once or more than once; whether the victim suffered a physical injury, 
and if so the severity of that injury; and other factors.  
The BJS definitions do not fully reflect this complexity of sexual victimization.  Thus, the 
definition of “nonconsensual sexual acts” includes a broad range of victimization events that are 
likely to have drastically different impacts for cost valuation purposes. It would include, for 
example, both a forcible gang-rape involving vaginal penetration and serious physical injury, and 
an incident in which an inmate is pressured into giving a staff member sexual gratification in 
16/ Bureau of Justice Statistics, Sexual Violence Reported by Correctional Authorities 2004 (NCJ 210333). 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 12 of 65 
 
     
  
  
 
     
   
  
 
 
     
  
 
  
    
 
 
 
          
exchange for added time in the recreation deck.  Both types of “nonconsensual sexual acts” are 
illegal and reprehensible, and the PREA standards aim to eliminate both; but for benefit-cost 
evaluation purposes the former type of event is very likely to have a much greater avoidance benefit 
than the latter. 
Of course, there are also limits to the extent to which a benefit-cost analysis can account for 
the complexity of the problem analyzed, and even a benefit-cost analysis must avail itself of some 
simplifying definitions and assumptions. For purposes of this IRIA, we therefore propose to divide 
sexual victimizations in prison settings into four categories, which are somewhat differently 
calibrated from those BJS uses in its statistical compilations.  
We have divided BJS’s category of “nonconsensual sexual acts” into two event categories 
based on the level of coercion involved.  First, we use the category labeled “rape involving 
force/threat of force” to denote incidents of anal or vaginal penetration, oral contact with the penis 
or vagina, and “hand jobs,” which result from physical force or threat of physical force – such as by 
physically holding down or restraining the victim, or threatening the victim with a weapon.  We use 
this category both for staff-on-inmate and inmate-on-inmate forcible rapes. 
Second, we differentiate “nonconsensual sexual acts involving pressure/coercion,” which we 
use to denote incidents of anal or vaginal penetration, oral contact with the penis or vagina, and 
“hand jobs,” in which the perpetrator, without using force or the threat of force, pressured the inmate 
or made the inmate feel that they had to participate. This would include sexual contact procured 
through bribes or blackmail, offers of protection or special treatment or privileges, offers to settle 
a debt, provision of drugs, or verbal persuasion.17/ We use this category both for staff-on-inmate and 
inmate-on-inmate nonconsensual sexual acts. 
We are able to divide BJS’s “nonconsensual sexual acts” category into these two different 
categories because the survey questions posed to inmates asked about the level of coercion used for 
the various sexual acts they reported, and BJS tabulated those responses by level of coercion.  See 
BJS Adult NIS 2008-09, at 25-26, 31, 46-51, 74-81; BJS Juv. NSYC 2008-09, at 3, 9, 13, 14, 18-19, 
22, 44-48. We believe it appropriate to make this distinction because the cost to the victim and to 
society of a rape involving force or threat of force is, in our view, substantially greater than the cost 
of a nonconsensual sexual act involving lesser forms of pressure or coercion.  See Part IV. 
17/ See Dumond, supra note 14, at 149 (“Aggressors employ several methods to control their victims, 
including entrapment (blackmail), pressure tactics, and physical force, accompanied by psychological manipulation.  A 
common form of entrapment is to give a new prisoner a number of goods which are ‘on loan,’ since new inmates often 
have few resources available to them.  In the correctional economy, loaned goods must be repaid at exorbitantly high 
rates . . . .  When an inmate cannot repay the loan, he or she is forced to pay with sex.  Pressure tactics include 
persuasion, bribes, threats to withdraw love, and use of alcohol or drugs. Force tactics include threats of harm; 
intimidation by the perpetrator’s size and strength; being physically held down; having a weapon present; and, a variety 
of physical assaults.”). 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 13 of 65 
  
 
  
     
         
 
 
    
   
 
 
  
  
      
 
Our third category, “abusive sexual contacts,” has the same meaning that BJS uses in its 
statistical compilations but is limited here to inmate-on-inmate contacts, to wit, “unwanted [i.e., 
forced, coerced, or pressured] contacts with another inmate . . . that [only] involved touching of the 
inmate’s buttocks, thigh, penis, breasts, or vagina in a sexual way.”  Our final category, “willing sex 
with staff,” includes incidents in which the inmate reported that he or she willingly (i.e., without any 
form of force or pressure) had sex or sexual contact with staff. 
Issues related to specific institution types.  The final limitation of the BJS baseline 
prevalence statistics for which we need to account in this IRIA has to do with the types of institutions 
covered by the BJS surveys. BJS’s data with respect to adult prisons and jails are comprehensive, 
reflecting the massive scale of the National Inmate Survey, and they provide a robust if not complete 
picture of the prevalence of prison rape and sexual abuse in those facilities nationwide.  BJS’s data 
with respect to juvenile facilities are somewhat more limited, since the NSYC only studies facilities 
that hold adjudicated youth for at least 90 days. BJS has nevertheless been able to extrapolate for 
purposes of this IRIA data on the estimated prevalence of sexual assault in facilities not covered by 
the survey.  See supra note 13 and accompanying text. 
BJS has not, however, studied the prevalence of sexual assault in community confinement 
facilities, and we are aware of no available studies conducted by other entities.  Many community 
confinement facilities are operated by (or in association with) neighboring or nearby prisons or jails; 
to the extent they are, data on the prevalence of sexual abuse within such facilities may in some cases 
be subsumed within the data for the operating prison or jail. Beyond that, we are not aware of any 
empirical attempt to assess the prevalence of sexual abuse in community confinement facilities or 
to propose a methodology for doing so. 
Nor are we aware of any statistics purporting to assess the prevalence of sexual abuse in 
America’s lockups.  An estimated 13.7 million arrests were made in 2009, and it can be assumed that 
a significant percentage of these passed through the (conservatively-estimated) 4,500 lockups across 
the country each year.18/   Because  the  amount of time each person spends in a given lockup facility 
is brief (typically less than 24 hours), conducting a meaningful survey of  lockup detainees to assess 
the prevalence of sexual abuse in those settings is difficult.  While the short amount of time detainees 
usually spend in lockup facilities, together with the typical physical layout of lockups, would suggest 
that lockup detainees face a lower risk of sexual abuse than do inmates in other settings, we cannot 
ignore the anecdotal evidence that sexual abuse can and does occur in lockup settings.  Statistics 
suggesting that 15% of sexual abuse victims in jails report having been abused by another inmate 
within the first 24 hours of their arrival at the jail19/ also indicate that the problem of sexual abuse 
18/ See Bureau of Justice Statistics, 2008 Census of State and Local Law Enforcement Agencies and 2005 
National Survey of State Court Prosecutors. 
19/ See BJS Adult NIS 2008-09, at 22-23. 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 14 of 65 
    
         
   
 
in lockups cannot and should not be ignored.  Nevertheless, we are currently  constrained by an 
absence of empirical data as to the magnitude of that problem. 
Due to the limitations in the available data, we have decided not to estimate the baseline 
prevalence of sexual abuse in lockups or community correctional facilities.  This adds a further 
conservative element to our baseline prevalence figures, in the sense of underestimating the extent 
of the problem. We do include the benefits of avoiding sexual abuse in these facilities in our 
accounting of non-quantifiable benefits in Part IV below, and we invite public comment as to 
whether there is a better way of capturing the benefit of preventing sexual abuse in these settings. 
Baseline Prevalence Matrix.   Taking into account the foregoing considerations, we set forth 
in Table 1 our estimate of the baseline prevalence of prison rape for benefit-cost analysis purposes. 
Our matrix uses four different event types (rape involving force, nonconsensual sexual acts involving 
pressure, abusive sexual contacts, and willing sex with staff) in three different confinement settings 
(adult prisons, adult jails, and juvenile facilities). For each event type, we list the total number of 
individuals who were victimized during 2008, as adjusted to account for the flow of inmates over 
that period of time. Inmates who experienced more than one type of victimization during the period 
are included in the figures for the most serious type of victimization they reported. 
Table 1
 
Baseline Prevalence of Prison Rape and Sexual Abuse
 
by Type of Incident and Type of Facility, 200820/
 
Adult Prisons Adult Jails Juvenile Facilities 
Rape involving force/threat of force 26,200 39,200 4,400 
Nonconsensual sexual acts involving 
pressure/coercion 
18,400 14,800 2,900 
Abusive sexual contacts 19,000 23,000 3,000 
Willing sex with staff 27,800 31,100 6,800 
TOTAL 91,400 108,100 17,100 
20/ Includes cross-sectional number covered in BJS surveys plus number of estimated victims released 
in the twelve months prior to the survey.  Juvenile facilities include adjudicated/committed youth only. 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 15 of 65 
    
  
 
  
   
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
     
  
  
 
   
    
     
       
II. Estimating the Quantifiable Unit Benefit of Avoiding a Prison Rape or Sexual Assault 
Placing a monetary value on an avoided sexual assault confronts considerable methodological 
difficulties, and the enterprise may even seem objectionable to some people.  However, the monetary 
value of an avoided sexual assault is only one dimension of the total benefits that will be achieved 
by the reduction in the prevalence of such assaults in prison.  This Part discusses that monetary 
value. Part IV discusses benefits from reducing rape and sexual assault in confinement facilities that 
are not quantifiable. 
As for the difficulties inherent in any attempt to monetize the value of an avoided sexual 
assault, Executive Order 12866 instructs agencies that they must measure quantifiable benefits “to 
the fullest extent that [they] can be usefully estimated.”  EO 12866, § 1(a).  Some uncertainty in such 
estimates is not itself sufficient reason to abandon the effort.  “Uncertainty may limit what an agency 
can do, but it does not excuse an agency from its statutory obligation to do what it can to apprise 
itself – and hence the public and the Congress – of the economic consequences of a proposed 
regulation before it decides whether to adopt the measure.”  Chamber of Commerce of the United 
States v. SEC, 412 F.3d 133, 144 (D.C. Cir. 2005).  Put otherwise, “the agency’s job is to exercise 
its expertise to make tough choices about which of the competing estimates is most plausible, and 
to hazard a guess as to which is correct. . . . . Regulators by nature work under conditions of serious 
uncertainty, and regulation would be at an end if uncertainty alone were an excuse to ignore a 
congressional command.”  Public Citizen v. Federal Motor Carrier Safety Admin., 374 F.3d 1209, 
1220-21 (D.C. Cir. 2004). 
Moreover, despite the uncertainties, our legal system does have mechanisms for placing a 
monetary value on the pain, suffering, and physical and dignitary losses experienced by inmates who 
have been abused while in confinement – for example, through jury verdicts and litigation 
settlements. We also have means to estimate the average cost of the medical and mental health care, 
and other services, that a rape victim typically requires after his or her ordeal. Moreover, social 
scientists from a number of disciplines have developed convincing data on the cost of various forms 
of sexual victimization to the victim and to society. 
A Review of the Literature. We are not aware of any empirical studies that have attempted 
to place a value on rape or sexual abuse specifically in the prison setting.  For this reason, we have 
relied primarily on studies that place a value on rape and sexual abuse generally, and we have 
attempted, where appropriate and feasible, to adjust the conclusions of those studies to reflect as best 
we can the differing circumstances posed by sexual abuse in the confinement setting. 
The studies that have calculated the cost of rape to the victim and to society have generally 
done so using two different methodologies. Some studies, following what is known as the victim 
compensation model, have looked at the problem ex post and have determined how much society 
would have to pay to fully compensate a victim who has already been assaulted (or correspondingly 
how much a victim would be willing to accept to compensate for the assault).  Other studies, 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 16 of 65 
    
 
 
   
  
 
  
   
 
 
   
 
         
  
 
 
 
 
 
following what is known as the contingent valuation model, have looked at the problem ex ante and 
have asked how much society (or a prospective victim) is willing to pay to avert a future sexual 
assault.21/  Both approaches have their advantages and disadvantages, and our analysis draws lessons 
and conclusions from each type of study. 
The Victim Compensation Model. The victim compensation model endeavors to identify 
the costs of sexual violence to the victim, both tangible (such as medical and mental health care) and 
intangible (such as pain and suffering). Costs are monetized in reference to amounts appropriate to 
compensate for the various harms caused by the assault. 
The largest quantifiable cost to victims of sexual assault is pain, suffering, and loss of dignity 
– put otherwise, a diminution in their quality of life.   See NIJ VICTIM COSTS, supra note 10, at 1, 
9, 15-16. “The effects of sexual violence are well-known and extremely deleterious.  Victims of 
sexual violence undergo a destructive, catastrophic, life-changing event.  They are likely to 
experience physical, emotional, cognitive, psychological, social, and sexual problems as a result. 
Even one event may precipitate a life-time of pain and suffering.”  Dumond, supra note 14, at 150­
51. 
Another significant cost relates to mental health care and psychological support services. 
Survivors of sexual violence endure a number of mental health consequences, including but not 
limited to guilt, shame, fear, anxiety, and tension. “One study noted that even seventeen years after 
the assault, 16.5% of rape victims manifested symptoms of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD).” 
Dumond, supra note 14, at 150-51 (footnotes and internal quotations omitted). “Short-term (and 
long-term) effects on male and female sexual violence victims might include a wide range of 
psychiatric problems such as PTSD, rape trauma syndrome, anxiety, depression, exacerbation of 
preexisting psychiatric disorders, and suicidal feelings.” Id. at 151. 
There is good reason to assume that the mental health care cost of sexual violence is greater 
when the assault takes place in the correctional setting than it is when it occurs in the general 
population. Even absent any assault, between 30% and 40% of incarcerated individuals exhibit 
symptoms of mental health disorders upon intake, compared with only approximately 11% of the 
population as a whole.22/ This greater prevalence of mental illness in America’s prisons means that 
compared to society as a whole a larger portion of the inmate community is predisposed to being 
21/ See generally John Roman & Graham Ferrell, Cost-Benefit Analysis for Crime Prevention: 
Opportunity Costs, Routine Savings, and Crime Externalities, 14 CRIM E PREV. STUDIES 68-69  (2002). 
22/ See Bureau of Justice Statistics, Special Report: Mental Health Problems of Prison and Jail Inmates 
3 (updated 2006), available at bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/content/pub/pdf/mhppji.pdf.
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 17 of 65 
     
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
  
   
 
           
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
vulnerable to sexual abuse, and to experiencing that abuse in an especially debilitating manner.23/ 
As Congress recognized, sexual assault exacerbates the prevalence of mental illness in our prisons 
by “substantially increasing the rate of post-traumatic stress disorder, depression, [and] suicide . . . 
among current and former inmates.” 42 U.S.C. § 15601(14)(D). 
In addition to devastating psychological effects, prison sexual assaults often have physical 
ramifications.  A significant percentage of inmates suffer physical injury as a result of sexual assault, 
especially when the assault takes place under force or threat of force.  See, e.g., BJS Adult NIS 2008­
09, at 22-23.  Such injuries can include knife or stab wounds, broken bones, anal or rectal tearing, 
chipped or broken teeth, internal injuries, bruises, cuts, scratches, loss of consciousness, and other 
injuries. Id. at 22. Of all victims of sexual abuse in prisons, an estimated 20% said that they had 
sustained an injury – 85% of whom reported at least one serious injury. NPREC Report, at 41. 
These physical ramifications carry with them tangible, quantifiable costs in the form of injury 
response and other medical care. 
Sexual assault in the prison environment also exposes victims to an increased risk of 
suicide.24/   Nearly 50% of prison rape victims contemplate suicide, while 17-19% actually attempt 
it.  A suicide attempt, successful or otherwise, has been estimated to cost an average of $223,400 in 
2010 dollars.25/ 
Likewise, sexual abuse in prison exposes victims to an increased risk of contracting 
HIV/AIDS, other sexually transmitted infections, and infectious diseases such as tuberculosis and 
hepatitis B and C.  See 42 U.S.C. § 15601(14)(C). The rates of sexually transmitted infections are 
much greater within confinement facilities than in the general population.26/   For example, in 2008 
23/ See Dumond, supra note 14, at 154 (“In jails and prisons . . .the unique structure of incarceration may 
result in even more debilitating effects on victims.  Research has demonstrated that incarcerated victims are more often 
physically assaulted during attacks, and they may experience repeated assaults by multiple assailants over time.  As a 
result, victims may experience on-going psychological trauma, terror, helplessness, and fear as the physical/sexual abuse 
continues. . . .  In addition, victims experience enormous social consequences; victims routinely experience a loss of 
social status, and they might be more vulnerable for future attacks within the jail or prison.”). 
24/ Dumond, supra note 14, at 151-54. 
25/ See Ted R. Miller et al., COSTS OF SEXUAL VIOLENCE IN MINNESOTA, at 11 (Minn. Dep’t Health July 
2007), available at http://www.pire.org/documents/mn_brochure.pdf.  Miller estimated that an act or attempt of suicide 
resulting from sexual assault costs $5,400 in medical expenses and $191,300 in quality of life losses, in 2005 dollars. 
We have adjusted these 2005 dollar totals to 2010 dollars using the CPI adjuster of 1.136, which was derived from the 
B ureau of Labo r S ta tis t ic s ,  H is to ry  o f  C P I -U  U .S .  A l l  I tem s  Ind ex es ,  ava i lab le  a t  
ftp://ftp.bls.gov/pub/special.requests/cpi/cpiai.txt. 
26/ See Terry A. Kupers, PRISON MADNESS: THE MENTAL HEALTH CRISIS BEHIND BARS AND WHAT WE 
MUST DO ABOUT IT 152 (“The incidence of AIDS in prison in 1994 was 518 cases per 100,000, compared to a 
comparable annual incidence in the total population of 31 cases per 100,000.”). 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 18 of 65 
  
    
 
 
    
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
almost 22,000 individuals incarcerated in state and federal prisons (1.5% of the total population) 
were known to be living with HIV/AIDS.27/ The prevalence of Hepatitis C is even higher in prisons 
because of intravenous drug use prior to incarceration.  See NPREC Report, at 129.  These diseases 
are expensive to treat and are sometimes fatal.  One study estimated the cost of HIV to a victim of 
sexual assault as $2,407,600 in 2010 dollars.28/ 
Various studies based on the victim compensation model have attempted to calculate the 
monetary value of rape and sexual assault by determining the cost to the victim of medical and 
mental health care, diminished quality of life, and increased risk of suicide and contracting serious 
infections. One such study, published by the Department’s National Institute of Justice, put the 
average cost per rape victim at $110,000 in 1993 dollars, which translates to $165,000 in 2010 
dollars.29/  When the victim is a juvenile, that study put the average cost of rape per victim at 
$125,000 in 1993 dollars, which translates to $187,500 in 2010 dollars. 30/ These estimates 
considered both immediate use of medical care and mental health services, lost productivity, and 
permanent disability, as well as the cost of pain, suffering, fear, and lost quality of life.  They also 
took into account the impact of multiple or serial victimization.  The quality of life estimates were 
derived from the analysis of 1,106 jury awards and settlements to assault, rape, and burn survivors 
to compensate for pain, suffering, and lost quality of life (excluding punitive damages). 
A more recent study by Prof. Ted Miller and others, commissioned by the Minnesota 
Department of Public Health, placed the  costs at $198,960 (in 2010 dollars) per adult victim for rape 
in the general population and $386 for abusive sexual contact not resulting in physical injury or 
attempted penetration.31/ 32/  When the victim was a juvenile, the cost was $263,800 per victim. The 
27/ Bureau of Justice Statistics, Bulletin: HIV in Prisons (updated 2010), available at 
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/content/pub/pdf/hivp08.pdf.
28/ See Miller et al., supra note 25, at 12. 
29/ See NIJ VICTIM  COSTS, supra note 10, at 16.   The figures used here are those presented per victim 
rather than per victimization, since we have chosen to use prevalence figures rather than incidence figures: “The [per 
victim] figure is probably a more useful estimate, since the quality of life losses (the largest component of rape costs) 
are estimated from jury awards to victims (not victimizations).”  Id. at 21.  The 1993 figures were converted to 2010 
dollars using the CPI adjuster of 1.5, which was derived from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, History of CPI-U U.S. All 
Items Indexes, available at ftp://ftp.bls.gov/pub/special.requests/cpi/cpiai.txt
30/ Id.  The victim costs associated with loss of quality of life are higher for juveniles than they are for 
adults because of juveniles’ longer expected lives and because of higher mental health treatment costs for juvenile 
victims.  See Miller, supra note 25, at 10 (“Adults had lower mental health costs, lost less quality of life, and had less 
likelihood of turning to suicide or substance abuse than children following a sexual assault.”); see also Ted R. Miller et 
al., Costs of Juvenile Violence: Policy Implications, 107 PEDIATRICS 1, 3 (Jan. 2001). 
31/ See Miller, supra note 25, at 11.  The figures here are derived first by multiplying the figures from the 
authors’ Table 7 (which reflect cost per victimization) by 1.26 to yield the cost per victim (in 2005 dollars).  See id. at 
17-18. These figures were then multiplied by 1.136 to convert from 2005 dollars to 2010 dollars.  The CPI adjuster of 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 19 of 65 
. 
   
 
  
     
       
    
  
  
   
        
  
 
 
       
   
 
           
  
 
quality of life estimates were again derived from the analysis of jury awards and settlements. Table 
2 on the next page displays the breakdown of constituent costs which Miller et al. identified. 
Because Table 2 reflects the costs of rape and sexual abuse in the general population, a 
number of adjustments need to be made to account for the differences of rape and sexual abuse in 
the prison context.  First, the elements of lost work, property damage, and perpetrator’s earning loss 
while confined must be deleted as inapplicable in the prison context.  We also reduce the cost of 
pregnancy to account for the fact that the vast majority of prison sexual assault victims are male, 
making the risk of pregnancy per victimization much lower than it is in the general non-correctional 
setting. Similarly, the entry for sexually transmitted diseases must be roughly doubled to account 
for the fact that in the prison setting the risk of contracting a sexually transmitted disease is much 
greater than the risk in the general population.  See supra notes 26-28 and accompanying text. 
Likewise, we double the cost of mental health care to account for the facts that the incidence of 
mental illness in the prison setting is at least twice the incidence in the general population and that 
the psychological impact of rape in the prison setting is generally more debilitating than it is in the 
non-correctional setting, especially given the frequency of multiple or serial victimization.  See supra 
notes 23-22 and accompanying text.33/ 
1.136 was drawn from the Bureau of Labor Statistics source cited supra in note 25. 
32/ We contacted Professor Miller for further elucidation of the seemingly low cost per victim of  incidents 
of “other sexual assault for adults over 18” (i.e., sexual assault short of rape). Professor Miller explained that for 
purposes of his article “other sexual assault” refers to conduct that falls well short of an attempted or completed sexual 
penetration. Any conduct that involved any degree of sexual aggressiveness on the part of the perpetrator was considered 
an attempted rape in his study and classified as such. Thus, “other sexual assault” referred only to contacts that involve 
sexual touching or abuse without any coercion, pressure, force, or threat of force. Victims of such assaults, in Professor 
Miller’s view, are unlikely to encounter any costs beyond a small diminution of quality of life due to embarrassment, 
humiliation, and the like. There may also be a small cost associated with avoidance behaviors undertaken in response 
to bullying.  But in Professor Miller’s view these costs are small per average victim, especially since a certain percentage 
of victims will have zero monetizable cost. 
We questioned the basis for Professor Miller’s apparent assumption that victims of “other sexual assault” incur 
no costs for mental health treatment. Professor Miller explained that the cost of mental health care per victim in his 
article was determined by first calculating the total amount spent on mental health care as a result of sexual violence and 
then dividing that total by the number of victims. For this purpose, all of the mental health care resulting from sexual 
violence was assumed to relate to actual or attempted rape, and all of that cost was assigned to that category of victim, 
rather than to the category of “other sexual assault.” 
33/ We are not aware of any academic studies that have attempted to extrapolate from  rape-associated 
mental health costs in general settings to those in the prison setting.  Given that the prevalence of serious pre-existing 
mental health issues in prisons is two to five times greater than in the population at large, and that the risk of multiple 
victimization is at least ten times greater, we view a multiplier of two as conservative.  Both the exacerbation of pre­
existing mental health conditions and the phenomenon of serial victimization are likely to increase the cost of therapeutic 
responses by at least 100%.  We invite public comment as to whether a different approach is more appropriate and as 
to whether there are established methodologies or data for deriving an estimate of mental health costs in the prison 
setting. 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 20 of 65 
       
                        
                        
As shown in Table 3 on the next page, these adjustments yield a cost per prison rape victim 
in 2010 dollars of $197,000 for each adult rape victim, $271,000 for each juvenile victim, and $386 
for each prison sexual abuse victim. 
Table 2
 
Victim Compensation Costs of Rape and Abusive Sexual Contact,
 
per Victim in the General Population, in 2010 dollars34/
 
Cost Child Rape Adult Rape Sexual Abuse 
Medical Care $1,002 $1,002 
Mental Health Care $13,455 $2,004 
Lost Work $5,582 $4,008 
Property Damage $145 $143 
Suffering and Lost Quality of Life $205,257 $169,044 $386 
Sexually Transmitted Diseases $1,574 $1,574 
Pregnancy $429 $573 
Suicide Acts $23,617 $11,737 
Substance Abuse $6,584 $3,292 
Victim Services $429 $143 
Criminal Justice: Investigation/Adjudication $859 $716
  Sanctioning $3,006 $2,863
  Perpetrator’s Earning Loss While Confined $1,861 $1,861 
Total $263,800 $198,960 $386 
34/ Source:  Miller et al., COSTS OF SEXUAL VIOLENCE IN MINNESOTA, supra note 25, at 11. 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 21 of 65 
    
                            
  
 
 
   
   
 
Table 3
 
Victim Compensation Costs of Rape and Abusive Sexual Contact, 

per Victim in Confinement Settings, in 2010 dollars35/
 
Cost Child Rape Adult Rape Sexual Abuse 
Medical Care $1,002 $1,002 
Mental Health Care $26,910 $4,008 
Suffering and Lost Quality of Life $205,257 $169,044 $386 
Sexually Transmitted Diseases $3,149 $3,149 
Pregnancy $429 $573 
Suicide Acts $23,617 $11,737 
Substance Abuse $6,584 $3,292 
Victim Services $429 $143 
Criminal Justice: Investigation/Adjudication $859 $716 
Sanctioning $3,006 $2,863 
Total $271,242 $196,527 $386 
The Contingent Valuation (or Willingness to Pay) Model. While the victim compensation 
model calculates the ex post costs associated with incidents of sexual abuse, the willingness to pay 
model calculates the ex ante benefits of avoiding such incidents.  Willingness to pay advocates point 
to the ability of this model to capture the value that society places on avoidance as being more 
appropriate for a regulatory cost-benefit assessment.  “While jury awards are one way to capture 
some of the intangible costs of crime that previous approaches had ignored, the method is not 
entirely appropriate for use in cost-benefit analysis.  Conceptually, when deciding whether to fund 
a program, we want to know how much the public expects to benefit – hence how much they would 
be willing to pay.  Thus, economists generally prefer ex ante measures of ‘willingness-to-pay’ (WTP) 
when conducting cost-benefit analysis as opposed to the ex post analysis of victim costs and jury 
awards used in previous studies.”36/ 
Crime, in other words, has an “existence value” separate and apart from its impact on its 
victims – it is worth something to people to know that they live in a crime-free (or crime-reduced) 
society.  It is also worth something to people to know that their loved ones who are incarcerated, or 
who might face incarceration some day, are less likely to be raped during their confinement.  The 
35/ Source:  Miller et al., COSTS O F SEXUAL VIOLENCE IN MINNESOTA, supra note 25, at 11. 
(2004). 
36/ Mark A. Cohen et al., Willingness-to-Pay for Crime Control Programs, 42 CRIM INO LOGY 86, 91 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 22 of 65 
   
  
 
   
   
 
  
  
         
 
  
         
 
  
  
     
victim compensation model fails to take account of this existence value, which the contingent 
valuation method endeavors to measure 
A 2001 study by Professor Mark Cohen and others used this method to estimate the economic 
value that people in society place on preventing various crimes, including sexual assault.  This study 
was based on a national survey which asked people how much they would be willing to pay to reduce 
the prevalence of various types of crime in their community by 10%; from these survey responses 
and other  data, Prof. Cohen then extrapolated the value to society of avoiding one incident of each 
type of crime studied.  According to Prof. Cohen, people are willing to pay on average $237,000 (in 
2000 dollars, which translates to $304,308 in 2010 dollars) to prevent rape and sexual assaults.37/ 
Professor Cohen’s study looked at society’s willingness to pay to reduce rape in the 
community in general and did not specifically examine the willingness to pay to reduce rape in the 
prison setting.  As a result, there are reasons for caution in using these figures for purposes of this 
IRIA.  On the one hand, Professor Cohen’s study looked to the survey respondents “to value crime 
reduction that affects them in some manner – whether through their own household, their families, 
friends, or coworkers.”  Cohen, supra note 36, at 93 n.5. This focus on reducing crime in the 
“community” may not translate well to the reduction of rape in prison settings, which to many 
members of the public may seem distant and unrelated to their lives.  Thus, respondents to Professor 
Cohen’s survey may not have been thinking of the prison setting when formulating their willingness 
to pay responses. On the other hand, the number of incarcerated persons in the United States is very 
large (estimated at 2.4 million), and the number of people who are arrested and pass through jail or 
a lockup each year is even larger (estimated at 14 million).  Thus, the size of the population with 
incarcerated “families, friends, or coworkers,” who may be personally affected by the reduction in 
the prevalence of rape in confinement settings, may be large enough to counteract the “community” 
problem to some extent. 
Another potential objection to extrapolating from Professor Cohen’s work to the prison 
setting is that some people may believe sexual assault in confinement facilities is a less pressing 
problem than it is in the society as a whole, and might therefore think that the value of avoiding such 
an assault in the confinement setting is less than the value of avoiding a similar assault in the non-
confinement setting.38/  However, one of Congress’s purposes in enacting PREA was to counteract 
the cultural tendency to take prison rape for granted; this tendency is in turn largely driven by the 
diminished value society may place on the tribulations of prisoners.  Because Congress has 
unanimously rejected this devaluation, we deem it inappropriate to discount the value that empirical 
studies have placed on rape and sexual abuse simply because those studies did not deal specifically 
37/ Id. at 98.  To convert from 2001 to 2010 dollars, we use a CPI multiplier of 1.284, drawn from the BLS 
source cited above at note 25. 
38/ See, e.g., Tamar Lewin, “Little Sympathy or Remedy for Inmates Who Are Raped,” N.Y. TIM ES, Apr. 
15, 2001, at 11. 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 23 of 65 
     
             
 
     
  
  
      
  
   
 
  
 
  
   
with the prison setting. Even if we wanted to attempt such a discount, in the absence of any 
empirical data the amount of the diminution would be purely speculative.  We have  invited public 
comment on the question whether an adjustment should be made to Professor Cohen’s willingness 
to pay figures.39/ 
What is more, rapes and sexual assaults in a prison setting have a constitutional dimension 
that is absent from similar events occurring in the general population.  To the extent society assigns 
inherent value to constitutional rights and their protection, one could argue that rape and sexual 
assault in the prison setting actually cost society more than they do in general terms. 
In the end, we believe that contingent valuation methodologies such as Prof. Cohen’s study, 
while not dispositive of our analysis, provide useful information in assessing the monetary benefit 
of avoiding a prison rape and may provide an appropriate upper bound for that benefit. 
Conclusions as to the Unit Benefit of Avoiding Prison Rape. Having reviewed the 
foregoing literature, we now proceed to our assumptions and conclusions as to the unit benefit of 
avoiding the various types of sexual abuse in various confinement settings.  As elaborated in Part 
I above, to assign a unit benefit to various types of avoided events, we need to account, at least to 
some extent, for the complexity of sexual victimization. Our event-type matrix in Table 1 aimed to 
account for some of this complexity by dividing the different types of sexual abuse events into four 
categories based on the level of coercion involved and on the nature of the sexual contact. 
The most serious category of sexual abuse in our matrix is rape involving force or threat of 
force.  We believe that $200,000, drawn from the “Adult Rape” column of Table 3 (and rounded up 
slightly), provides an appropriate lower bound for the unit cost of rape involving force or threat of 
force in an adult prison or jail setting.  We likewise believe that $275,000, drawn from the “Child 
Rape” column of Table 3 (and rounded up slightly), provides an appropriate lower bound for the unit 
cost of rape involving force or threat of force in the juvenile detention setting.40/ 
We also believe that $300,000 (rounded down slightly from Prof. Cohen’s figure, as adjusted 
to 2010 dollars) provides an appropriate upper bound for the unit cost of rape involving force or 
threat of force in an adult prison or jail setting.  We increase this figure by approximately 33%, to 
$400,000, to provide the upper bound for the unit cost of rape involving force or threat of force in 
39/ Another significant difference between sexual assault in the prison setting and in the general population 
has to do with the gender of the typical victim. In the general population, the vast majority of sexual assault victims are 
female; in the confinement setting the victims are overwhelmingly male.  It is not clear whether and to what extent this 
difference is relevant for purposes of using the contingent valuation method to monetize the cost of an incident of sexual 
abuse.  We invite public comment on this subject. 
40/ “Aside from murder, child sexual abuse is the most serious crime, followed by rape, child physical 
abuse, and arson.”  NIJ VICTIM  COSTS, supra note 10, at 16. 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 24 of 65 
  
 
   
         
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
       
 
the juvenile detention setting.  We derive 33% from the approximate difference between the child 
rape and rape figures in the NIJ victim compensation study. See supra note 30. 
The second category of sexual abuse in our matrix is nonconsensual sexual acts involving 
coercion or pressure.  Placing a value on this category is considerably more difficult, as we are not 
aware of any study that has specifically attempted to place a value on this form of sexual assault, to 
the exclusion of rape involving force or threat of force. It is an event that is less costly to both the 
victim and to society than is forcible rape, in part because there is typically no physical injury.  Its 
seriousness can nevertheless not be overemphasized.  As several studies have recognized, even rape 
involving pressure or coercion rather than force has costs to the victim: “Perpetrators . . . utilize five 
major psychological components to engage victims: conquest and control, revenge and retaliation, 
sadism and degradation, conflict and counteraction, and status and affiliation, aimed primarily at 
exercising control and aggression.  The process is seductive and manipulative, has a significant 
impact on the psyche of the victim, and often contributes to feelings of guilt, shame, and 
humiliation.” Dumond, supra note 14, at 149. Moreover, “the intimate and complex nature of 
coercive sexuality itself may also contribute to feelings of guilt, shame, humiliation, confusion, and 
despair within victims.  Id. at 151-52 (citing studies). 
In the absence of any specific studies purporting to place a value on this species of sexual 
conduct, we invite public comment on how best to assess the benefit of avoiding it.  In the meantime, 
for purposes of this IRIA, we estimate the costs of this species of sexual assault as being 20% the 
cost of forcible rape. 
The third category in our event-type matrix is abusive sexual contacts between inmates. 
Consistent with the figures in Table 3, we assign a value of $375 to each such event for adults and 
$500 for juveniles. As noted above in note 32, we consider this value to be conservative, and we 
invite public comment as to whether a higher figure would be more appropriate. 
The final category in our event-type matrix involves incidents of “willing” sex with staff. 
In the context of juveniles, we assign this the same value as nonconsensual sexual acts involving 
coercion or pressure.  Given laws against statutory rape and the generally deep-seated revulsion to 
sexual intercourse between adults and children, we believe that society treats all such intercourse as 
coerced or pressured, no matter how “willing” the juvenile might profess it to be, and that all such 
intercourse is harmful to both the juvenile and to society. On the other hand, in the context of adult 
prisons and jails, while sex between inmates and staff is illegal and inappropriate no matter the 
degree of volition on the part of the inmate, for benefit-cost valuation purposes we treat the cost of 
“willing” sex between an inmate and staff as equivalent to abusive sexual contacts with an inmate, 
and we assign it a conservative cost of $375.  We emphasize that “willing sex with staff” is defined 
very narrowly to exclude any events for which the inmate reports indicia of pressure or coercion. 
Thus, Table 4 presents the range of cost values we assign to each event in our matrix for 
purposes of benefit cost valuation. 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 25 of 65 
       
  
 
  
  
 
 
Table 4
 
Range of Unit Avoidance Benefits
 
By Type of Victim and Type of Facility, in 2010 Dollars
 
Adult Prisons Adult Jails Juvenile Facilities 
Rape involving force/threat of force $200,000 to $300,000 $275,000 to $400,000 
Sexual assault involving pressure/coercion $40,000 to $60,000 $55,000 to $80,000 
Abusive sexual contacts $375 $500 
Willing sex with staff $375 $55,000 to $80,000 
III. The Total Expected Monetary Benefit of a 1% Reduction in Prison Rape 
To determine the total monetary benefit of a 1% reduction from the baseline in the average 
annual prevalence of prison rape (e.g., reducing forcible rapes in prison by an average of 262 per 
year, in jails by an average of 392 per year, and in juvenile facilities by an average of 44 per year), 
we use the following equation:  B = P x V x 1%, where B is the expected annual monetary benefit, 
P is the baseline prevalence, and V is the quantifiable unit avoidance benefit.  Using this formula, 
we set forth the total monetary benefit in Table 5, using both lower bound and upper bound 
assumptions for V. 
Table 5:  Total Monetary Benefit of a 1% Reduction from the Baseline
 
in the Average Annual Prevalence of Prison Rape
 
in Thousands of 2010 Dollars
 
Adult Prisons Adult Jails Juvenile 
Facilities 
Total 
Rape involving 
injury/force/threat of 
force 
$52,400 to 
$78,600 
$78,400 to 
$117,600 
$9,636 to 
$17,600 
$140,436 to 
$213,800 
Nonconsensual sexual 
acts involving 
pressure/coercion 
$7,360 to 
$11,040 
$5,920 to $8,880 $1,276 to $2,320 $14,556 to $22,240 
Abusive sexual contacts $71 $86 $12 $169 
Willing sex with staff $104 $117 $1,496 to $2,720 $1,555 to $2,779 
TOTAL (ROUNDED) $60,000 ­
$90,000 
$84,500 to 
$126,500 
$12,500 to 
$22,500 
$157,000 to 
$239,000 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 26 of 65 
   
 
  
 
    
      
  
 
     
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
By our calculation, then, the total monetary benefit of a 1% reduction from the baseline in 
the average annual prevalence of prison rape and sexual assault will range from approximately $157 
million to $239 million. 
IV. Describing and Assessing the Non-quantifiable Benefits of Prison Rape Avoidance 
“Costs and benefits” under Executive Order 12866 must “include both quantifiable measures 
(to the fullest extent that these can be usefully estimated) and qualitative measures of costs and 
benefits that are difficult to quantify but nevertheless essential to consider.”  EO 12866, § 1(a). 
Benefits of regulatory action include “the enhancement of health and safety, the protection of the 
natural environment, and the elimination or reduction of discrimination or bias.”  Id. 
Congress predicated PREA on its conclusion – consistent with decisions by the Supreme 
Court – that “deliberate indifference to the substantial risk of sexual assault violates prisoners’ rights 
under the Cruel and Unusual Punishment Clause of the Eighth Amendment.”  42 U.S.C. 
§ 15601(13).  The individual rights enshrined in our Constitution express our country’s deepest 
commitments to human dignity and equality, and American citizens place great value on knowing 
that their government aspires to protect those rights to their fullest extent.  In thinking about the 
qualitative benefits that will accrue from the implement of these proposed standards, these values 
stand paramount. 
To complete the analysis of the benefits of the PREA standards, we have endeavored to 
identify the non-monetary benefits that will result from reducing prison rape and to provide 
qualitative indication of their magnitude.  We have been assisted in this endeavor by many useful 
comments submitted in response to the ANPRM. Non-monetarybenefits may accrue to rape victims 
themselves, to inmates who are not rape victims, to prison administrators and staff, to families of 
rape victims, and to society at large. 
Non-quantifiable benefits relating to lockups and community confinement facilities. Our 
analysis in Parts II and III made no estimate of the monetary benefit of reducing rapes in lockups and 
community confinement facilities for the simple reason that we do not have data on the baseline 
prevalence of rape in these settings.  Although unit cost of rape in these settings can generally be 
assumed to be the same as for adult prisons and jails, we classify the avoidance of assaults in these 
settings as “non-quantifiable” because it is not possible at this juncture to ascertain how many such 
assaults would be avoided in a 1% reduction from the baseline prevalence. 
Non-quantifiable benefits for the rape victims.  The PREA standards will yield non-
quantifiable benefits to victims even with regard to assaults that the standards do not prevent. 
Implementation of the standards will enhance the  mental well-being of victims, by ensuring that they 
receive adequate treatment after an assault, which in turn will enhance their ability to integrate into 
the community and maintain stable employment upon their release from prison.  Moreover, the 
standards will reduce their re-traumatization, together with their loss of dignity and privacy, 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 27 of 65 
      
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
   
   
  
  
 
 
 
  
       
 
  
 
associated with evidence collection, investigation, and any subsequent legal proceedings that take 
place in connection with sexual assault and its prosecution.  Victims will also benefit from the 
increased likelihood that their perpetrators will be held accountable for their crimes. 
Non-quantifiable benefits for inmates who are not rape victims.  The PREA standards will 
improve quality of life in prison even for those inmates who would not experience sexual assault 
even in the absence of the standards, in at least three ways.  First, the standards should reduce the 
collective fear and dread of rape and sexual assault while incarcerated.41/    Second, standards that 
work to reduce sexual assault will likely reduce other forms of physical assault as well.  Third, 
sexual assault often fosters a polarized prison climate, such as by exacerbating racial tensions, as 
Congress itself noted.  See 42 U.S.C. § 15601(9), (14)(F). 
Non-quantifiable benefits for families of inmate rape victims. Families of inmates also 
suffer from the prevalence of sexual assault in our prisons.  The families of all inmates, whether 
victims or not, often fear that their incarcerated loved ones will be raped, assaulted, or abused while 
in prison.  Moreover, when prison rape victims return home after their incarceration and are unable 
to work due to emotional trauma, their families are affected.  Implementation of the standards will 
thus improve the emotional and financial well-being of families of individuals currently or formerly 
living in prisons. 
Non-quantifiable benefits for prison administrators and staff. Sexual assault in 
correctional facilities constitutes a failure to keep inmates safe: this breakdown often has significant 
ripple effects for prison employees.  As Congress recognized, sexual assaults in prison “increase[] 
the levels of violence, directed at inmates and staff, within prisons.”  42 U.S.C. § 15601(14)(b). 
Staff are at risk even when the abuser is a colleague: correctional staff who sexually abuse inmates 
often also engage in other security breaches; some have “provided contraband to prisoners, accepted 
bribes, lied to federal investigators, and committed other serious crimes as a result of their sexual 
involvement with federal prisoners.”42/   Staff who are compromised due to their involvement with 
an inmate are more likely to neglect their responsibilities, thus imperiling their colleagues.  In 
addition, as the Commission recognized, even victims of sexual assault may be more likely to 
commit infractions; some may “break rules in an attempt to escape a perpetrator, whether or not they 
disclose the abuse.”  NPREC Report at 48. By reducing the level of violence against staff and 
inmates alike, by reducing the need and opportunity for inmates to violate facility rules, and by 
diminishing the concomitant risk of insurrections and riots, the standards will make prisons a safer 
41/ See, e.g., MARGARET T. GORDON & STEPHANIE RIGER, THE FEMALE FEAR: THE SOCIAL COST OF RAPE 
(1991) (discussing fear among women as a cost of rape). 
42/ See  OFFICE OF THE INSPECTOR GENERAL, EVALUATION AND INSPECTIONS DIVISION, THE DEPARTM ENT 
OF JUSTICE’S EFFORTS TO PREVENT STAFF SEXUAL ABUSE OF FEDERAL INM ATES, i (2009), available at www.justice.gov/ 
oig/reports/plus/e0909.pdf.
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 28 of 65 
  
 
  
  
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
and better workplace, thus promoting staff retention, decreasing work-related injuries, and improving 
morale. 
Similarly, implementation of the standards will ensure, in the long term, that fewer prison 
employees will be charged with felony sexual abuse crimes, as the incidence of sexual abuse 
declines. The number of prison staff prosecuted for sexual abuse of inmates has steadily increased 
in recent years.43/ Both the personnel time lost due to these prosecutions and the stigma and negative 
morale engendered by them can be expected to abate as the prevalence of prison rape diminishes, 
enhancing quality of life in the workplace.44/ 
Non-quantifiable benefits for society at large. Implementation of the PREA standards will 
provide numerous public health benefits for society.  As noted above, the standards will improve 
public health by reducing the incidence and spread of HIV/AIDS, of other sexually transmitted 
infections, and of infectious diseases such as tuberculosis and hepatitis B and C, among prison 
populations. Almost all individuals in prisons and jails (95%) are eventually released back to their 
communities,45/ and the diseases the inmates contract in the prison confines eventually spread to the 
populations outside the correctional system.  Reducing the incidence of prison sexual assault will 
mitigate the spread of these diseases, reducing the costs of medical treatment and mental health care 
for our society.  Moreover, the health problems of many victims of prison rape persist well after they 
return to their communities. Many of these individuals end up on Medicaid, and government 
agencies pay for their treatment; others use hospital emergency rooms as their primary care – a high 
cost to hospitals and state agencies. 
Sexual assault in prison often leads to long-term trauma, especially if victims are not treated 
properly in the immediate aftermath of their victimization.  When victims return to their 
communities, this trauma frequently results in an inability to maintain stable employment. The 
standards will improve the reentry of offenders into society after their incarceration, reducing the 
likelihood that they will require public assistance (such as welfare, disability benefits, housing 
vouchers, food stamps) and other forms of governmental financial support  upon their reentry. 
Society also will derive a number of public safety benefits from the PREA standards.  As 
Congress recognized, sexual assault in prisons “increases the risks of recidivism, civil strife, and 
violent crime by individuals who have been brutalized by prison rape.”  42 U.S.C. § 15601(14)(E). 
43/ See generally, OIG Report, supra note 42. 
44/ Of course, in the short term there may be additional costs to prison authorities associated with a 
potential increase in prosecutions of staff as prisons adopt measures that enhance the detection and investigation of prison 
rape and the punishment of perpetrators.  Once the level of prison rape has been reduced, however, prisons should feel 
the benefit of having fewer of their employees charged with felony sexual abuse crimes. 
45/ Bureau of Justice Statistics, Reentry Trends in the United States 1 (2003), available at 
http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/content/pub/pdf/reentry.pdf.
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 29 of 65 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Implementation of the standards will enhance public safety by reducing the likelihood that inmates 
released from prison and jail each year will commit crimes (especially violent crimes) after their 
release. Reducing the prevalence of sexual abuse in juvenile detention settings similarly increases 
the likelihood that delinquent juveniles can be rehabilitated and reduces the likelihood that they will 
embark on a life of crime when reaching adulthood.  Reducing recidivism could potentially save 
society and governments tens of millions of dollars per year by avoiding the economic and human 
costs of crime, the cost of investigating and prosecuting crimes, and the considerable expense of 
incarceration itself ($22,600 per prisoner per year, or $62 per day, as of 2001).46/ 
The PREA standards will also result in significant cost savings to the criminal justice system: 
as the prevalence of prison rape diminishes over time, police and investigative costs, adjudication 
costs (prosecutors, courts, defense), incarceration costs including offender treatment, post-release 
costs (e.g., halfway houses, supervision), costs associated with risk assessment and community 
notification programs, and victim compensation and reparation program administration costs, will 
all correspondingly be reduced. 
Finally, given the frequently interracial character of prison sexual assaults,47/ minimizing their 
prevalence will reduce interracial tensions, both within prison and, upon release of perpetrators and 
victims from prison, within the community at large.  See, e.g., 42 U.S.C. § 15601(9), (14)(F). 
V.	 Identifying and Monetizing the Estimated Costs of Complying with the Proposed DOJ 
Standards. 
In this Part, we undertake a preliminary assessment of the anticipated compliance costs 
associated with the Department’s proposed PREA standards.  Each of the proposed standards is 
examined to estimate the costs to correctional agencies in implementing that standard.  In setting 
forth our estimates, we assume that the first full year for which the standards will be applicable is 
2012, and we assign all start-up expenses associated with the standards to that year.  We then 
estimate annual or on-going compliance costs in the out years, in present value terms (using both a 
3% and a 7% discount rate), for a fourteen year period from 2013-2026.  Where possible, we 
differentiate the cost implications based on facility type:  prisons, jails, juvenile facilities, community 
confinement facilities, and lockups.  For purposes of these cost estimates, we assume that the 
Department’s standards will apply to, and will be adopted and implemented by: 1,668 prisons; 3,365 
46/ Bureau of Justice Statistics, Special Report: State Prison Expenditures 1 (updated 2004), available 
at http://.bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/content/pub/pdf/spe01.pdf.
47/ See BJS Adult SSV 2006, at 4 (“[A]t least half of inmate-on-inmate sexual violence was interracial: 
65 of incidents in 2006 involved a white perpetrator and non-white victim; 35%, a black perpetrator and non-black 
victim; and 8%, a Hispanic perpetrator and non-Hispanic victim.”). 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 30 of 65 
     
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
jails; 2,810 juvenile facilities; lockups operated by at least 4,469 different agencies; and 
approximately 530 community confinement facilities.48/ 
Table 6 sets forth in summary fashion our conclusions as to how much we expect compliance 
with the Department’s proposed standards to cost, on a startup, ongoing, and total (15 year) basis. 
Following the chart we set forth an explanation of our sources, assumptions, and methodology, as 
well as an analysis of each standard and its anticipated implementation costs.  As elaborated below, 
no adjustment is made in the out years for inflation or for anticipated cost savings due to innovation 
– that is, costs are assumed to be constant in nominal terms over the course of the fifteen year period. 
Table 6
 
Total Expected Compliance Costs, 2012-2026
 
By Facility Type, in Thousands of Dollars
 
Startup On-going 
Total 2012-2026 
3% discount rate 
(Present Value) 
Total 2012-2026 
7% discount rate 
(Present Value) 
Prisons $26,304 $56,407 $411,494 $249,035 
Jails $117,742 $356,618 $2,745,729 $1,762,524 
Juvenile 
Facilities 
$24,087 $78,497 $602,546 $386,128 
Community 
Confinement 
$300 $2,358 $17,680 $11,177 
Lockups $44,913 $50,583 $417,672 $278,212 
TOTAL $213,346 $544,463 $4,195,121 $2,687,076 
Sources of Data.  In preparing these cost estimates, we rely on several sources of 
information. Our primary source is the June 18, 2010, Phase II Final Report of the Cost Impact 
Analysis completed by Booz Allen Hamilton (“Booz Allen Report”).49/  Booz Allen is a consulting 
firm with which the Department’s Bureau of Justice Assistance (“BJA”) contracted early in 2010 to 
develop a preliminary cost analysis of the Commission’s recommended standards. As elaborated 
below, for purposes of this IRIA, the conclusions of the Booz Allen Report have been adjusted in 
three ways: (1) to estimate the compliance costs of the Department’s proposed standards, rather than 
the Commission’s recommendations, by reassessing the cost of a subset of standards to which the 
48/ Bureau of Justice Statistics, 2005 Census of State and Federal Correctional Facilities, 2006 Census 
of Jail Facilities, and the 2008 Juvenile Residential Facility Census. 
49/ See http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/programs/pdfs/preacostimpactanalysis.pdf.
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 31 of 65 
       
  
     
 
    
  
 
  
     
    
 
             
 
Department made significant revisions from the Commission’s proposals; (2) to extrapolate a 
nationwide cost estimate from the data derived from the specific facilities included in the Booz Allen 
survey; and (3) to develop a fifteen year (2012-2026) cost projection. 
Other sources of information on which we have relied in preparing this cost analysis include: 
(a) internal assessments by the federal Bureau of Prisons (BOP) and the United States Marshals 
Service (USMS, or the Marshals) as to the costs they expect to incur in implementing the standards; 
and (b) comments and cost estimates submitted in response to the ANPRM. 
The Booz Allen Report.  The Commission’s recommendations did not include an estimate 
of their costs. Subsequently,  BJA contracted with Booz Allen to prepare a preliminary cost analysis 
of the Commission’s recommended standards in order to assist the Attorney General in exercising 
his required “independent judgment” when issuing PREA standards.50/ 
Booz Allen selected a representative sampling of various types of correctional systems and 
facilities from throughout the country (including 13 state prison systems, 6 community confinement 
jurisdictions, 10 juvenile agencies, 16 jail jurisdictions, and four lockup facilities).  It assembled a 
team of criminal and juvenile justice subject matter experts and cost estimation experts who 
conducted on-site face-to-face meetings with representatives of each of the 49 selected sites.  Its 
conclusions as to the cost impact of the Commission’s recommended standards were drawn from the 
site representatives’ responses at these meetings and at followup interviews, as well as from reviews 
of relevant documentation (including policy statements and staffing and facility plans), and in many 
cases facility tours. 
Of the 41 Commission-recommended standards, the Booz Allen Report identified three (PP­
3, PP-4, and PP-7) as having major compliance costs.  PP-3 related to staff supervision and 
monitoring of inmates; PP-4 restricted cross-gender pat-down searches, among other provisions; and 
PP-7 called upon agencies to use video monitoring systems to supplement its sexual abuse 
prevention, detection, and response efforts.  These three standards accounted for 99% of all up-front 
costs determined in the Booz Allen study – with PP-7 alone accounting for 96% of startup costs. 
These three standards also accounted for 85% of the total on-going compliance costs in the out 
years.51/   Twenty-six of the Commission-recommended standards were determined to have a very 
minimal to modest compliance cost. The remaining twelve had a negligible or non-existent cost 
based on Booz Allen’s analysis.  Finding a general correlation between lower compliance rates and 
50/ 42 U.S.C. § 15607(a)(2) (the Department’s standards “shall be based upon the independent judgment 
of the Attorney General, . . . and being informed by such data, opinions, and proposals that the Attorney General 
determines to be appropriate to consider.”). 
51/ Similarly, in the comments submitted by the Association of State Correctional Administrators (ASCA) 
in response to the ANPRM, PP-3, PP-4, and PP-7 accounted for 86% of total startup costs and 94% of ongoing costs. 
See supra note 3.  ASCA was the only commenter at the ANPRM stage that provided nationwide compliance cost 
estimates relating to the Commission’s recommended standards. 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 32 of 65 
 
  
   
 
  
  
 
  
            
 
   
 
higher costs, Booz Allen found that sites had varying degrees of compliance with the Commission’s 
recommended standards – ranging from 38% to 88%, with an average compliance rate of 63%. 
Methodology for Cost Assessment in this IRIA. As the Department developed its own 
proposed PREA standards, it asked Booz Allen to undertake additional analyses and to make 
adjustments in their data to estimate the compliance costs associated with the Department’s proposed 
standards, which make a number of significant modifications to the Commission recommendations. 
The Department asked Booz Allen to look at a discrete subset of the proposed standards to 
assess the extent to which the compliance cost associated with those standards may have changed 
due to revisions in the Commission’s version of the standards.  These efforts focused on what the 
Commission called PP-3, PP-4, and PP-7 (now denominated in the Department’s standards as 
sections 115.13, 115.14, and 115.17 in Subpart A and their analogs in Subparts B, C, and D), which 
as noted above were the three largest anticipated cost drivers.  We also asked Booz Allen to re-assess 
the compliance costs of the Commission’s recommended standards PP-1 (now 115.11), PP-2 
(115.12), TR-1 to TR-5 (115.31-.35), SC-1 to SC-2 (115.41-.42), MM-3 (115.83), and AU-1 
(115.93), based on changes to those standards that the Department made from the Commission 
versions that were studied in the Booz Allen Report.  These eleven standards, after PP-3, PP-4, and 
PP-7, made up some of the largest cost drivers in the standards, either according to the Booz Allen 
Report or to comments received in response to the ANPRM.  
In re-assessing these standards, Booz Allen conducted a detailed analysis of the cost drivers 
and variables for each of the fourteen Commission-recommended standards we identified.  Those 
cost drivers and variables were standardized across the full spectrum of the 49 sites included in the 
Booz Allen Report. Booz Allen then (1) determined which cost drivers and variables were impacted 
by the Department’s changes to the Commission’s standards, (2) developed a set of assumptions to 
determine the degree to which they are impacted, and (3) developed metrics to determine a 
quantitative impact to the cost drivers and variables that could be applied consistently to each site. 
Based on this analysis, Booz Allen estimated that for the 49 sites included in the Booz Allen Report, 
the total cost associated with implementing the Department’s proposed standards (as opposed to the 
Commission’s version) would be $11.7 million in startup costs and $23.8 million in ongoing costs. 
Next, the Department asked Booz Allen to extrapolate from the data derived from the 49 
specific sites included in its Report into a nationwide estimate of the compliance cost of the 
Department’s proposed standards. For the fourteen standards identified in the previous paragraph, 
we asked Booz Allen to conduct its extrapolation using the adjusted cost figures from its 
supplemental analysis; for the remaining standards, we asked Booz Allen to use the cost estimates 
set forth in the Booz Allen Report, either because the Department’s changes to the Commission’s 
proposed versions of those standards were not expected to affect their cost, or because those 
standards were assessed to have a minimal cost impact in any event.  We asked Booz Allen to assess 
start-up costs as well as annual costs from 2012-2026.  We also asked Booz Allen to subdivide its 
nationwide cost estimates, where possible, by facility type:  prisons, jails, lockups, community 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 33 of 65 
  
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
          
 
    
 
 
confinement facilities, and juvenile facilities.  And we asked Booz Allen to compare the expected 
nationwide compliance costs of the Department’s proposed standards to the expected nationwide 
compliance costs of the Commission’s recommended standards. 
Based upon the data it had gathered from the 49 sites in its Report, Booz Allen developed 
parameters to extrapolate across the entire nationwide population.  Under this parametric approach, 
the calculations for total costs, associated standard errors, and 95% confidence limits rely on large 
sample statistical theory for a simple random sample.  For prisons, juvenile facilities, and community 
confinement, the total cost is the product of the number of geographical regions (e.g., States) and the 
sample mean. For jails, the total cost is the product of the number of facilities and the sample mean. 
The sample size of lockups was too small for this approach. 
This parametric approach has limitations in precision, most notably the small sample size 
relative to the total number of facilities for all facility-types except prisons.  For example, with over 
4,000 jails across the country and only 16 jails included in the study, the sample size is only 0.4% 
of the total population. This is compounded by the wide variation of costs for many standards 
among the facilities (i.e., standard deviation), exhibited in the Booz Allen Report.  (The cost 
estimates for prisons have a much tighter range of costs, resulting from a larger sample size, which 
constituted 25% of the total prison inmate population.) 
To minimize the variability and enhance the robustness of the extrapolation, Booz Allen 
applied a multivariate regression analysis using characteristics of the facilities gathered during the 
study such as number of facilities, staff counts, PREA compliance percentages, capacity, average 
dailypopulation, whether the facility has been accredited by the American Correctional Association, 
cost of care per day, whether facility staff belong to a union, number of reported incidents of sexual 
abuse (2008 and 2009), and annual operating budget.  The results were validated against data 
gathered during Booz Allen’s study to determine an order of magnitude or level of reasonable 
confidence.  The standard error of the total cost is a function of the standard error of the sample and 
an adjustment for the sampling fraction.  The confidence limits are a function of the estimated total 
cost, the standard error, and a Student’s t distribution quartile indexed for the sample size. 
In order to validate the results from the previous approach, a second cost estimate was 
calculated for all facility types except community confinement based on the average costs per inmate. 
The average cost per inmate for each facility was found by dividing the total sample costs by the total 
sample average daily population.  Extrapolating this value to the entire U.S. population was 
performed by multiplying this average cost across the total U.S. population for each facility type. 
The population figure was determined using figures from BJS. The parametric and cost-per-inmate 
calculations determined the cost range (low to high) for prisons, jails, and juvenile facilities, with 
the average of these two calculations serving as the medium estimate.  Due to data limitations, for 
community confinement facilities, only the parametric calculation was used, whereas for lockups 
only the cost-per-inmate calculation was used. 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 34 of 65 
    
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
   
Booz Allen’s supplemental cost analysis relies upon three assumptions given the limitations 
of the data from which the nationwide estimates and forecasts were extrapolated.   The first 
assumption is that the data were a simple random sample of all correctional facilities of a given type. 
This assumption is potentially tenuous, since the collecting agents picked the facilities that they felt 
were representative, as opposed to at random. The second, more plausible, assumption is that the 
sample comes from a normal (bell curve) distribution.  Finally, the cost-per-inmate approach 
assumes that the sample accurately represents the average costs per inmate for each facility. 
Once the total startup costs were determined using the above procedures, they were assigned 
to the year 2012. Estimated annual costs were assigned to the year 2013. These ongoing costs were 
assumed for purposes of this analysis to remain constant in nominal terms from 2013 through 2026 
– thus, no adjustment was made for inflation or for the possibility that costs will diminish over time 
due to new innovations.  For present value purposes, alternative discount rates of 3% and 7% were 
applied to the out years, using the following equation: 
where C(x) is the cost for any year x, d is the discount rate (.03 or .07, as the case may be), and n is 
the nth year following 2013 (i.e., n = x - 2013). 
We invite public comment as to whether the foregoing methodology yields the best estimate 
of the expected cost of compliance with the proposed standards or whether enhancements or 
refinements to this methodology are appropriate for purposes of assessing the benefit-cost 
justification of the proposed standards. 
Standard-by-Standard Assessment. The Department has extrapolated the nationwide 
compliance costs associated with the proposed standards taken in the aggregate, as reflected in Table 
6 above and Tables 13, 14A, and 14B below.  The Department has also estimated the nationwide 
compliance costs for each of the most cost-intensive standards (or groups of related standards), 
which together account for a very high percentage of the total estimated costs associated with the 
standards. We have not, at this juncture, quantified the estimated nationwide compliance costs, on 
a per standard basis, for those standards judged not to have a major cost impact but have instead 
developed qualitative descriptions of the relative magnitude of the impact of those standards – 
classifying startup and ongoing costs for each as zero, negligible, minimal, modest, or moderate, as 
the case may be.   
In the following discussion, we set forth our estimate of nationwide compliance costs 
associated with each of the proposed standards (or groups of related standards).  We note Booz 
Allen’s conclusions regarding the costs of the Commission’s recommended standards for the 49 
facilities studied in the Report; we analyze how the Department’s changes to the standard are likely 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 35 of 65 
        
 
  
   
 
 
    
          
 
    
 
  
  
to have affected that impact; we offer a sense of the magnitude of the anticipated compliance cost 
in relation to the nationwide total; and we set forth the internal cost assessments of BOP and USMS 
with respect to the standard. 
Sections 115.11, 115.111, 115.211, and 115.311 (compare to the Commission’s PP-1 
standard): This standard requires that agencies establish a written zero-tolerance policy toward 
sexual abuse and harassment and mandates that certain agencies employ or designate an agency-wide 
PREA coordinator to oversee efforts to comply with PREA standards.  Its principal benefit derives 
from the change in institutional culture that a zero tolerance policy and PREA coordinator will likely 
engender and from prompting agencies to make prison rape prevention a priority in making decisions 
with regard to policy, personnel, and physical plant.  
The cost of this standard derives from the mandate that agencies 
Cost of 115.11: operating facilities whose total rated capacity exceeds 1000 inmates hire 
an upper-level, agency-wide, full-time PREA compliance director to 
Startup MINIMAL oversee efforts to comply with the PREA standards.  Other agencies are 
(~$1M) directed either to hire a full-time PREA compliance manager or else to 
Ongoing MAJOR assign full-time or part-time PREA coordination duties to a designated 
(~$99M) existing employee.  All facilities whose total rated capacity exceeds 
1000 are also called upon to assign full-time or part-time PREA 
coordination duties at the facility level to a designated existing 
employee.  These are significant changes from the Commission’s recommendation to require all 
agencies, regardless of size, to hire a full-time PREA compliance manager.  
BOP has estimated the cost of this standard to be approximately $600,000 per year, 
comprising salary and benefits for one national coordinator at the GS-13 pay level plus two hours 
of staff time per week at each of BOP’s 113 facilities.  USMS estimates that it will cost 
approximately $550,000 per year to comply, consisting of salary and benefits for one national 
coordinator at the GS-13 pay level, plus two hours of staff time per week in each of 94 districts. 
As reflected in Table 7, and commensurate with the cost expectations of BOP and USMS, 
we expect the total cost of compliance with this standard to be approximately $99 million annually, 
with upfront costs of less than $1 million.  Nationwide, an estimated 319 agencies are likely to need 
a full-time PREA compliance director (at an approximate cost of $150,000 per year in salary and 
benefits):  in addition to BOP and USMS (which is the one lockup agency in Table 7), this would 
include all 50 States’ prison systems, approximately 11 state juvenile systems, and 256 jail 
jurisdictions.52/  We assume for cost estimation purposes that those agencies will assign PREA 
coordination responsibilities at the facility level to existing employees, who will spend an average 
of two hours per week (at an average $38 per hour in salary and benefits) on PREA coordination 
52/ See Bureau of Justice Statistics, 2005 Census of State and Federal Correctional Facilities, 2006 
Census of Jail Facilities, and the 2008 Juvenile Residential Facility Census. 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 36 of 65 
    
 
 
 
   
responsibilities. We likewise assume that agencies that do not operate any facilities whose total rated 
capacity exceeds 1000 inmates will assign part-time PREA coordination responsibilities to existing 
employees, who again will spend an average of two hours per week per facility on those 
responsibilities. These cost estimates are very conservative given the likelihood that corresponding 
salary and benefit costs for State and local agencies are generally lower than the costs of a GS-13 
employee based in Washington, DC. 
Table 7
 
Estimated Annual Compliance Costs for Standard 115.11, .111, .211, .311
 
(Cost of PREA Coordinator Positions)
 
No. Agency 
Directors 
Salary and 
Benefits for 
Agency 
Directors 
No. Facility 
Coordinators 
Salary/Benefits 
for Facility 
Coordinators53/ 
Total 
Prisons 51 $7,650,000 1,668 $6,591,936 $14,241,936 
Jails 256 $38,400,000 3,365 $13,298,480 $51,698,480 
Juvenile 11 $1,650,000 2,810 $11,105,120 $12,755,120 
Community 
Confinement 
0 $0 529 $2,090,608 $2,090,608 
Lockups 1 $150,000 4,563 $18,032,976 $18,182,976 
Total 319 $47,850,000 12,935 $51,119,120 $98,969,120 
Sections 115.12, 115.112, 115.212, and 115.312 (compare to the Commission’s PP-2 
standard): The cost of this standard derives from the expectation that, as some entities who operate 
confinement facilities under contract with agencies come into compliance with the PREA standards, 
they will pass the costs of that compliance onto the public agencies that hired them. The benefit of 
this standard derives from its assurance that the protections of PREA and of the standards reach 
inmates in facilities operated by private, corporate, and non-profit entities in addition to inmates in 
facilities operated by public authorities. 
Booz Allen found that most agencies that contract with private and public facilities for the 
confinement of offenders already mandate that contract facilities follow the same policies and 
procedures as the jurisdiction places on its own facilities, oftentimes having regulations codified in 
53/ Assumes an average of two hours of labor per week devoted to PREA coordination responsibilities, 
for 52 weeks, at a rate of $38/hour.  The rate for staff time is based on salary ($70,794) and benefits (approximately 
$35,400) for a GS-11 Step 5 federal employee in the Washington, DC area. 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 37 of 65 
  
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
contracts.  Some sites, however, have unique contracting 
agreements with private entities that prevent any additional or Cost of 115.12: 
higher fees regardless of whether requirements and regulations 
change. Booz Allen estimated that the startup cost associated with 
the Commission’s PP-2 was zero and that the ongoing cost was 
modest, given the high level of  baseline compliance. 
Startup: NEGLIGIBLE, 
Ongoing: MODERATE 
(~$67M) 
The Department’s changes to the Commission’s standards 
significantly decreased the compliance costs associated with this standard.  The total cost of this 
standard is dependent upon all other PREA related costs (with the exception of the costs of the 
PREA compliance director and coordinators in standard 115.11).  Since the Department’s revisions 
to the Commission’s recommended standards reduced the cost by more than 90%, the cost of this 
standard decreased proportionately. 
BOP notes that the precise level of costs implicated by this standard will be determined by 
private corporations and will be subject to negotiations, making it difficult to derive estimates at this 
time. USMS estimates the annual compliance cost of this standard to be $61,557, for an additional 
one hour per week of contract monitoring work on each of USMS’s 15 contracts. 
Booz Allen reports that the 49 jurisdictions that participated in its study would collectively 
have to spend approximately $3.4 million per year to comply with this standard.  Extrapolated to 
nationwide figures, this translates to approximately $67 million in annual compliance costs, as 
reflected in Table 8.  We invite comment as to whether there are other methods of estimating the 
extent to which contract renewals and renegotiations over the 15 year period will lead to costs for 
agencies that adopt the proposed standards. 
Table 8
 
Estimated Annual Compliance Costs for Standard 115.12, .112, .212, .312
 
(Contractor Compliance) in Thousands of Dollars
 
Jurisdictions in 
Booz Allen 
Study 
Nationwide 
Extrapolation 
Prisons $768 $3,020 
Jails $476 $49,683 
Juvenile $2,130 $14,318 
Community 
Confinement 
$36 $300 
Lockups $0 $0 
Total $3,410 $67,321 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 38 of 65 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
    
      
 
 
  
  
 
 
   
   
 
  
Sections 115.13, 115.113, 115.213, and 115.313 (compare to the Commission’s PP-3 
standard):  The principal cost impact of the Commission’s recommended version of this standard 
derives from the requirement that each facility maintain “an adequate level of supervision and/or 
monitoring of inmates and staff to protect inmates from sexual abuse,” which for some facilities may 
translate to a need to hire more staff as a means of preventing 
sexual abuse. A substantial majority of the systems and facilities 
Cost of 115.13: studied in the Booz Allen Report identified no cost associated 
with this standard: 9 of the 13 prison systems, 13 out of the 16 jail 
Startup: ZERO jurisdictions, 5 out of 6 community corrections facilities, 8 of the 
Ongoing: NEGLIGIBLE 10 juvenile detention facilities, and all four of the lockups reported 
no cost associated with the requirement of adequate supervision. 
However, a small number of facilities who reported a cost impact from the Commission’s 
recommended version of this standard justified their estimate on the premise that they were 
understaffed relative to levels commensurate with adequate supervision necessary to meet minimal 
constitutional staffing levels and best practices.  These facilities exhibited significant variations in 
costs, largely due to varying interpretations regarding the level of staff that is considered adequate 
to prevent sexual abuse, combined with the characteristics (age and design) of the physical plant. 
Based on the reports of these facilities, Booz Allen estimated that the nationwide compliance cost 
of the Commission’s recommended PP-3 amounted to $26.8 million in startup costs and $1.823 
billion dollars in annual ongoing costs. 
The Department’s proposed standard reduces the costs of compliance by not mandating  any 
particular level of staffing, and by not requiring the use of video monitoring.  It calls upon agencies 
to conduct an annual assessment of their prevailing staffing patterns and deployment of video 
monitoring systems and other technologies to determine whether adjustments or other measures 
should be taken to eliminate rape and sexual abuse. Agencies are also called upon to determine what 
the adequate levels of staffing and video monitoring are for each facility, taking into account physical 
layout, composition of the inmate population, and other relevant factors.  The benefits of the 
Department’s proposed standard derive from the requirement that agencies undertake a focused 
assessment of their staffing patterns and monitoring systems, with the prevention and detection of 
prison rape specifically in mind, so that deficiencies can be identified and corrective measures 
incorporated into the facilities’ development plans. 
We anticipate that, consistent with the Booz Allen Report, the great majority of facilities 
nationwide will find no compliance costs associated with the standard as proposed, since most 
agencies assess their staffing and monitoring patterns as being adequate. Both BOP and USMS have 
determined that this standard will have minimal cost impact on them. Some agencies may, upon 
conducting the required assessments, decide to undertake additional measures with regard to the 
supervision and/or monitoring of inmates, in order to adequately protect them from sexual abuse. 
Some of these measures may involve implementation costs.  However, because this standard only 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 39 of 65 
  
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
          
requires assessments and does not mandate specific corrective measures, we do not attribute any such 
costs to this standard.  Moreover, we have no way of anticipating the decisions that agencies would 
make in light of the findings of these assessments, or the cost of those decisions.  
We invite public comment on the cost implications of this proposed standard as well as on 
alternative approaches to this standard. 
Sections 115.14, 115.114, 115.214, and 115.314 (compare to the Commission’s PP-4 
standard): Booz Allen assessed the Commission’s version of this standard as having the largest 
ongoing cost impact of all the recommended standards.  The entire impact derived from the 
Commission’s prohibition of all cross-gender pat-down searches, which a number of facilities 
interpreted as requiring them either to hire significant numbers of 
additional male staff or to lay off significant numbers of female 
staff, due to their overwhelmingly male inmate population and Cost of 115.14: 
substantial percentage of female staff.  In addition, many agencies 
expressed concern that the necessary adjustments to their Startup: ZERO 
workforce would expose them to liability for violating federal Ongoing: MINIMAL 
and/or state equal employment opportunity laws.  
The Department’s proposed standard does not prohibit cross-gender patdown searches in any 
setting except juvenile facilities, which tend to conduct pat-down searches less frequently.  Indeed, 
many juvenile facilities already ban cross-gender pat-down searches absent exigent circumstances. 
In addition, under the Department’s standard, adult prisons, jails, and community confinement 
facilities should not allow cross-gender pat-down searches of inmates who have previously suffered 
cross-gender sexual abuse while incarcerated.  The benefit of this standard derives from the 
protection it provides to the privacy and dignity of inmates and from the reduction in opportunities 
for staff-on-inmate sexual abuse. 
We believe that the standards as currently drafted will not necessitate the workforce 
realignment implicated by the Commission’s PP-4, except in those few juvenile facilities where 
cross-gender pat-down searches are currently permitted.  This should entirely eliminate the cost 
impact of this standard, except in juvenile facilities.  BOP’s and USMS’s internal assessments do 
not expect a substantial compliance cost associated with this standard, which is largely consistent 
with current practice.  We do not anticipate any cost (or anything more than a minimal cost) 
associated with the aspects of this standard other than those dealing with cross-gender pat-downs, 
although we invite public comment as to whether the limitations on cross-gender viewing might 
impose costs. In particular, we recognize that these limitations on cross-gender viewing might 
require some facilities to undertake retrofitting, or to construct privacy panels; we do not have data 
from which a cost estimate can be developed for such measures. 
Sections 115.15, 115.115, 115.215, and 115.315 (compare to the Commission’s PP-5 
standard): The cost impact of this standard, as assessed by Booz Allen, is rather minimal and 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 40 of 65 
  
 
 
    
 
  
  
  
     
 
 
  
 
primarily affects lockups, and to a lesser extent jails and community confinement facilities.  The 
primary cost driver is the mandate to ensure that all inmates are able to communicate effectively and 
directly with staff, which in some cases may require costs associated with ensuring that sign-
language and foreign language interpreters are available.  The Department’s standards somewhat 
mitigate this cost by allowing inmates to interpret for other 
inmates in exigent circumstances – something the Commission’s 
Cost of 115.15: recommendation did not allow.  Otherwise, the Booz Allen 
Report’s assessment of the minimal cost of the Commission’s PP-
Startup:  NEGLIGIBLE 5 – for the 49 facilities in its study, startup costs collectively 
Ongoing: MINIMAL amounted to $2,000, and on-going costs a mere $47,000 annually 
– is an appropriate indicium of the nationwide cost of the 
Department’s proposed standard. BOP reports no estimable cost 
associated with this standard but noted that compliance may require additional contracts for 
interpretation services, which will vary by location, duration, and nature of services required . 
USMS was unable to estimate a cost associated with this standard, noting that it may require 
additional services and equipment that would vary by location and situation.  The benefit of this 
standard primarily derives from ensuring that all inmates have the ability to communicate effectively 
and directly with staff. 
Sections 115.16, 115.116, 115.216, and 115.316 (compare to the Commission’s PP-6 
standard): The primary compliance cost associated with the Commission’s recommended PP-6 
standard derived from the requirement of background checks on any employee being considered for 
promotion. Even so, the Booz Allen Report assessed a minimal cost from the Commission’s 
proposal, with no impact on lockups: for the 49 facilities in the study, startup costs of $4,000 and 
ongoing costs of $284,000.  The Department’s proposed standard would reduce that burden even 
further: it would not mandate background checks on all employees 
up for promotion but instead would require agencies to conduct 
criminal background checks of all current employees at least every Cost of 115.16: 
five years (as BOP currently does) or else have in place a system 
for otherwise capturing such information for current employees. Startup: NEGLIGIBLE 
Ongoing: MODEST The primary benefit of this standard comes from limiting the risk 
(~$7.2M)that employees of correctional and detention facilities may bring 
to the workplace a history of criminal behavior suggestive of a 
propensity to engage in sexual abuse. 
Neither BOP nor USMS cite any cost in connection with this standard, noting that it is 
consistent with current practice. 
One way to calculate the total cost of this standard is to multiply the total number of 
correctional employees in the nation by $10, since the average background check costs $50 
(according to Booz Allen), and a check would only be required once every five years.  Because the 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 41 of 65 
         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
    
latest available data show approximately 717,000 correctional employees nationwide,54/ the total cost 
of this standard could be estimated at approximately $7.2 million annually. 
Sections 115.17, 115.117, 115.217, and 115.317 (compare to the Commission’s PP-7 
standard): The Booz Allen Report assessed the Commission’s PP-7 as accounting for 96% of all up-
front costs associated with implementation of the recommended 
standards, largely due to the requirement for agencies to utilize 
Cost of 115.17: video monitoring systems and other technology to eliminate 
sexual abuse. This requirement would engender significant 
Startup: ZERO investment costs associated with procuring and installing
Ongoing: ZERO monitoring technology; there would also be costs in the out years 
associated with maintaining such systems. 
The Department has eliminated the requirement of using video monitoring systems, replacing 
it with a new standard requiring agencies to take into account how best to combat sexual abuse when 
designing or expanding facilities and when installing or updating video monitoring system or other 
technology.55/  The benefits of the Department’s proposed standard derive from the requirement that 
agencies undertake a focused assessment of their video monitoring technology when designing or 
expanding facilities, with the prevention and detection of prison rape specifically in mind, so that 
deficiencies can be identified and corrective measures incorporated into the facilities’ plans. 
The Department believes that most agencies already consider the effects of design, 
acquisition, expansion, and upgrading of technological systems on their ability to protect inmates 
from all destabilizing activities, including sexual abuse, and already consider how technology may 
enhance their abilities to protect inmates from these same activities. The additional marginal cost 
of such consideration for agencies that do not currently do so is expected to be negligible.  Thus, all 
up-front and ongoing costs associated with the Commission’s recommended PP-7 have been 
eliminated.56/ 
54/ The number of employees is based on the 2005 Census of State and Federal Correctional Facilities, 
2006 Census of Jail Facilities, and the Council of Juvenile Correctional Administrators’ Yearbook, 2010. Staff in state 
juvenile facilities were limited to direct care staff. A total count was estimated to account for employees in 6 
participating states that did not provide staff  counts; the number of employees in 2 states (IA and VT) could not be 
estimated. Otherwise, federal, state and local staff counts include full-time, part-time, payroll, non-payroll, and contract 
staff.  Community volunteers were excluded.  
55/ Standards 115.13, .113, .213, and .313 also require facilities to annually assess, and determine whether 
adjustments are needed to, its deployment of video monitoring systems and other technologies. 
56/ BOP and USMS identify no cost associated with this standard, observing that the cost of an assessment 
is minimal. 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 42 of 65 
 
 
  
       
 
   
   
 
 
  
 
  
Some agencies may, upon conducting the required assessments, decide to undertake 
additional measures with regard to installation or upgrading of video monitoring technology, in order 
to adequately protect inmates from sexual abuse.  Some of these measures may involve 
implementation costs.  However, because this standard only requires assessments and does not 
mandate specific corrective measures, we do not attribute any such costs to this standard.  Moreover, 
we have no way of anticipating the decisions that agencies would make in light of the findings of 
these assessments. 
Sections 115.21-23, 115.121-123, 115.221-223, 115.321-323 (compare to the 
Commission’s RP-1, RP-2, RP-3 standards):  The primary cost driver behind the Commission’s RP­
1 standard is the requirement for agencies to make available a 
victim advocate during the medical examination process following 
Cost of 115.21-.23:a prison rape or sexual assault – which could have a cost 
associated with hiring a new employee or developing and 
Startup: NEGLIGIBLE maintaining a Memorandum of Understanding.  Booz Allen 
Ongoing: MINIMAL assessed this recommended standard as having a relatively 
minimal cost impact, observing that the majority of prisons and 
jails already provide a victim advocate through arrangements with 
local hospital Sexual Assault Nurse Examiner (SANE) programs.  It noted, however, that there are 
some sites and scenarios that suggest this standard could have a sporadic impact across the country. 
Among the 49 facilities that participated in its cost study, costs associated with the Commission’s 
RP-1 standard were estimated to amount to $25,000 in startup costs and $1.4 million in annual 
ongoing costs. 
In revising this standard from the Commission’s version, the Department has made the 
minimal cost impact identified by Booz Allen even smaller by specifying that the victim advocate 
can either be “a qualified staff member” or “a victim advocate from a community-based organization 
that provides services to sexual abuse victims.”57/   Qualified staff member is defined as a facility 
employee who has received education concerning sexual assault and forensic examination issues in 
general.  The Department’s revision of the Commission’s standard is intended to clarify that an 
existing employee with appropriate education can fulfill this role, thus reducing the burden on the 
facility while ensuring support for the victim.  
For facilities that elect to train and then rely on their own staff to provide victim advocate 
services, the Department estimates that providing specialized training to “qualified staff members” 
will require approximately eight hours of staff time at each facility where the training is conducted, 
plus approximately forty staff hours to develop the training.  On the basis of these assumptions, BOP 
estimates that it will cost it $35,872 to implement 115.21 at each of its 113 facilities, with no annual 
cost in the out years. USMS assigns no cost to 115.121; since the Marshals do not hold primary 
57/ The Department also eliminated the requirement of a victim advocate altogether in lockup settings. 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 43 of 65 
          
    
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
  
 
jurisdiction for the investigation of prisoners in custody, they do not foresee needing to provide 
training to their personnel in evidence protocol. USMS already pays for prisoner medical 
examinations. 
Booz Allen combined the Commission’s RP-2, RP-3, and RP-4 for purposes of assessing the 
cost, and determined that the total cost of those standards on the facilities and systems it studied is 
minimal.  Among the 49 entities that participated in Booz Allen’s cost study, the compliance costs 
associated with those three recommended standards would total $75,000 in startup expenses and $2.1 
million in annual ongoing costs. The primary cost driver for the Commission’s recommended 
standards is the need for jurisdictions to establish Memorandums of Understanding with outside 
service providers to provide inmates with confidential emotional support services related to sexual 
abuse and to help victims of sexual abuse during their transition from incarceration to the 
community.  
The Department proposes to scale back the scope of services that a community service 
organization would provide, deleting from standard 115.22/222/322 the requirement that the provider 
“help victims of sexual abuse during their transition from incarceration to the community.”  This 
reduces any cost associated with this standard.  BOP estimates no costs in connection with standard 
115.22.  The Department has also deleted the Commission’s RP-2 insofar as it relates to lockups. 
The Department proposes to eliminate the Commission’s RP-3 and RP-4 standards, which 
would require agencies to enter into Memorandums of Understanding with outside investigative 
agencies and with prosecutorial agencies.  Booz Allen did not identify any significant costs 
associated with either of those standards,58/ although a number of agency commenters expressed 
concern that these requirements would impose a burden, especially in State systems where 
investigations and prosecutions are conducted by numerous different agencies at the county or 
municipal level. 
The Department’s proposed new standard 115.23/123/223/323 mandates that each agency 
must have in place policies to ensure that allegations of sexual abuse or sexual harassment are 
investigated by an agency with the legal authority to conduct criminal investigations.  The policy 
must be published on the agency’s website, and, if a separate entity is responsible for investigating 
criminal investigations, the website must delineate the responsibilities of the agency and the 
investigating entity.  The Department is not aware of any cost associated with this standard, although 
it is conceivable that some agencies could incur costs associated with developing such a policy; 
moreover, some agencies may incur costs due to the increased number of investigations that could 
result from designating an investigative entity. BOP and USMS report that the standard is consistent 
with their existing policy and therefore would not impose any additional costs. 
58/ Among the 49 jurisdictions that participated in Booz Allen’s cost study, total costs associated with the 
Commission’s proposed RP3 and RP4 were $42,000 in startup costs and $508,000 in ongoing annual costs. 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 44 of 65 
    
 
            
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
Sections 115.31-35, 115.131-135, 115.231-235, 115.331-335 (compare to the 
Commission’s TR standards):  Booz Allen combined the Commission’s training standards (TR-1 
through TR-5) for purposes of assessing their associated 
implementation costs, and determined that the total cost on the 
Cost of 115.31-.35: facilities and systems it studied is moderate to major.  Most of the 
agencies it studied had additional work to do to comply with this 
Startup: MAJOR standard, and 80% of them reported costs associated with them. 
(~$166M) Among the 49 agencies, the total cost associated with the five 
Ongoing: MAJOR training standards amounts to approximately $7 million in startup 
(~$93.7M) expenses and $4.8 million in annual ongoing expenses.  The 
primary cost drivers derive from the requirement that agencies 
train all employees (including non-sworn officers and 
administrative assistants), train all contractors and volunteers, provide education to inmates and 
offenders, and ensure specialized training is provided to investigators and the medical and mental 
health care staff.    
The Department’s proposed standards in this group are substantively similar to the 
corresponding standards recommended by the Commission,59/ with the addition that each standard 
requires documentation that the required training was provided – and, for staff training, that the 
training was understood. In order to facilitate compliance, the Department has revised the 
Commission’s recommendations to allow electronic documentation in addition to written 
documentation. 
BOP anticipates complying with standards 115.31, .32, and .33 by using existing training 
sessions, available lesson plans, inmate handbooks, inmate training, and unit team meetings.  Thus, 
BOP does not anticipate any additional costs in connection with these standards. BOP estimates that 
implementation of the other two training standards will involve a one-time cost of $70,892 and then 
an annual cost of $34,352.  With regard to standard 115.34 (involving specialized training for 
investigators), it will cost $5,000 to pay for an outside consultant to provide specialized training, and 
eight hours of staff time to attend the training, for one staff member per institution, amounting to an 
annual expense of $39,352.  With regard to standard 115.35 (involving specialized medical training), 
BOP estimates eighty hours of staff time to develop the training plus three hours to attend the 
training for approximately 250 staff, amounting to a one-time expense of $31,540. 
59/ The Department did make one substantive change to the training standards recommended by the 
Commission, to wit, to include training for staff on “how to communicate effectively and professionally with residents, 
including lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender or intersex residents” for all facility types other than lockups.  See Standard 
115.31, 115.231, 115.331.  It is not known at this juncture whether or not this change will lead to additional costs for 
correctional facilities in comparison to the training costs reported by the facilities that participated in the Booz Allen 
study.  We invite public comment on this question. 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 45 of 65 
              
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
     
USMS estimates an annual cost of $400,000 plus a startup cost of $2,000 to implement 
standard 115.131 – which would involve 5,000 USMS operational personnel and other employees 
receiving a two-hour on-line training session. Forty hours of startup work would be required to 
create the training module; an additional fee would be required if a private contractor were used. 
Another $5000 startup cost and $3000 per year would be needed for 115.132, which requires 
notification posters and periodic replacement and update of materials. 
As reflected in Table 9 below, the total nationwide implementation cost of the five training 
standards, extrapolated from the cost estimates provided by the 49 agencies that participated in Booz 
Allen’s cost study, amounts to $166 million in startup costs and $93.7 million in ongoing annual 
costs. The Department intends to assist agencies across the country in mitigating the costs associated 
with the training standards by making models, modules, and other resources available through the 
PREA Resource Center and other support mechanisms. 
Table 9
 
Estimated Annual Compliance Costs for Standards 

115.31-.35, .131-.135, .231-.235, .331-.335 (Training)
 
in Thousands of Dollars
 
Jurisdictions in Booz Allen Study Nationwide Extrapolation 
Startup Ongoing Startup Ongoing 
Prisons $5,286 $544 $20,784 $2,138 
Jails $938 $527 $97,833 $54,908 
Juvenile $631 $3,597 $4,244 $24,176 
Community 
Confinement 
$205 $148 $1,940 $1,270 
Lockups $7 $20 $41,561 $11,173 
Total $7,067 $4,836 $166,362 $93,665 
Sections 115.41-43, 115.241-242, 115.341-342 (compare to the Commission’s SC 
standards and AP standards for juveniles): Booz Allen combined the Commission’s recommended 
screening standards (SC-1 and SC-2, called “Assessment and Placement” (AP-1 and AP-2) for 
juvenile facilities) for purposes of assessing their cost impact, and determined that the total impact 
on the facilities and systems it studied is moderate.  Most sites in 
the Booz Allen Report currently utilize a formal screening process, 
Cost of 115.41-.43:but the majority felt that they would need to update their screening 
instruments to include PREA-related questions, mostly because 
Startup: MODERATE they fell short of meeting all the PREA criteria or were not gender­
(~$33M)specific.  Each site was at a different degree of compliance, some 
Ongoing: MODERATE requiring modest modifications with little or no costs and some 
(~$55M)requiring significant modifications depending on the state of their 
     
  
  
         
  
  
 
 
  
   
  
classification process and the gap between that and the PREA standards.  Thus, the principal cost 
drivers relate to modifications of existing screening tools and implementation of procedures where 
they do not already exist.  The 49 agencies that participated in Booz Allen’s cost study reported 
collective startup costs of $3.5 million and ongoing annual costs of $3.8 million. 
The Department’s changes to the Commission’s recommended screening standards should 
somewhat reduce the cost of those standards. First, the Department’s standard does not apply to 
lockups. Second, although the Commission would require use of a written instrument in the 
classification process, the Department has not adopted this requirement in order to allow for 
electronic evaluations; this may serve to reduce costs in some instances.  Third, several agency 
commenters expressed concern about the cost and burden of conducting detailed screening upon an 
inmate’s entrance into a facility.  By clarifying that the detailed initial classification need only be 
conducted within 30 days of confinement, the Department intends to allow agencies with rapid 
turnover to avoid conducting a full classification, while still ensuring that an inmate is screened 
appropriately upon intake.  This added flexibility may reduce costs in many instances. 
Fourth, to the extent there was a cost associated with the protective custody provisions of the 
Commission’s SC-2 (no such impact was reported by Booz Allen), those provisions now only apply 
to prisons and jails (in 115.43) and not to any other setting. Fifth, the increased clarity and 
specificity of this standard compared to the Commission’s version may also serve to reduce costs. 
As reflected in table 10 below, the total nationwide implementation cost of the screening (or 
assessment and placement) standards, extrapolated from the cost estimates provided by the 49 
agencies that participated in Booz Allen’s cost study, amounts to $33 million in startup costs and $55 
million in ongoing annual costs.60/ 
BOP estimates its costs of complying with standard 115.41 as an initial cost of $4560 to 
develop and disseminate a new screening instrument, which it estimates will take approximately 120 
hours of staff time.  If negotiation with the union proves necessary, additional staff time may be 
required.  Standards 115.42 and .43 would not impose additional costs on BOP, as they are 
consistent with existing BOP policy. 
60/ In its comments in response to the ANPRM, ASCA reported standard SC2 as having the biggest cost 
after PP3, PP4, and PP7, estimating a total startup cost for that single standard across the 50 states of $103.2 million, 
with annual costs of $19.4 million in the out years; ASCA did not provide an explanation of the basis of its calculations. 
See supra note 3. 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 47 of 65 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
       
 
  
Table 10
 
Estimated Annual Compliance Costs for Standards 

115.41-.43, .241-.242, .341-.342 (Screening/Assessment and Placement)
 
in Thousands of Dollars
 
Jurisdictions in Booz Allen Study Nationwide Extrapolation 
Startup Ongoing Startup Ongoing 
Prisons $518 $1,906 $2,036 $7,493 
Jails $118 $356 $12,275 $37,106 
Juvenile $2,760 $1,584 $18,550 $10,646 
Community 
Confinement 
$64 $0 $550 $0 
Total $3,460 $3,846 $33,411 $55,245 
Sections 115.51-54, 115.151-154, 115.251-254, 115.351-354 (compare to the 
Commission’s RE standards): The Booz Allen Report found a minimal cost to the Commission’s 
recommended standards relating to reporting. Standards RE-1 and RE-4 were determined to have 
“negligible to non-existent” cost – these two standards have not materially changed in the 
Department’s iterations, where they have become 115.51/151/251/351 and 115.54/154/254/354, 
respectively.  BOP reports that neither proposed standard would impose additional costs on it. 
USMS estimates an annual cost of $5000 to print posters and brochures in compliance with 115.151. 
The Commission’s recommended RE-2 standard, dealing 
Cost of 115.51-.54: with exhaustion of administrative remedies, has been completely 
rewritten in its current form at 115.52/252/352. The Booz Allen Startup: MINIMAL Report found the Commission’s recommendation to have a Ongoing: MINIMAL “negligible” cost and observed that where agencies were 
noncompliant with the Commission’s recommended standard, 
quantifying a cost as a result of changing the agency’s grievance 
policy was indeterminate or speculative at best.  One agency did express a cost impact ($6,000 
startup and $105,000 ongoing) associated with an increased level of effort required by a change in 
policy restricting investigations to 90 days, which the agency construed as requiring the hiring of an 
additional grievance officer to help meet a shortened deadline.  The Department’s proposed 
standards ameliorate any cost impact of this sort by allowing an agency to claim an extension of time 
to respond, up to 70 days, if the normal 90-day time period for response is insufficient to make an 
appropriate decision.  
Costs associated with conflicts between the standards and the Prison Litigation Reform Act, 
and with an inmate’s ability (under the Commission’s proposal) to exhaust administrative remedies 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 48 of 65 
          
 
 
  
  
  
 
  
 
 
   
within 48 hours, have also been eliminated in the Department’s proposed standard.  We therefore 
assess the exhaustion of administrative remedies standards as having minimal compliance cost.  BOP 
estimates that its systemwide costs associated with 115.52 will amount to a mere $23,940 per year. 
This includes one hour of staff time, on an estimated 150 cases per year, to process and document 
third party notifications, and 24 hours of staff time, on an estimated 20 cases per year, to prepare for 
and attend court proceedings on “imminent harm” matters. BOP notes that the impact of the 
standard on litigation is unknown and may lead to additional costs.  Because the Department’s 
proposed standard includes significant revisions to the Commission’s recommendation, we invite 
public comment as to whether there might be additional costs associated with this standard that we 
have not included. 
The Booz Allen Report grouped the Commission’s RE-3 standard together with standards 
RP-2 through RP-4, which, as noted above, it found to have a minimal cost impact.  (The 49 
agencies that participated in the Booz Allen study collectively reported $98,000 in startup costs and 
zero ongoing costs in connection with RE-3.) As with standards RP-2 through RP-4, the 
Commission’s RE-3 standard related to establishing Memorandums of Understanding with outside 
service providers – in this case, to outside victim advocates for emotional support services related 
to sexual abuse.  The Department has not materially changed this standard from what the 
Commission recommended, aside from changing the requirement that communications be “private, 
confidential, and privileged, to the extent allowable by Federal, State, and local law” to a 
requirement that such communications be “as confidential as possible consistent with agency 
security needs.” The Department believes that standard 115.53/253/353 will, like the RE-3 standard 
that Booz Allen assessed, have minimal cost impact on the correctional community. 
Sections 115.61-67, 115.161-165, 115.261-265, 115.361-366 (compare to the 
Commission’s OR standards): The Booz Allen Report found that four of the Commission’s 
recommended standards relating to official response following an inmate report – to wit, OR-1, OR­
2, OR-3, and OR-4 – would have negligible to non-existent cost. The Department’s revisions to 
these recommended standards (which now appear at 115.61/161/261/361, 115.62/162/262/362, 
115.63/163/263/363, and 115.64/164/264/364, respectively) do not change or add to the cost of these 
standards.  Neither BOP nor USMS have identified any estimated costs associated with any of these 
proposed standards. 
Cost of 115.61-.67:The Booz Allen Report found minimal cost to the 
Commission’s recommended OR-5 standard.  One prison system 
Startup: MINIMAL reported an expected up-front cost of $500,000; the remaining 48 
Ongoing: NEGLIGIBLE sites Booz Allen surveyed reported no costs.  The proposed 
standard requires agencies to adopt policies that help ensure 
prisoners who do report incidents of sexual abuse are properly 
monitored and protected afterwards, including but not limited to providing information in training 
sessions, enforcing strict reporting policies, imposing strong disciplinary sanctions for retaliation, 
making housing changes or transfers for inmate victims or abusers, removing alleged staff or inmate 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 49 of 65 
     
 
    
 
 
          
abusers from contact with victims, and providing emotional support services for inmates or staff who 
fear retaliation.  The one system that reported a cost for this standard attributed it to the need to 
develop a system to permit central office monitoring of inmate victims and witnesses.  In drafting 
standard 115.65/165/265/365, the Department has not changed the Commission’s recommended OR­
5 in a way that would likely mitigate or affect this cost.61/   BOP estimates that its costs associated 
with implementation of standard 115.65 amount to $11,400 per year, consisting of one hour of staff 
time, in 300 cases per year, to assess whether retaliation has occurred and to take appropriate action. 
USMS estimates no cost in connection with 115.165. 
Sections 115.71-73, 115.171-172, 115.271-273, 115.371-373 (compare to the 
Commission’s IN standards): The Booz Allen Report found that the Commission’s recommended 
standards relating to investigation of reported abuse incidents 
would impose a minimal cost on agencies. Standard IN-2, which 
Cost of 115.71-.73: dealt with criminal and administrative agency investigations, was 
determined to have negligible to non-existent impact.  The 
Startup: MINIMAL Department’s version of this standard, 115.71/171/271/371,  is 
Ongoing: MODEST similar in sum and substance to the Commission’s version and like 
that version is expected to have a negligible cost. 
The Booz Allen Report grouped the Commission’s recommended IN-1 and IN-3 standards 
together for purposes of assessing cost and found that the combined cost associated with those 
standards was minimal.  Only six sites out of the 49 surveyed reported costs ($19,000 in startup and 
$1.3 million in annual ongoing).  Those costs related either to the need for additional staff to conduct 
more frequent investigations (which were expected to increase in volume as a result of more reports 
being brought to the attention of prison authorities), or to the need to ensure that investigations are 
conducted properly and thoroughly.  Ninety-six percent of the sites surveyed in the Booz Allen 
Report were already in compliance with IN-3 (which relates to the burden of proof for substantiation 
of abuse allegations), while only 41% were in compliance with IN-1. 
The Department proposes to revise these standards.  The Commission’s IN-3 standard has 
been modified and is now the proposed 115.72/172/272/372; the changes the Department made 
should not affect the cost of the standard.  The Commission’s IN-1 standard has been deleted, and 
its provisions relating to notification to inmates have been incorporated into standard 
115.73/273/373. The cost of this proposed standard should be no greater than, and will probably be 
less than, what Booz Allen assessed to be the cost of the Commission’s IN-1 standard.  BOP 
estimates that this standard will cost it $5,700 per year to implement nationwide, consisting of 30 
61/ The Department has modified sections 115.65, 115.265, and 115.365 to require agencies to continue 
past the initial 90-day period their monitoring of residents or staff who report sexual or who cooperate with an 
investigation, if the initial monitoring indicates a continuing need for monitoring or for protection against retaliation. 
We do not view this requirement as being likely to impose additional costs on agencies that comply with it. 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 50 of 65 
   
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
minutes of staff time per allegation, for 300 allegations per year, to notify inmates of the outcome 
of investigations.  USMS reports no estimated cost associated with this standard. 
Sections 115.76-77, 115.176-177, 115.276-277, 
Cost of 115.76-.77:115.376-377 (compare to the Commission’s DI standards): The 
Booz Allen Report found the Commission’s recommended 
Startup: NEGLIGIBLE standards concerning disciplinary sanctions for staff and inmates 
Ongoing: NEGLIGIBLE to have negligible to non-existent cost.  The Department has 
modified the Commission’s recommended standards in various 
ways but does not believe these changes introduce any cost that 
was not present in the Commission’s proposals.  BOP and USMS estimate no additional costs 
associated with this standard, which are consistent with current practice. 
Sections 115.81-83, 115.182, 115.282-283, 115.381-383 (compare to the 
Commission’s MM standards).  The Booz Allen Report assessed the first two of the Commission’s 
recommended standards relating to medical and mental health care (MM-1 and MM-2) as having 
negligible to non-existent cost.  The Department’s changes to these two standards – as now set forth 
in 115.81/381 and 115.82/182/282/382 – if anything somewhat reduce the burden of the 
Commission’s recommended standards (especially for jails) and therefore do not change the already 
negligible cost of those standards. 
The Booz Allen Report assessed the Commission’s MM-3 
Cost of 115.81-.83: (which relates to ongoing mental health care for sexual abuse 
victims and abusers) as having a much more substantial 
Startup: MINIMAL compliance cost – in fact the highest of all standards after the 
(~$800K) major ones of PP-3, PP-4, and PP-7.  The 49 agencies that 
Ongoing: MAJOR participated in Booz Allen’s cost study reported collective 
(~$150M) compliance costs associated with the Commission’s 
recommended MM-3 of $8,000 in startup costs and $5.4 million 
in annual ongoing costs.  The primary cost driver associated with 
this standard is the requirement of providing ongoing care and mental health care particularly as it 
relates to care for all known sex abusers.  
The Department’s proposed standard, sections 115.83/283/383, is substantially similar to the 
Commission’s recommendation, insofar as it requires that victims of sexual abuse receive access to 
ongoing medical and mental health care, and that abusers receive access to care as well.  This 
standard requires facilities to offer ongoing medical and mental health care consistent with the 
community level of care for as long as such care is needed, and also requires that known inmate 
abusers receive a mental health evaluation within 60 days of learning the abuse has occurred.  The 
Department does not believe that its changes to the Commission’s version of this standard 
substantially affect the cost determined by Booz Allen.  As depicted in Table 11, the estimated 
nationwide compliance costs associated with this standard, as extrapolated from the costs reported 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 51 of 65 
  
 
    
 
by the 49 agencies involved in the Booz Allen study, amount to $803,000 in startup costs and $150 
million in annual ongoing costs. 
BOP estimates that it would need to spend $1,816,272 per year to implement this standard 
systemwide by dedicating two additional GS-13 staff per region (12 in total) to provide ongoing 
counseling sessions to inmates beyond what is currently provided. 
Table 11
 
Estimated Annual Compliance Costs for Standard 115.83, .283, .383
 
(Mental Health Care)
 
in Thousands of Dollars
 
Jurisdictions in Booz Allen Study Nationwide Extrapolation 
Startup Ongoing Startup Ongoing 
Prisons $0 $3,293 $0 $12,947 
Jails $8 $1,265 $803 $131,936 
Juvenile $0 $809 $0 $5,434 
Community 
Confinement 
$0 $0 $0 $0 
Lockups $0 $0 $0 $0 
Total $8 $5,367 $803 $150,317 
Sections 115.86-89, 115.186-189, 115.286-289, 115.386-389 (compare to the 
Commission’s DC standards): The Booz Allen Report treated the four Commission standards 
relating to data collection and review as a group.  It found that DC-4 (which deals with data storage, 
publication, and destruction) had a negligible to non-existent cost.  We assume that the Department’s 
substantially similar version, at 115.89/189/289/389, likewise has a negligible cost.  However, 
USMS intends to build a database that will track, store, and create reports, for an upfront cost of 
$300,000. 
The Booz Allen Report found that standards DC-1 through 
DC-3 collectively have “some of the highest compliance rates and Cost of 115.86-.89: 
lowest overall cost impact” of all the Commission’s recommended 
standards. Of the sites which were not already in compliance with Startup: MODEST 
these recommended standards, the primary cost drivers are the Ongoing: MODEST 
manpower and database automation/integration expenses 
associated with gathering, reviewing, and reporting sexual abuse 
data. The agencies which participated in the Booz Allen study collectively reported costs associated 
with these standards of $371,000 in startup costs and $374,000 in ongoing costs. 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 52 of 65 
  
      
  
 
 
 
 
  
      
  
    
 
  
The Department made numerous clarifying changes to the Commission’s proposals but did 
not change their substance, and the Department’s revisions are therefore unlikely to affect the cost 
of this standard as assessed in the Booz Allen Report. BOP reports that standard 115.86 will require 
$456,000 per year to implement, based upon reviewing an anticipated 300 allegations per year, at 
40 staff hours per review.  BOP also estimates a required cost of $151,000 per year to fund a GS-11 
data analyst position for the collection of data in accordance with standard 115.87.  As for standard 
115.88, BOP estimates a compliance cost of $9,120 per year for 240 hours of staff time. 
USMS projects an annual cost of $16,000 to comply with standard 115.186, based on the 
time to conduct a review with upper management of an estimated ten incidents per year.  For 
115.187, the Marshals anticipate a cost of $75,000 per year for a GS-11 part-time analyst position 
for the collection of data.  For 115.188, USMS estimates $10,000 per year for the additional 
personnel required to review and submit reports for corrective action. 
Sections 115.93, 115.193, 115.293, and 115.393 (compare to the Commission’s AU-1 
standard): The Commission’s recommended audit standard (AU-1) requires agencies to audit each 
of their facilities, including contract facilities, at least once every three years. The Booz Allen 
Report determined that on average, audits would cost $32,000 for prisons, $25,000 for jails, $17,000 
for juvenile facilities and community confinement facilities, and $9,000 for lockups.  The cost to 
audit every facility once every three years would equal approximately $77.5 million per year.  
Cost of 115.93: The Department’s proposed standard does not specify any 
particular frequency of audits and only addresses the 
Startup: UNKNOWN 
Ongoing: UNKNOWN 
independence and certification of auditors, as well as the 
requirements that agencies give auditors full access and publish 
the audit reports on their websites. As discussed in the NPRM, 
the Department believes that further discussion is necessary in 
order to determine how frequently, and on what basis, such audits should be conducted. 
Accordingly, the proposed standard does not specify the frequency or breadth of audits – these will 
be addressed in the final Rule.  At this time, it would be premature to assign any cost to this standard. 
However, because the Department is seeking comments on whether audits should be conducted at 
regular intervals, the Department invites the public to comment on the cost per facility per audit and 
provide the basis for those costs. 
* * * 
Conclusions as to Compliance Costs. The following tables, together with Table 6 above, 
depict in summary fashion, from a number of perspectives, the estimated nationwide compliance 
costs associated with the Department’s proposed standards.  
Below, Table 12 lists all of the proposed standards by regulation number (with a cross-
reference to the corresponding Commission designation) and describes the relative magnitude of the 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 53 of 65 
 
 
 
 
estimated startup and ongoing costs associated with implementation of that proposed standard. 
Where applicable, each standard lists the associated costs reported by the 49 agencies that 
participated in the Booz Allen study and by BOP and USMS.  Where an extrapolated nationwide 
cost estimate is available for a particular standard in dollar-figure terms, that figure is reflected in 
the Table, drawn from Tables 7 through 11 above. The verbal descriptions of the relative magnitude 
of the cost estimates use the following hierarchy: 
zero < negligible < minimal < modest < moderate < major. 
Table 13, on page 58, then depicts the expected upfront and ongoing compliance costs 
associated with the Department’s proposed standards on a per facility and per inmate basis for the 
different facility types. 
Tables 14A and 14B, on page 59, project the total compliance costs of the proposed standards 
over the 15-year period from 2012-2026, showing aggregate nationwide costs per year per facility 
type, and calculated alternatively using a 3% and 7% discount rate. 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 54 of 65 
 Table 12
 
Summary of Compliance Costs for Proposed PREA Standards
 
(all dollar figures in Thousands – blank entries are unknown at this time)
 
Standard 
Estimated Startup Costs Estimated Ongoing Costs 
– Reg. 
Nos. 
NPREC 
Designation Relative 
Magnitude 
49 Booz 
Allen
Agencies 
BOP Marshals Nationwide Estimate 
Relative 
Magnitude 
49 Booz 
Allen 
Agencies 
BOP Marshals Nationwide Estimate 
115.11 etc. PP-1 Minimal $0 $0 <$1,000 Major $600 $550 $99,000 
115.12 etc. PP-2 Negligible $62 Moderate $3,410 $62 $67,321 
115.13 etc. PP-3 Zero $0 $0 $0 $0 Negligible $0 $0 
115.14 etc. PP-4 Zero $0 $0 $0 $0 Minimal $0 $0 
115.15 etc. PP-5 Negligible $2 $0 Minimal $47 $0 $0 
115.16 etc. PP-6 Negligible $4 $0 $0 Modest $284 $0 $0 $7,200 
115.17 etc. PP-7 Zero $0 $0 $0 $0 Zero $0 $0 $0 $0 
115.21 etc. RP-1 Negligible $25 $36 $0 Minimal $1,400 $0 $0 
115.22 etc. RP-2 Negligible $75 $0 $0 Minimal $2,100 $0 $0 
115.23 etc. Zero $0 Zero 
115.31 etc. TR-1 $2 $400 
$93,665 
115.32 etc. TR-2 $0 $5 $0 $3 
115.33 etc. TR-3 Major $7,000 $166,000 Major $4,800 
$0115.34 etc. TR-4 
$71 
$0 
$34 
115.35 etc. TR-5 
  
Table 12 (continued) 
Standard 
Estimated Startup Costs Estimated Ongoing Costs 
– Reg. 
Nos. 
NPREC 
Designation Relative 
Magnitude 
49 Booz 
Allen
Agencies 
BOP Marshals Nationwide Estimate 
Relative 
Magnitude 
49 Booz 
Allen 
Agencies 
BOP Marshals Nationwide Estimate 
115.41 etc. SC-1/AP-1 
Moderate $3,500 $5 $0 $33,411 Moderate $3,800 $0 $0 $55,245 115.42 etc. SC-2/AP-2 
115.43 etc. 
115.51 etc. RE-1 Negligible $0 $0 $5 Zero $0 $0 $0 
115.52 etc. RE-2 Negligible $6 $0 $0 Minimal $105 $24 $0 
115.53 etc. RE-3 Minimal $98 $0 $0 Zero $0 $0 $0 
115.54 etc. RE-4 Zero $0 $0 $0 Zero $0 $0 $0 
115.61 etc. OR-1 
Zero $0 $0 $0 Zero $0 $0 $0 
115.62 etc. OR-2 
115.63 etc. OR-3 
115.64 etc. OR-4 
115.65 etc. OR-5 
Minimal $500 $11 $0 Negligible $0 $11 $0115.66 etc. 
115.67 
115.71 etc. IN-2 Negligible $0 $0 $0 Negligible $0 $0 $0 
115.72 etc. IN-3 $0 $0 $0 $0 
115.73 etc. IN-1 
Minimal $19 
$6 $0 
Modest $130 
$0 $0 
  
Table 12 (continued) 
Standard 
Estimated Startup Costs Estimated Ongoing Costs 
– Reg. 
Nos. 
NPREC 
Designation Relative 
Magnitude 
49 Booz 
Allen
Agencies 
BOP Marshals Nationwide Estimate 
Relative 
Magnitude 
49 Booz 
Allen 
Agencies 
BOP Marshals Nationwide Estimate 
115.76 etc. DI-1 
Negligible $0 $0 $0 Negligible $0 $0 $0 
115.77 etc. DI-2 
115.81 etc. MM-1 
Negligible $0 $0 $0 Negligible $0 $0 $0 
115.82 etc. MM-2 
115.83 etc. MM-3 Minimal $8 $1,816 $0 $803 Major $5,400 $1,816 $0 $150,317 
115.86 etc. DC-1 $456 $16 $456 $16 
115.87 etc. DC-2 Modest $371 $151 $75 Modest $374 $151 $75 
115.88 etc. DC-3 $9 $10 $9 $10 
115.89 etc. DC-4 Negligible $0 $0 $300 Negligible $0 $0 $0 
115.93 etc. AU-1 Unknown Unknown 
Table 13
 
Expected Upfront and Ongoing Compliance Costs, Nationwide, 

Per Facility and Per Inmate
 
Upfront Ongoing 
Prisons, per Facility $15,770 $33,817 
Prisons, Per Inmate $16.48 $35.35 
Jails, Per Facility $34,990 $105,978 
Jails, Per Inmate $96.00 $292.00 
Juvenile, per Facility $8,572 $27,935 
Juvenile, per Resident $227.00 $741.00 
Comm. Conf., per Person $5.36 $42.12 
Lockups, per Facility $9,843 $11,086 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis (Draft Dated January 24, 2011 (9:45am)) 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 58 of 65 
Table 14A
 
Expected Compliance Cost Projection, Nationwide, 

Per Facility Type, Per Year, 2012-2026, in Thousands of Present Value Dollars, 

Calculated Using a 3% Discount Rate
 
YEAR 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 TOTAL 
Prisons 26,304 56,407 51,621 45,864 39,563 34,127 29,439 25,394 21,905 18,896 16,299 14,060 12,128 10,462 9,025 411,494 
Jails 117,742 356,618 356,618 316,850 273,318 235,766 203,374 175,432 151,329 130,538 112,603 97,133 83,787 72,276 62,346 2, 745,729 
Juvenile 24,087 78,497 78,497 69,743 60,161 51,896 44,766 38,615 33,310 28,733 24,786 21,380 18,443 15,909 13,723 602,546 
Comm. 
Conf. 
300 2,358 2,358 2,095 1,808 1,559 1,345 1,160 1,001 863 745 642 554 478 412 17,680 
Lockups 44,913 50,583 50,583 44,943 38,768 33,441 28,847 24,884 21,465 18,516 15,972 13,777 11,885 10,252 8,843 417,672 
TOTAL 213,346 544,463 539,677 479,496 413,617 356,790 307,770 265,485 229,010 197,546 170,405 146,993 126,797 109,376 94,349 4, 195,121 
Table 14B 

Expected Compliance Cost Projection, Nationwide, 

Per Facility Type, Per Year, 2012-2026, in Thousands of Present Value Dollars, 

Calculated Using a 7% Discount Rate
 
YEAR 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 TOTAL 
Prisons 26,304 56,407 46,045 35,128 25,046 17,857 12,732 9,078 6,472 4,615 3,290 2,346 1,673 1,193 850 249,035 
Jails 117,742 356,618 356,618 272,062 193,976 138,302 98,608 70,306 50,127 35,740 25,482 18,168 12,954 9,236 6,585 1,762,524 
Juvenile 24,087 78,497 78,497 59,885 42,697 30,442 21,705 15,475 11,034 7,867 5,609 3,999 2,851 2,033 1,449 386,128 
Comm. 
Conf. 
300 2,358 2,358 1,799 1,283 915 652 465 332 236 169 120 86 61 44 11,178 
Lockups 44,913 50,583 50,583 38,590 27,514 19,617 13,987 9,972 7,110 5,069 3,614 2,577 1,837 1,310 934 278,212 
TOTAL 213,346 544,463 534,101 407,463 290,516 207,134 147,683 105,296 75,075 53,527 38,164 27,211 19,401 13,832 9,862 2,687,076 
   
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
Assumptions with Respect to On-going Costs in the Out Years. In setting forth our cost 
projections for the years after the start-up year of 2012, we have projected compliance costs as 
remaining constant in nominal dollar terms over the period of 2013-2026 without adjusting for 
inflation.  Nor have we adjusted for the possibility that over time the cost of compliance will 
decrease as correctional agencies adopt new innovations that will make their compliance more 
efficient and less costly.  In projecting costs over the out years, we have simply applied a discount 
rate of 3% or 7% to render the compliance cost into present value dollars. 
Some commenters in response to the ANPRM urged us to adopt a different approach.  As 
one commenter put it, “regulated parties do not always factor in how initial costs may decrease over 
time as they adapt to new standards.  The federal guidelines on cost-benefit analysis advise agencies 
that ‘“learning” will likely reduce the cost of regulation in future years’ in some cases, and 
recommend that agencies ‘take into account cost-saving innovations’ when regulations promote 
adaptation.”  Comments of the Institute for Policy Integrity, May 10, 2010, at 9, quoting OMB 
Circular A-4, at 37.  The same commenter urged that “to accurately estimate compliance costs, DOJ 
must . . . also anticipate adaptation to new regulations.”62/ 
While we understand the appeal of this recommended approach, we have elected not to 
pursue it at this juncture.  We simply do not have an informational basis from which to draw 
plausible assumptions as to the extent to which compliance costs will decrease over time due to 
learning or to adoption of efficiencies.  As it is, there is a certain amount of uncertainty in nationwide 
cost estimates that are extrapolated from a relatively small sample size.  We have endeavored to be 
as conservative as possible in our cost estimates, and introducing additional uncertainty into those 
estimates through assumptions as to the extent of learning will, we fear, lead into the realm of 
speculation. 
We nevertheless invite public comment on this subject and would appreciate any data from 
which plausible assumptions can be drawn as to the effect of future learning on the cost of 
compliance with the standards. 
VI. Cost Justification Analysis 
This Part analyzes the cost justification of the proposed standards.  First, we conduct a break-
even analysis to demonstrate that the costs of PREA compliance are justified by the anticipated 
benefits.  Given that the proposed PREA standards are expected to cost the correctional community 
approximately $213 million in startup costs, and that the monetary benefit of a 1% reduction in the 
62/ Comments of the Institute for Policy Integrity, May 10, 2010; see also  RICHARD L. REVESZ & MICHAEL 
A. LIVERMORE, RETAKING RATIONALITY: HOW COST-BENEFIT ANALYSIS CAN BETTER PROTECT OUR ENVIRONMENT AND 
OUR HEALTH 131 (2008) (“Cost-benefit analysis, by assuming that industry does not respond to regulations by finding 
the cheapest possible way to comply, has traditionally overestimated the costs of compliance – in some cases quite 
significantly.”). 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis (Draft Dated January 24, 2011 (9:45am)) 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 60 of 65 
  
     
  
    
   
  
   
 
      
 
 
  
   
 
 
baseline prevalence of prison rape is worth between $157 million and $239 million, the startup costs 
would be offset in the very first year of implementation, even without regard to the value of the 
nonmonetary benefits, if the standards achieved reductions of between 0.9 and 1.4 percent. The break 
even point would be even lower if the analysis amortized start up costs over the entire 15 years. 
Moreover, because the annual ongoing costs of full compliance are estimated to be  no more than 
$544 million beginning in 2013, the proposed standards would have to yield approximately a 2.3 ­
3.5% reduction from the baseline in the average annual prevalence of prison rape for the ongoing 
costs and the monetized benefits to break even, without regard to the nonmonetary benefits.63/ 
Second, we compare the estimated compliance costs associated with the Department’s 
standards against the costs associated with the most obvious alternative approach, to wit, the 
Commission’s recommended standards. We conclude that in comparison to the Commission’s 
recommendations, the Department’s proposed standards reduce the upfront costs by between 31% 
and 99% and the ongoing costs by between 44% and 99%, depending on the facility type. 
A. Breakeven Analysis 
To evaluate whether the costs of the proposed PREA standards are justified in light of their 
anticipated benefits, we conduct a breakeven analysis. A breakeven analysis first determines how 
effectively the standards would have to accomplish their goal – viz., what  percentage reduction from 
the baseline in the average annual prevalence of prison rape and sexual assault would have to ensue 
from the standards’ promulgation – in order for the costs and benefits to break even.  Then it asks 
whether it is reasonable and plausible to assume that the standards will be as effective as needed to 
break even. 
Two caveats must be offered before proceeding to the breakeven analysis.  First, for reasons 
stated in Part II, we were unable to determine the monetary benefit of a 1% reduction in prison rape 
in the lockup or community confinement settings, for the simple reason that we do not have data 
from which the prevalence of rape and sexual assault in those settings can be determined.  In order 
to present an apples-to-apples comparison for break-even analysis purposes, we remove the costs 
attributable to lockups and community confinement settings and compare the costs in the other three 
settings against the corresponding benefits.64/ 
63/ These figures differ from those depicted below in Tables 15 and 16, which include only the $491.5 
million in annual ongoing costs attributable to prisons, jails, and juvenile facilities, as opposed to the $544 million in total 
annual ongoing costs attributable to all five categories (i.e., adding lockups and community confinement facilities). As 
noted above in Part IV, we have not attempted to quantify the benefits that will result from reducing sexual abuse in 
lockups and community confinement facilities. For this reason, these figures are somewhat conservative because they 
incorporate the costs, but not the benefits, of reducing sexual abuse in lockups and community confinement facilities. 
64/ An alternative approach would be to estimate how many individual incidents of rape or sexual assaults 
(as opposed to what percentage reduction) would need to be avoided in lockups and community confinement settings 
in order for the costs affecting those facilities to break even with their monetary benefits.  This approach is fraught with 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis (Draft Dated January 24, 2011 (9:45am)) 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 61 of 65 
   
      
      
 
    
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Second, for purposes of this breakeven analysis, we assume that the costs and benefits of 
reducing prison rape are linear, at least within the range relevant to the present analysis. It may well 
be that the marginal cost of procuring an additional 1% reduction in prison rape increases as more 
and more rape is reduced.  However, we are unaware of any data showing precisely how the marginal 
cost of rape reduction is likely to change once various benchmarks of reduction have been achieved. 
For this reason, and because our estimates show that the ongoing compliance costs associated with 
the proposed standards break even with the monetary benefits when the prevalence of prison rape 
is reduced by a mere 3% from the base line level, we believe it to be appropriate to assume linear 
benefits and costs, at least within the range relevant to the analysis. We invite the public to comment 
on whether this assumption is appropriate and to provide data on how the marginal cost of rape 
reduction is likely to change once various benchmarks of rape reduction have been achieved. 
Table 15 uses lower-bound assumptions for the monetary benefit of a 1% reduction in prison 
rape (from Table 5) and shows the total percentage reduction required in each confinement setting 
in order for the upfront and annual compliance costs for that setting to be benefit-cost justified. 
Table 16 shows the same using upper-bound assumptions for monetary benefit.  
Table 15
 
Break-Even Analysis Using Lower-Bound Assumptions of Benefit Value
 
By Facility Type (Dollars are in Thousands)
 
Value of 1% 
Reduction Upfront Costs 
Breakeven 
Percentage Ongoing Costs 
Breakeven 
Percentage 
Prisons $60,000 $26,304 0.44% $56,407 0.94% 
Jails $84,500 $117,742 1.39% $356,618 4.22% 
Juvenile $12,500 $24,087 1.93% $78,497 6.28% 
Total $157,000 $168,133 1.07% $491,522 3.13% 
difficulty, given its inability to account for the complexity of sexual victimization in the manner set forth in Part II. 
Nevertheless, this approach may offer some general insight into how successful the standards would need to be in the 
lockup and community confinement settings in order for the costs incurred in those settings to be justified by the 
corresponding benefits.  Using the figures from Table 4, which provide that the monetary value of an avoided rape of 
an adult prisoner involving force or threat of force is $200,000 to $300,000, the estimated nationwide startup costs for 
community confinement facilities ($300,000) break even if one to two rapes is avoided, while the estimated nationwide 
annual costs ($2.4 million) break even if eight to twelve rapes are avoided each year.  For lockups, the estimated 
nationwide startup costs ($45 million) break even when between 150 and 225 forcible adult rapes are avoided; the 
estimated nationwide ongoing costs ($51 million) break even when between 170 and 250 forcible adult rapes are avoided. 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis (Draft Dated January 24, 2011 (9:45am)) 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 62 of 65 
  
 
 
  
 
 
   
  
   
 
 
   
Table 16
 
Break-Even Analysis Using Upper-Bound Assumptions of Benefit Value
 
By Facility Type (Dollars are in Thousands)
 
Value of 1% 
Reduction Upfront Costs 
Breakeven 
Percentage Ongoing Costs 
Breakeven 
Percentage 
Prisons $90,000 $26,304 0.29% $56,407 0.63% 
Jails $126,500 $117,742 0.93% $356,618 2.82% 
Juvenile $22,500 $24,087 1.07% $78,497 3.49% 
Total $239,000 $168,133 0.70% $491,522 2.06% 
As these tables make clear, even without reference to the nonmonetary benefits of avoiding 
prison rape and sexual assault (which as we have seen are numerous, and of considerable 
importance) the Department’s proposed standards need only be very modestly effective in order for 
the monetized benefits to offset the anticipated compliance costs both as a whole and with respect 
to each facility type to which they apply. 
With respect to prisons, a mere 0.63%-0.94% decrease from the baseline in the average 
annual prevalence of prison rape and sexual assault would result in the monetized benefits of the 
standards breaking even with their ongoing costs. Such a decrease from the baseline would mean 
an average of 165-246 fewer forcible rapes per year, 116-173 fewer nonconsensual sexual acts 
involving pressure or coercion, 120-179 fewer abusive sexual contacts, and 175-261 fewer incidents 
of willing sex with staff.  Even in the jail context, a 0.93% to 1.39% decrease from the baseline in 
the prevalence of rape would justify the startup costs, while a 2.82%-4.22% decrease would justify 
the ongoing costs.  For jails, a 4.22% decrease from the baseline in the average annual prevalence 
would translate to 1654 fewer forcible rapes per year, 625 fewer nonconsensual sexual acts involving 
pressure or coercion, 971 fewer abusive sexual contacts, and 1312 fewer incidents of willing sex 
with staff. 
We believe that all of these expectations as to the effectiveness of the standards are 
reasonable and plausible. When one properly takes into account the importance of the nonmonetary 
benefits, the effectiveness required to reach the break-even point falls further. 
B. Consideration/evaluation of alternatives 
In developing the proposed PREA standards, the Department considered a wide range of 
alternative approaches.  The most obvious set of alternatives that the Department considered are the 
standards recommended by the Commission.  As elaborated above in the discussion of specific 
standards, many of the Commission’s recommended standards would, if implemented, have a 
compliance cost significantly greater than do the Department’s proposed standards.  Table 17 shows 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis (Draft Dated January 24, 2011 (9:45am)) 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 63 of 65 
  
 
 
 
 
 
the Department’s internal assessment, based on analyses conducted by Booz Allen, of the total 
projected upfront and ongoing costs of the Commission’s recommended standards, as compared to 
the Department’s proposals: 
Table 17
 
Comparison of Projected Nationwide Upfront and Ongoing Costs
 
Commission Recommendations v. Department Proposed Standards
 
in Thousands of Dollars
 
Upfront Costs Ongoing Costs 
NPREC DOJ Difference NPREC DOJ Difference 
Prisons $2,778,770 $26,304 99.05% $733,166 $56,407 92.31% 
Jails $3,151,806 $117,742 96.26% $1,955,154 $356,618 81.76% 
Juvenile $475,562 $24,087 94.94% $139,417 $78,497 43.70% 
Comm. 
Conf. $20,944 $300 98.57% $233,735 $2,358 98.99% 
Lockups $65,093 $44,913 31.00% $2,240,096 $50,583 97.74% 
Total $6,492,175 $213,346 96.71% $5,301,568 $544,463 89.73% 
As is evident from Table 17, the Commission’s recommended standards would cost an 
estimated $6.5 billion in upfront costs plus $5.3 billion in annual costs.  In break-even terms, this 
would require a 27% reduction from the baseline in any given year in the prevalence of prison rape 
and sexual assault to break-even with the startup costs, and a 22% reduction from the baseline in the 
average annual prevalence of prison rape to break-even with the ongoing costs.  The Department’s 
proposed standards reduced the upfront cost of the Commission’s proposed standard by between 
31% and 99% and the ongoing cost by between 44% and 99%, depending on the facility type.  
The Department also has alternatives other than the Commission’s recommended standards. 
For example, we could mandate that certain standards apply to one type of facility but not others, or 
we could vary certain standards based on the size of the facility (as we have done for 115.11 for 
example). While the Department believes that its proposed standards are the most cost effective 
means of combating prison rape, we invite public comment as to whether alternative approaches 
might be worth considering from a cost-benefit point of view. 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis (Draft Dated January 24, 2011 (9:45am)) 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 64 of 65 
  
 
 
VII. Conclusions 
In sum, the Department believes that the proposed PREA standards are justified from the 
point of view of break-even analysis, even when the substantial nonmonetary benefits of avoiding 
prison rape are left out of the analysis.  The standards are also justified when compared to the 
compliance costs that would be associated with the Commission’s recommended standards. 
We caution, however, that the conclusions laid out in this IRIA are preliminary ones that set 
forth our current estimates.  During the comment period, and in advance of preparing the final rules 
for publication, we intend to subject our cost and benefit estimates to additional analysis.  Moreover, 
the Department actively seeks the participation of stakeholders in assessing the regulatory impact 
of its proposed standards and invites public comment on any aspects of this IRIA, both as to the 
societal benefits of adopting the standards and as to the costs of compliance.  In the body of the 
Notice of Proposed Rulemaking we have drawn attention to a number of specific questions, which 
are not meant to limit any other comments that any interested person may wish to submit. 
Initial Regulatory Impact Analysis (Draft Dated January 24, 2011 (9:45am)) 
Department of Justice NPRM for PREA Standards 
Page 65 of 65 
