DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION 
FEDERAL RAILROAD ADMINISTRATION 
49 CFR PARTS 229, 234, 235, AND 236 
[DOCKET NO. FRA-2006-0132, NOTICE NO. 1] 
RIN 2130-AC03 
POSITIVE TRAIN CONTROL SYSTEMS 
 
ECONOMIC ANALYSIS  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Frank D Roskind 
Senior Industry Economist 
Office of Safety Analysis 
202 302 9704 
July 10, 2009 
 Table of Contents 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY........................................................................................ ii 
 
INTRODUCTION.......................................................................................................1 
 
BACKGROUND.........................................................................................................2 
 
THE NEED FOR POSITIVE TRAIN CONTROL TECHNOLOGY.......................................... 2 
EARLIER EFFORTS TO ENCOURAGE VOLUNTARY PTC IMPLEMENTATION ............ 3 
TECHNOLOGY ADOPTED BEFORE RSIA08......................................................................... 5 
THE RAIL SAFETY IMPROVEMENT ACT OF 2008 ............................................................. 8 
RSAC............................................................................................................................................ 9 
PTC WORKING GROUP.......................................................................................................... 10 
USE OF PERFORMANCE STANDARDS............................................................................... 12 
SECTION-BY-SECTION ANALYSIS ....................................................................15 
GENERAL COSTS OF PTC ................................................................................. 112 
PTC BENEFITS ..................................................................................................... 132 
ACCIDENT REDUCTION BENEFITS .................................................................................. 132 
HEADLINE ACCIDENTS ...................................................................................................... 135 
TOTAL RAILROAD SAFETY BENEFITS FROM PTC PREVENTABLE ACCIDENTS .. 140 
BUSINESS BENEFITS ........................................................................................................... 141 
ADDITIONAL SOCIETAL BENEFITS ................................................................................. 143 
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN BENEFITS AND COSTS, AND TIMING OF 
IMPLEMENTATION ............................................................................................ 144 
 
APPENDIX A – BUSINESS BENEFITS...........................................................    A-1 
 ii
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 
The accompanying proposed rule provides new performance standards for the implementation 
and operation of Positive Train Control (PTC) systems as mandated by the Railroad Safety 
Improvement Act of 2008 (RSIA08) and as otherwise voluntarily applied.  The proposed rule also 
details the process and identifies the documents that railroads and operators of passenger trains 
are to utilize and incorporate in their PTC implementation plans required by RSIA08.  The 
proposal also details the process and procedure for obtaining FRA approval of such plans. 
 
FRA is required to analyze the proposed rule under Executive Order 12866.  FRA=s analysis 
presents a 20-year analysis of the costs and benefits associated with FRA=s proposed rule, using 
both 7 percent and 3 percent discount rates, including net present value (PV) and annualized 
value, which is the annuity required at the discount rate to yield the total over the analysis period. 
 It also presents two types of sensitivity analyses.  The first is associated with varying cost 
assumptions used for estimating PTC implementation costs. The second takes into account 
potential business benefits from realizing service efficiencies and related additional societal 
benefits from environmental attainment and an overall reduction in transportation risk from modal 
diversion.   
 
Safety benefits include: 
 
 Casualties (Value of a Statistical Life= $6 Million)   
 Equipment Damage 
 Track & Right-of-Way Damage 
 Damage Off Right-of-Way 
 Hazardous Material Cleanup 
 Evacuation (e.g., Hazmat) 
 Loss of Lading 
 Wreck Clearing 
 Train Delays 
 
 
The 20-year total cost estimates are $10,008 million (PV, 7%) and $13,849 million (PV, 3%).  
Annualized costs are $945 million (PV, 7%) and $931 million (PV, 3%).  Using high-cost 
assumptions, the 20-year total cost estimates would be $17,122 million (PV, 7%) and $23,761 
million (PV, 3%).  Using low-cost assumptions, the 20-year cost estimates would be $7,085 
million (PV, 7%) and $9,837 million (PV, 3%).  Twenty-year railroad safety (railroad accident 
reduction) benefit estimates associated with implementation of the proposed rule are $608 million 
(PV, 7%) and $931 million (PV, 3%).  Approximately one third of the accident prevention 
benefits would accrue from avoided fatalities.  Annualized benefits are $57 million (PV, 7%), and 
$63 million (PV, 3%).  The costs would make the rule significant, and the costs would far exceed 
the benefits, but FRA is constrained by the requirements of RSIA08, which does not give FRA 
any latitude to avoid promulgating the proposed rule, or one which achieves the same ends.  
 iii
 
   Table E-1, Summary of Costs and benefits 
Twenty Year Discounted Values     
      
Discount Rate 3.00% 7.00% 
Costs     
Central Office and Development  $283,025,904 $263,232,675 
Wayside Equipment $3,109,098,494 $2,586,453,456 
On-Board Equipment $1,643,839,209 $1,416,706,349 
Maintenance $8,812,624,111 $5,741,220,231 
Total $13,848,587,717 $10,007,612,712 
      
Railroad Safety Benefits $931,253,681 $607,711,640 
 
FRA has taken several steps to avoid triggering unnecessary costs in the proposed rule.  For 
instance, FRA is not proposing to require use of separate monitoring of switch position in signal 
territory or that the system be designed to determine the position of the end of the train.  FRA also 
minimized costs by proposing a requirement to monitor derails protecting the mainline, but 
limiting it to derails connected to the signal system; and by proposing a requirement to monitor 
hazard detectors protecting the mainline, but limiting it to hazard detectors connected to the signal 
system.  FRA also minimized costs related to diamond crossings, where a PTC equipped railroad 
crosses a non-PTC equipped railroad at grade; included exceptions to main track for passenger 
train operations, and proposed provisions that would permit some Class III railroad operation of 
trains not equipped with PTC over Class I freight lines equipped with PTC.  All commuter 
operations connected to the general railroad system of transportation, which include all current 
commuter rail operations, would be subject to the proposed rule.  Note that Port Authority Trans 
Hudson Railroad (PATH) is not physically connected to the general freight system yet is 
considered a commuter railroad for all purposes.  PATH formerly was part of the general freight 
system and remains under FRA safety jurisdiction.  Rapid transit systems, such as the Washington 
Metro Area Transit Authority (WMATA) and New York City Transit Authority (NYCTA), would 
not be impacted. 
 
Some of the costs of PTC implementation, operation, and maintenance may be offset by business 
benefits, especially in the long run, although there is uncertainty regarding the timing and level of 
those benefits.  Economic and technical feasibility of the necessary system refinements and 
modifications to yield the potential business benefits has not yet been demonstrated. 
Nevertheless, FRA believes that there is opportunity for significant business benefits to accrue 
several years after implementation once the systems have been refined to the degree necessary.  
Thus, FRA conducted a sensitivity analysis of potential business benefits from fuel savings 
attributable to train pacing, precision dispatch, and capacity enhancement.   
 
Developing technology and rising fuel costs have caused the rail supply industry and the railroads 
to focus on additional means of conserving diesel fuel while minimizing in-train forces that can 
lead to derailments and delays from train separations (usually broken coupler knuckles).  Further 
integrating this technology with PTC communications platforms and traffic planning capability 
could permit transmittal of “train pacing” information to the locomotive cab in order to conserve 
 iv
fuel.  The diesel fuel use for road operations on the Class I railroads is approximately 3.5 billion 
gallons annually, which is $8.75 billion at $2.50 per gallon.  If PTC helps to potentiate the growth 
and effective use of train pacing, fuel savings of 5% ($437,500,000 annually) or greater could 
very likely be achieved. Clearly, if the railroads are able to conserve use of fuel, they will also 
reduce emissions and contribute to environmental attainment, even before modal diversion 
occurs. 
 
The improvements in dispatch and capacity have further implications.  With those improvements 
railroads could improve the reliability of shipment arrival time, and thus dramatically increase the 
value of rail transportation to shippers, who in turn would divert certain shipments from highway 
to rail.  Such diversion would yield greater overall transportation safety benefit since railroads 
have much lower accident risk than highways, on a point-to-point ton-mile basis.   
 
At present, the PTC systems contemplated by the railroads, with the possible exception of one, 
would not increase capacity, at least not for some time.  If the locomotive braking algorithms 
need to be made more conservative in order to ensure that trains do not exceed the limits of their 
authority, PTC may actually decrease rail capacity where applied in the early years.  Further 
investment would be required to bring about the synergy that would result in capacity gains.  
 
Diversion could result in very significant annual highway safety benefits.  Of course, these 
benefits require that the productivity enhancing systems be added to PTC.  Modal diversion 
would also yield environmental benefits.  Modal diversion is highly sensitive to service quality. 
The sensitivity analysis performed by FRA indicates that realization of business benefits could 
yield benefits sufficient to close the gap between PTC implementation costs and rail accident 
reduction benefits within the first 20 years of the rule applying a 3% discount rate and by year 25 
of the rule, applying a discount rate of 7%.  The precise partition of business and societal benefits 
cannot be estimated with any certainty. 
 
FRA recognizes that the likelihood of business benefits is uncertain and that the cost-to-benefit 
comparison of this rule, excluding any business benefits, is not favorable.  However, FRA has 
taken measures to minimize the rule’s adverse impacts and to provide as much flexibility as FRA 
is authorized to grant under RSIA08. 
 
1 
INTRODUCTION 
 
The accompanying proposed rule provides new performance standards for the implementation 
and operation of Positive Train Control (PTC) systems as mandated by RSIA08 and as otherwise 
voluntarily applied.  The proposed rule also details the process and identifies the documents that 
railroads and operators of passenger trains are to utilize and incorporate in their PTC 
implementation plans required by the Railroad Safety Improvement Act of 2008. 104, Pub. L. 
110-432, 122 Stat. 4848, 4856, (Oct. 16, 2008) (codified at 49 U.S.C. 20157) (hereinafter 
RSIA08).  The proposal also details the process and procedure for obtaining FRA approval of 
such plans. 
  
FRA began the process of developing a proposed rule after RSIA08 was signed into law on 
October 16, 2008.  While developing the proposed rule, FRA has applied to the rule the 
performance-based principles embodied in existing subpart H of part 236 to identify and remedy 
any weaknesses discovered in the subpart H regulatory approach, while exploiting lessons learned 
from products developed under subpart H.  FRA has continued to make performance based safety 
decisions while supporting railroads in their development and implementation of PTC system 
technologies. 
 
Development of the proposed rule was enhanced with the participation of the Railroad Safety 
Advisory Committee (RSAC), which tasked a PTC Working Group to provide advice regarding 
development of implementing regulations for PTC systems and their deployment that are required 
under RSIA08.  The PTC Working Group made a number of consensus recommendations, which 
have been identified and included in this proposed rule.  The preamble discusses the statutory 
background, the regulatory background, the RSAC proceedings, the alternatives considered and 
the rationale for the option selected, the proceedings to date, as well as the comments and 
conclusions on general issues.  Other comments and resolutions are discussed within the 
corresponding section-by-section analysis. 
 
 
 
2 
BACKGROUND 
 
THE NEED FOR POSITIVE TRAIN CONTROL TECHNOLOGY 
 
Since the early 1920s, systems have been in use that can intervene in train operations by warning 
crews or causing trains to stop if they are not being operated safely because of inattention, 
misinterpretation of wayside signal indications, or incapacitation of the crew.  Pursuant to orders 
of the Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC)Cwhose safety regulatory activities were later 
transferred to the Federal Railroad Administration (FRA) when the FRA was established in 
1967Ccab signal systems, automatic train control, and automatic train stop systems were 
deployed on a significant portion of the national rail system to supplement and enforce the 
indications of wayside signals and operating speed limitations.  However, these systems were 
expensive to install and maintain, and with the decline of intercity passenger service following the 
Second World War, the ICC allowed many of these systems to be discontinued.  During this 
period railroads were heavily regulated with respect to rates and service responsibilities.  The 
development of the Interstate Highway System and other factors led to reductions in the railroads= 
revenues without regulatory relief, leading to bankruptcies, railroad mergers, and eventual 
abandonment of many rail lines.  Consequently, railroad managers focused on fiscal survival and 
investments in expensive relay-based train control technology were economically out of reach.  
The removal of these train control systems, which had never been pervasively installed, permitted 
train collisions to continue, notwithstanding enforcement of railroad operating rules designed to 
prevent them.  
 
As early as 1970, following its investigation of the August 20, 1969, head-on collision of two 
Penn Central Commuter trains near Darien, Connecticut, in which 4 people were killed and 45 
people were injured, the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) asked the FRA to study 
the feasibility of requiring a form of automatic train control system to protect against operator 
error and prevent train collisions. Following the Darien accident, the Safety Board continued to 
investigate one railroad accident after another caused by human error. During the next two 
decades, the Board issued a number of safety recommendations asking for train control measures. 
Following its investigation of the May 7, 1986, rear-end collision involving a Boston and Maine 
Corporation commuter train and a Conrail freight train in which 153 people were injured, the 
Safety Board asked the FRA to promulgate standards to require the installation and operation of a 
train control system that would provide for positive train separation (R-87-16).  When the NTSB 
first established its Most Wanted List of Transportation Safety Improvements in 1990, the issue 
of Positive Train Separation was among the improvements listed, and it remained on the list until 
just after enactment of the RSIA.  The NTSB continues to follow the progress of implementation 
closely and participated through staff in the PTC Working Group deliberations.    
 
Meanwhile, enactment of the Staggers Rail Act of 1980 signaled a shift in public policy that 
permitted the railroads to shed unprofitable lines, largely replace published Atariffs@ with 
appropriately priced contract rates, and generally respond to marketplace realities, which 
increasingly demanded flexible service options responsive to customer needs.  The advent of 
microprocessor-based electronic control systems and digital data radio technology during the 
 
3 
mid-1980s led the freight railroad industry, through the Association of American Railroads 
(AAR) and the Railway Association of Canada, to explore the development of Advanced Train 
Control Systems (ATCS).  With broad participation by suppliers, railroads, and the FRA, detailed 
specifications were developed for a multi-level Aopen@ architecture that would permit 
participation by many suppliers while ensuring that systems deployed on various railroads would 
work in harmony as trains crossed corporate boundaries.  ATCS was intended to serve a variety 
of business purposes, in addition to enhancing the safety of train operations. 
 
Pilot versions of ATCS and a similar system known as Advanced Railroad Electronic Systems 
(ARES) were tested relatively successfully, but the systems were never deployed on a wide scale 
primarily due to cost.  However, sub-elements of these systems were employed for various 
purposes, particularly for replacement of pole lines associated with signal systems. 
 
Collisions, derailments, and incursions into work zones used by roadway workers continued as a 
result of the absence of effective enforcement systems designed to compensate for effects of 
fatigue and other human factors.  Renewed emphasis on rules compliance and federal regulatory 
initiatives, including rules for control of alcohol and drug use in railroad operations, operating 
rules testing of rail employees, requirements for qualification and certification of locomotive 
engineers, and negotiated rules for roadway worker protection led to some reduction in risk, but 
the lack of an effective collision avoidance system still allowed the continued occurrence of 
accidents, some involving tragic losses of life and significant property damage. 
 
EARLIER EFFORTS TO ENCOURAGE VOLUNTARY PTC IMPLEMENTATION 
 
As the NTSB continued to highlight the opportunities for accident prevention associated with 
emerging train control technology through its investigations and findings, the Congress showed 
increasing interest, mandating three separate reports over the period of a decade.  In 1994, the 
FRA reported to the Congress on this problem, calling for implementation of an action plan to 
deploy PTC systems (Railroad Communications and Train Control, July 1994 (hereinafter A1994 
Report@)).  The 1994 Report forecasted substantial benefits of advanced train control technology 
to support a variety of business and safety purposes, but noted that an immediate regulatory 
mandate for PTC could not be currently justified based upon normal cost-benefit principals 
relying on direct safety benefits.  The report outlined an aggressive Action Plan implementing a 
public-private sector partnership to explore technology potential, deploy systems for 
demonstration, and structure a regulatory framework to support emerging PTC initiatives. 
 
Following through on the 1994 Report, FRA committed approximately $40 million through the 
Next Generation High Speed Rail Program and the Research and Development Program to 
support development, testing, and deployment of PTC prototype systems in the Pacific 
Northwest, Michigan, Illinois, Alaska, and the Eastern railroads.  As called for in the Action Plan, 
FRA also initiated a comprehensive effort to structure an appropriate regulatory framework for 
facilitating voluntary implementation of PTC and for evaluating future safety needs and 
opportunities. 
 
 
4 
In September of 1997, the Federal Railroad Administrator asked the RSAC to address the issue of 
Positive Train Control.  The RSAC accepted three tasks: Standards for New Train Control 
Systems (Task 1997-06), Positive Train Control Systems-Implementation Issues (Task 1997-05) 
and Positive Train Control Systems-Technologies, Definitions, and Capabilities (Task 1997-04)   
The PTC Working Group was established, comprised of representatives of labor organizations, 
suppliers, passenger and freight railroads, other federal agencies, and interested state departments 
of transportation.  The PTC Working Group was supported by the FRA counsel and staff, analysts 
from the Volpe National Transportation Systems Center, and advisors from the NTSB staff.  
 
In 1999, the PTC Working Group provided to the Federal Railroad Administrator a consensus 
report (A1999 Report@) with an indication that it would be continuing its efforts.  The report 
defined the PTC core functions to include: prevention of train-to-train collisions (positive train 
separation); enforcement of speed restrictions, including civil engineering restrictions (curves, 
bridges, etc.) and temporary slow orders; and protection for roadway workers and their equipment 
operating under specific authorities.  The PTC Working Group identified additional safety 
functions that might be included in some PTC architectures: provide warning of on-track 
equipment operating outside the limits of authority; receive and act upon hazard information, 
when available, in a more timely or more secure manner (e.g., compromised bridge integrity, 
wayside detector data); and provide for future capability by generating data for transfer to 
highway users to enhance warning at highway-rail grade crossings.  The PTC Working Group 
stressed that efforts to enhance highway-rail grade crossing safety must recognize the train=s 
necessary right of way at grade crossings and that it is important that warning systems employed 
at highway-rail grade crossings be highly reliable and Afail-safe@ in their design.   
 
As the PTC Working Group=s work continued, other collaborative efforts, including development 
of Passenger Equipment Safety Standards (including private standards through the American 
Public Transit Association), Passenger Train Emergency Preparedness rules, and proposals for 
improving locomotive crashworthiness (including improved fuel tank standards) have targeted 
reduction in collision and derailment consequences. 
 
In 2003, in light of technological advances and potential increased cost and system savings 
related to prioritized deployment of these systems, the Appropriations Committees of the 
Congress requested FRA to update the costs and benefits for the deployment of PTC and related 
systems.  As requested, FRA carried out a detailed analysis that was filed in August of 2004 
(A2004 Report@), which indicated that under one set of highly controversial assumptions, 
substantial public benefits would likely flow from the installation of PTC systems on the railroad 
system.  Further, the total amount of these benefits was subject to considerable controversy.  
While many of the other findings of the 2004 Report were disputed, there was no data submitted 
to challenge the 2004 Report finding that reaffirmed earlier conclusions that the safety benefits 
alone of PTC systems were relatively small in comparison to the large capital and maintenance 
costs.  Accordingly, FRA continued to believe that an immediate regulatory mandate for 
widespread PTC implementation could not be justified based upon normal cost-benefit principles 
relying on direct railroad safety benefits. 
 
 
5 
Despite the economic infeasibility of PTC based on safety benefits alone, as outlined in the 1994, 
1999, and 2004 Reports, FRA continued with regulatory and other efforts to facilitate and 
encourage the voluntary installation of PTC systems.  As part of the High Speed Rail Initiative, 
and in conjunction with the National Railroad Passenger Corporation (Amtrak), the Association 
of American Railroads (AAR), the State of Illinois, and the Union Pacific Railroad Company 
(UP), FRA created the North American Joint Positive Train Control (NAJPTC) Program, which 
set out to describe a single standardized open source PTC architecture and associated standards.  
UP=s line between Springfield and Mazonia, Illinois, was selected to initial installation of a train 
control system to support Amtrak operations up to 110 mph, and the system was installed and 
tested on portions of that line.  Although the system did not prove viable as then conceived, the 
project hastened the development of PTC technology that was subsequently employed in other 
projects.  Promised standards for interoperability of PTC systems also proved elusive. 
 
In addition to financially supporting the NAJPTC Program, FRA continued to work with the rail 
carriers, rail labor, and suppliers on regulatory reforms to facilitate voluntary PTC 
implementation.  The regulatory reform effort culminated when FRA issued a final rule on March 
7, 2005, establishing a technology neutral safety-based performance standard for processor-based 
signal and train control systems.  This new regulation, codified as subpart H to part 236 of title 49 
of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), was carefully crafted to encourage the voluntary 
implementation and operation of processor-based signal and train control systems without 
impairing technological development.  70. Fed. Reg. 11052 (Mar. 7, 2005).   
 
FRA intended for the final rule--developed in close cooperation with rail management, rail labor, 
and suppliers--to further facilitate individual railroad efforts to voluntarily develop and deploy 
cost effective PTC technologies that would make system-wide deployment more economically 
viable.  It also appeared very possible that major railroads would elect to make voluntary 
investments in PTC to enhance safety, improve service quality and foster efficiency (e.g., better 
asset utilization, reduced fuel use through train pacing).    
 
TECHNOLOGY ADOPTED BEFORE RSIA08 
 
While FRA and RSAC worked to develop consensus on the regulations that would become 
subpart H, the railroads continued with PTC prototype development.  The technology neutral, 
performance-based regulatory process established by subpart H proved to be very successful in 
facilitating the development of other PTC implementation approaches. Although the railroads 
prototype development efforts were generally technically successful and offered significant 
improvements in safety, costs of nationwide deployment continued to be untenable.  Information 
gained from prototype efforts did little to reduce the estimated costs for widespread 
implementation of the core PTC safety functions on the nation=s railroads.   
 
Working under subpart H, UP, CSX Transportation, Inc. (CSX), the BNSF Railway Company 
(BNSF), and the Norfolk Southern Corporation (NS) undertook more aggressive design and 
implementation work.  The new subpart H regulatory approach also made it feasible for smaller 
railroads such as the Alaska Railroad and the Ohio Central Railroad to begin voluntary design and 
 
6 
implementation work on PTC systems that best suited their needs.  FRA provided, and continues 
to provide, technical assistance and guidance regarding regulatory compliance to enable the 
railroads to more effectively design, install, and test their respective systems.   
 
In December 2006, FRA approved the initial version of the Electronic Train Management System 
(ETMS) product for deployment on 35 of BNSF=s subdivisions (AETMS I Configuration@) 
comprising single track territory which was either non-signaled or equipped with traffic control 
systems.  In a separate proceeding, FRA agreed that ETMS could be installed in lieu of restoring 
a block signal system on a line for which discontinuance had been authorized followed by a 
significant increase in traffic.  During the same period BNSF successfully demonstrated a Switch 
Point Monitoring System (SPMS)1 and Track Integrity Warning System (TIWS)2, a system that 
electronically reports to the railroad=s central dispatching office or the crew of an approaching 
train if there are any breaks in the rail that might lead to derailmentsCboth of which FRA believes 
are technologies that help to reduce risk in non-signaled territory and that are forward-compatible 
with PTC.  To be forward-compatible, not to be confused with the similar concept of 
extensibility, a system must be able to gracefully accept input intended for use in later system 
versions.  The introduction of a forward compatible technology implies that old devices can partly 
understand data generated by new devices.  The concept can be applied to electrical interfaces, 
telecommunication signals, data communication protocols, file formats, and computer 
programming languages.  A standard supports forward compatibility if older product versions can 
receive, read, view, play or execute the new standard. 
 
In addition to scheduling the installation of the ETMS I Configuration as capital funding became 
available, BNSF voluntarily undertook the design and testing of complementary versions of 
ETMS that would support BNSF operations on more complex track configurations, at higher 
allowable train speeds, and with additional types of rail traffic.  Meanwhile, CSXT was in the 
process of redesigning and relocating the test bed for it its Communications Based Train 
Management (CBTM) system, which it has tested for several years, and UP and NS were working 
on similar systems using vital on-board processing.   
 
As congressional consideration of legislation that resulted in the RSIA commenced, all four major 
railroads had settled on the core technology developed for them by Wabtec Railway Electronics.  
As the legislation progressed, the railroads and Wabtec worked toward greater commonality in 
the basic functioning of the on-board system with a view toward interoperability.  Accordingly, 
ETMS is now a generic architectural description of one type of PTC system.  Examples of ETMS 
include the non-vital PTC systems of BNSF=s ETMS I and ETMS II, CSXT=s Communications 
                                                 
1 Switch Point Monitoring Systems (SPMS) are systems that contain devices attached to switches 
that electronically report the position of the switches to the railroads central dispatching office 
and/or the crew of an approaching train. 
2 Track Integrity Warning Systems (TWIS) are systems that electronically report to the railroad=s 
central dispatching office and/or the crew of an approaching train if there are any breaks in the 
rail that might lead to derailments. 
 
7 
CBTM UP=s Vital Train Management System (VTMS) and NS=s Optimized Train Control (OTC). 
 Further work is been undertaken by BNSF to further the capability of ETMS by integrating 
Amtrak operations (ETMS III).  For a description of system enhancements planned by BNSF as 
of the Product Safety Plan filing, see FRA Docket No. 2006-23687, Document 0017, at pp. 40-43 
(at Regulations.gov). 
 
While the freight railroads= efforts for developing and installing PTC systems progressed over a 
relatively long period of time, starting with demonstrations of ATCS and ARES in the late 1980s 
and culminating in the initial Product Safety Plan approval in December of 2006, the National 
Railroad Passenger Corporation (Amtrak) demonstrated its ability to turn on revenue-quality PTC 
systems on its own railroad in support of high speed rail.   
 
Beginning in the early 1990=s, Amtrak developed plans for enhanced high speed service on the 
Northeast Corridor (NEC), which included electrification and other improvements between New 
Haven and Boston and introduction of the Acela trainsets as the premium service from 
Washington to New York and New York to Boston.  In connection with these improvements, 
which support train speeds up to 150 mph, Amtrak undertook to install the Advanced Civil Speed 
Enforcement System (ACSES) as a supplement to existing cab signals and automatic train control 
(speed control).  Together, these systems deliver PTC core functionalities.  In support of this 
effort, FRA issued an order for the installation of the system, which required all passenger and 
freight operators in the New Haven-Boston segment to equip their locomotives with ACSES (63 
FR 39343; July 22, 1998).  ACSES was installed between 2000 and 2002, and has functioned 
successfully between New Haven and Boston, and on selected high speed segments between 
Washington and New York for a number of years. 
 
Amtrak voluntarily began development of an architecturally different PTC system, the 
Incremental Train Control System (ITCS), for installation on its Michigan Line.  Amtrak 
developed and installed ITCS under waivers from specific sections of 49 CFR part 236, subparts 
A through G, granted by FRA.  ITCS was applied to tenant NS locomotives as well as Amtrak 
locomotives traversing the route.  Highway-rail grade crossings on the route were fitted with 
ITCS units to pre-start the warning systems for high-speed trains and to monitor crossing warning 
system health in real time.  The system was tested extensively in the field for safety and 
reliability, and it was put in revenue service in 2001.  As experience was gained, FRA authorized 
increases in speed to 95 mph; and FRA is currently awaiting final results of an independent 
assessment of verification and validation for the system with a view toward authorizing 
operations at the design speed of 110 mph. 
 
Despite these successes, the widespread deployment of these various train control systems, 
particularly on the general freight system, remained very much constrained by prohibitive capital 
costs.  While the railroads were committed to installing these new systems to enhance the safety 
afforded to the public and their employees, the railroad=s actual widespread implementation 
remained forestalled due to an inability to generate sufficient funding for these new projects in 
excess of the capital expenditures necessary to cover the ongoing operating and maintenance 
 
8 
costs.  Accordingly, the railroads continued to plan very slow deployments of PTC system 
technologies. 
 
THE RAIL SAFETY IMPROVEMENT ACT OF 2008 
 
On May 1, 2007, the House of Representatives introduced H.R. 2095, which would, among other 
things, mandate the implementation and use of PTC systems.  The bill passed the House on 
October 17, 2007, and passed the Senate after amendment on August 1, 2008.  On September 24, 
2008, the House concurred with the Senate amendment with another amendment pursuant to H. 
Res. 1492, and on October 1, 2008, the Senate concurred with the House amendment.  When 
considering the House=s amendment on October 1, various Senators made statements referencing 
earlier train accidents that were PTC-preventable.  For instance, Senator Lautenberg (NJ) took 
notice of the collision at Graniteville, South Carolina in 2005, and Senators Lautenberg, 
Hutchinson (TX), Boxer (CA), Levin (MI), and Carper (DE) took notice of an accident at 
Chatsworth, California, on September 12, 2008.  According to Senator Levin, federal 
investigators have said that a collision warning system could have prevented that crash and the 
subject legislation would require that new technology to prevent crashes be installed in high risk 
tracks.  Senators Carper and Boxer made similar statements, indicating that PTC systems are 
designed to prevent train derailments and collisions, like the one in Chatsworth. Congressional 
Record 10283-10290, Oct. 1, 2008. 
 
The Graniteville accident referenced by Senator Lautenberg was an early morning collision 
between two NS trains in non-signal (dark) territory near the Avondale Mills Textile plant.  One 
of the trainsCwhich was transporting chlorine gas, sodium hydroxide, and cresolCapproached an 
improperly lined hand-operated switch.  As the train diverged through the switch, it ran onto the 
siding track where it collided with a parked train.  Various tank cars ruptured, releasing at least 90 
tons of chlorine gas.  Nine people died due to chlorine inhalation, and at least 250 people were 
treated for chlorine exposure.  In addition, 5,400 residents within a mile of the crash site were 
forced to evacuate for nearly two weeks while hazardous materials (hazmat) teams and cleanup 
crews decontaminated the area. 
 
The Chatsworth train collision occurred on the afternoon of September 12, 2008, when a Union 
Pacific freight train and a Metrolink commuter train collided head-on a single main track 
equipped with a Traffic Control System (TCS) in the Chatsworth district of Los Angeles, 
California.  Although NTSB has not yet released its final report, evidence summarized at the 
NTSB=s public hearing suggested that the Metrolink passenger train operated past a signal 
displaying a stop indication and entered a section of single track where the opposing UP freight 
train was operating on a signal indication permitting it to proceed over a switch and into a siding 
(after which the switch would have been lined for the Metrolink train to proceed).  As a 
consequence of the accident, 25 people died and over 130 more were seriously injured.  
 
Prior to the accidents in Graniteville and Chatsworth, the railroads= slow incremental deployment 
of PTC technologiesCwhile not uniformly agreed upon by the railroads, FRA, and NTSBCwas  
generally deemed acceptable by them in view of the tremendous costs involved.  Partially as a 
 
9 
consequence and severity of these very public accidents, coupled with a series of other less 
publicized accidents, Congress passed the RSIA08 into law on October 16, 2008, marking a 
public policy decision that, despite the implementation costs, railroad employee and general 
public safety warranted mandatory and accelerated installation and operation of PTC systems. 
 
As immediately relevant to this rulemaking, the RSIA08 requires the installation and operation of 
PTC systems on all main lines, meaning all intercity passenger and commuter railroad linesCwith 
limited exceptions entrusted to FRACand on freight-only lines when they are owned by Class I 
railroads, carrying at least 5 million gross tons of freight annually, and carrying any amount of 
toxic by inhalation (TIH) materials. 
 
In RSIA08, Congress established very aggressive dates for PTC system build-out completion.  
Each subject railroad must submit to FRA by April 16, 2010, an implementation plan indicating 
where and how it intends to install PTC systems by December 31, 2015.  As a result of this 
accelerated PTC system deployment schedule, railroads must engage in a massive reprogramming 
of capital funds. 
 
In light of timetable instituted by Congress, and to better support railroads with their installation 
while maintaining safety, FRA decided that it is appropriate for mandatory PTC systems to be 
reviewed by FRA differently than the regulatory approval process provided under subpart H.  
FRA believes that it is important to develop a process more suited specifically for PTC systems 
that would better facilitate railroad reuse of safety documentation and simplify the process of 
showing that the installation of the PTC system did not degrade safety.  FRA also believes that 
subpart H does not clearly address the statutory mandates and that such lack of clarity would 
complicate railroad efforts to comply with the new statutory requirements.  Accordingly, FRA is 
proposing to amend part 236 by modifying existing subpart H and adding a new subpart I. 
 
RSAC 
 
In March 1996, FRA established the RSAC, which provides a forum for collaborative rulemaking 
and program development.  The Committee includes representation from all of the agency=s major 
customer groups, including railroads, labor organizations, suppliers and manufacturers, and other 
interested parties.  When appropriate, FRA assigns a task to RSAC, and after consideration and 
debate, RSAC may accept or reject the task.  If accepted, RSAC establishes a working group that 
possesses the appropriate expertise and representation of interests to develop recommendation to 
FRA for action on the task.  These recommendations are developed by consensus.  The working 
group may establish one or more task forces or other subgroups to develop facts and options on a 
particular aspect of a given task.  The task force, or other subgroup, reports to the working group. 
 If a working group comes to consensus on recommendations for action, the package is presented 
to the RSAC for a vote.  If the proposal is accepted by a simple majority of the RSAC, the 
proposal is formally recommended to FRA. FRA then determines what action to take on the 
recommendation.  Because FRA staff has played an active role at the working group and 
subgroup levels in discussing the issues and options and in drafting the language of the consensus 
proposal, and because the RSAC recommendation constitutes the consensus of some of the 
 
10 
industry=s leading experts on a given subject, FRA is generally favorably inclined toward the 
RSAC recommendation. However, FRA is in no way bound to follow the recommendation and 
the agency exercises its independent judgment on whether the recommended rule achieves the 
agency=s regulatory goals, is soundly supported, and was developed in accordance with the 
applicable policy and legal requirements.  Often, FRA varies in some respects from the RSAC 
recommendation in developing the actual regulatory proposal.  
 
In developing the proposed rulemaking, FRA adopted the RSAC PTC working group and task 
force approach to ensure that the new regulation is neither arbitrary nor capricious or exceeds its 
statutory authority.  As part of this effort, FRA is working with the major stakeholders affected by 
this subpart in as much a collaborative manner as possible.  FRA believes establishing a 
collaborative relationship early in not only the product development cycle, but the regulatory 
development cycle, can help to bridge the divide between the railroad carrier=s management, 
railroad labor organizations, the suppliers, and the FRA by ensuring that all stakeholders are 
working with the same set of data and have a common understanding of product characteristics or 
their related processes production methods, including the regulatory provisions, with which 
compliance is mandatory.   However, where the group fails to reach consensus on a 
recommendation proposed by the various stakeholders, FRA will resolve the issue on its own, 
attempting to reconcile as many of the divergent positions as possible through traditional 
rulemaking proceedings.  
 
PTC WORKING GROUP 
 
On December 10, 2008, the RSAC accepted a task (No. 08-04) entitled AImplementation of 
Positive Train Control Systems.@  The purpose of this task was defined as follows: ATo provide 
advice regarding development of implementing regulations for Positive Train Control (PTC) 
systems and their deployment under the Rail Safety Improvement Act of 2008.@  The task called 
for the RSAC PTC Working Group to perform the following: 
 
1. Review the mandates and objectives of the Act related to deployment of PTC systems; 
2. Help to describe the specific functional attributes of systems meeting the statutory 
purposes in light of available technology; 
3. Review impacts on small entities and ascertain how best to address them in harmony with 
the statutory requirements; 
4. Help to describe the details that should be included in the implementation plans that 
railroads must file within 18 months of enactment of the Act;  
5. Offer recommendations on the specific content of implementing regulations; and 
6. The task also required the PTC Working Group to: 
7. Report on the functionalities of PTC systems; 
8. Describe the essential elements bearing on interoperability and the requirements for 
consultation with other railroads in joint operations; and 
9. Determine how PTC systems will work with the operation of non-equipped trains. 
 
 
11 
From January to April 2009, FRA met with the entire PTC Working Group five times over the 
course of twelve days.  During those meetings, in order to efficiently accomplish the tasks 
assigned to it, the PTC Working Group empowered three task forces to work concurrently.  These 
task forces included the passenger, short line and regional railroad, and the radio and 
communications task forces.  Each discussed issues specific to their particular interests and needs 
and produced proposed rule language for the PTC Working Group=s consideration.  The majority 
of the proposals were adopted into the proposed rule as agreed upon by the working group, with 
rule language related to a remaining few issues being further discussed and enhanced for 
inclusion into the rule by the PTC Working Group.  
 
The passenger task force discussed testing issues relating to parts 236 and 238 and the definition 
of Amain line@ under the statute, including possible passenger terminal and limited operations 
exceptions to PTC implementation.  Recommendations of the task force were presented to the 
Working Group, which adopted or refined each suggestion. 
 
The short line and regional railroad task group was formed to address the questions pertaining to 
Class II and Class III railroads.  Specifically, the group discussed issues regarding the trackage 
rights of Class II and III railroads using trains not equipped with PTC technology over a Class I 
railroad=s PTC territory, passenger service over track owned by a Class II or Class III railroads 
where PTC would not otherwise be required, and railroad crossings at grade involving a Class I 
railroad=s PTC equipped train and an Class II or III railroad=s PTC unequipped train.  After much 
discussion, there were no resolutions reached on any of the main issues raised.  However, the 
discussion yielded insights utilized by FRA in preparing this proposed rule. 
 
The radio and communications task force addressed wireless communications issues, particularly 
as they relate to communications security, and recommended language for proposed ' 236.1033.  
 
FRA staff worked with the PTC Working Group and its task forces.  FRA gratefully 
acknowledges the participation and leadership of representatives who served on the PTC Working 
Group and its task forces.  These points are discussed to show the origin of certain issues and the 
course of discussion on these issues at the task force and working group levels. We believe this 
helps illuminate the factors FRA weighed in making its regulatory decisions regarding this 
proposed rule and the logic behind those decisions. 
 
In general, the PTC working group agreed on the process for implementing PTC under the statute, 
including decisional criteria to be applied by FRA in evaluating safety plans, adaptation of 
subpart H principles to support this mandatory implementation, and refinements to subpart H and 
the part 236 appendices necessary to dovetail the two regulatory regimes and take lessons from 
early implementation of subpart H, including most aspects of the training requirements.  Notable 
accords were reached, as well, on major functionalities of PTC and on exceptions applicable to 
passenger service (terminal areas and main line exceptions).  Major areas of disagreement 
included whether to allow non-equipped trains on PTC lines, extension of PTC to lines not within 
the statutory mandate, and whether to provide for additional displays when two or more persons 
are regularly assigned duties in the cab.  Some additional areas of concern were discussed but 
 
12 
could not be resolved in the time available.  It was understood that where discussion did not yield 
agreement, FRA would make proposals and receive public comment.     
 
In the section-by section analysis, FRA presents the actual proposal, but the main focus of this 
analysis is to show how FRA exercised its understanding of the railroad industry and the 
Congressional intent behind RSIA08 to arrive at a regulatory program that avoids unintended 
burdens where permitted under Congressional intent, yet delivers the level of safety which 
Congress intended.  It is difficult, if not impossible, to estimate the contribution to total costs of 
each section separately.  Even estimating the total costs of installing PTC requires some degree of 
speculation, as no entity is procuring PTC on the scale required by RSIA08, or on its aggressive 
installation timeline.  In general, the less time an entity takes to make a major acquisition, the 
more it has to pay for it, because both supply elasticity and demand elasticity are lower with 
shorter timeframes.  Further, any design difficulties will be exacerbated by the short timeframes.  
On the other hand, widespread acquisition of large number of units will allow development costs 
to be amortized over a large number of units, and the unit cost of development will be relatively 
lower, all else equal.   
 
USE OF PERFORMANCE STANDARDS 
 
Given the statutory mandate for the implementation of PTC systems, FRA intends the proposed 
rule to accelerate the promotion of, and not hinder, cost effective technological innovation by 
encouraging an efficient utilization of resources, an increased level of competition, and more 
innovative user applications and technological developments.  FRA believes that, wherever 
possible, regulation must allow technologies the full freedom to exploit market opportunities, 
must support the challenges and opportunities resulting from the combination of emerging and 
varying technologies within an evolving marketplace, and should not discriminate between PTC 
systems vendors due to the technology or services provided. 
 
Accordingly, wherever possible FRA has refrained from developing technical or design 
standards, or even requiring implementation of particular PTC technologies that may prevent 
technological innovation or the development of alternative means to achieve the statutorily 
defined PTC functions.  If FRA were to implement specific technical standards, emerging 
technologies may render those standards obsolete, but nevertheless required.  Implementation of 
systems by the railroads using new technologies that are not addressed by the standards would 
require railroads and FRA to manage the deployment using a cumbersome and time consuming 
waiver process.  For the same reasons FRA expressed in the final rule implementing subpart H 
(70 Fed. Reg. 11052, 11055-11059 (Mar. 7, 2005)), FRA continues to believe that it is best to 
pursue a performance-based standard while providing sufficient basic parameters within which 
the system=s architectures and functionalities must be developed, implemented, and maintained. 
 
Like subpart H, the proposed subpart I provides for the same level of product confidence and 
versatility in determining what PTC technology a railroad may elect to implement and operate, 
even if the railroad chooses to modify its PTC system over time. Unlike subpart H, however, the 
proposed subpart I requires specific deployment of PTC while simplifying the application 
 
13 
process, potentially reducing the size of the regulatory filings through facilitation of safety 
documentation reuse, and more narrowly defining the required performance targets based on 
railroad operations and in terms of more specific functional PTC behaviors.  The approach under 
subpart I also reduces the likelihood of continually changing safety targets, which may vary based 
on each railroad=s safety culture, and provides for incremental improvements in safety in 
coordination with FRA. 
 
To ensure sufficient confidence in each PTC system implemented under subpart I, FRA expects 
that all safety- and risk-related data be supported by credible evidence or information.  Such 
credible evidence or information may be developed through laboratory or field testing, augmented 
by appropriate analysis and inspection, which may be monitored or reviewed by FRA.  FRA 
expects that as a practical matter, lab testing should be performed in the majority of cases.  FRA 
does not believe it is necessary to require any railroad to lab test.  However, field testing may be 
required in certain instances to test certain points of the PTC system in various conditions. 
 
If the railroad or FRA determines that the complexity of the technology or the supporting safety 
case warrants, credibility of this information may also be evaluated through an assessment of 
Verification and Validation performed by an acceptable independent third party selected and paid 
for the railroad, subject to FRA approval.  Ultimately, however, it is FRA=s responsibility to 
determine whether each PTC system=s performance results in an acceptable level of safety to 
railroad employees and the general public and whether any such system shall receive PTC System 
Certification, as required by statute. 
 
In order to provide meaningful flexibility, FRA is prepared to consider use of alternative risk 
analysis methods and proposals regarding the extent to which a product exhibits fail-safe 
behavior.  FRA still emphasizes that higher speed and higher risk rail service should be supported 
by more highly competent train control technology and analysis. 
 
FRA recognizes that there may potentially be various PTC system configurations and a variety of 
operational scopes involved.  FRA believes that the information requested under subpart I should 
be sufficient to permit FRA to predict whether the PTC system is fully adequate from a safety 
perspective.  Subparts H and I require submission of similar technical data.  Given the degree of 
uncertainty associated with the underlying analysis of a complex PTC system and its environs, 
subpart ICmuch like subpart HCrequires application of FRA=s judgment and expertise.  Given the 
underlying analysis= complexityCand FRA=s need to ensure an acceptable level of safety and 
analytical uniformity between functionally equivalent but architecturally different systemsCit is 
incumbent upon the subject railroad, possibly in concert with the vendor, supplier, or 
manufacturer of its PTC system, to make a persuasive case in its filings that the applicable 
performance standards are met.  Primarily, the risk assessments required by the proposed rule 
should provide an objective measure of the safety risk levels involved, which will be reviewed by 
FRA for comparison purposes.  As such, FRA believes that each risk assessment should 
determine relative risk levels, rather than absolute risk levels, but against a clearly delineated base 
case acceptable to FRA under the proposed regulation. 
 
 
14 
The primary goal of the risk assessment required by this rule is to give an objective measure of 
the levels of safety risk involved for comparison purposes.  As such, FRA believes the focus of 
the risk assessment ought to be the determination of relative risk levels, rather than absolute risk 
levels.  Thus, this proposed rule attempts to emphasize the determination of relative risk.  FRA 
believes that the guidelines captured in Appendix B adequately state the objectives and major 
considerations of any risk assessment it would expect to see submitted per subpart I.  FRA also 
feels that these guidelines allow sufficient flexibility in the conduct of risk assessments, yet 
provide sufficient uniformity by helping to ensure final results are presented in familiar units of 
measurement. 
 
One of the major characteristics of a risk assessment is determined by the extent to which it is 
performed using qualitative and quantitative methods.  FRA continues to believe that both 
quantitative and qualitative risk assessment methods may be used, as well as combinations of the 
two.  FRA expects that qualitative methods should be used only where appropriate, and only 
when accompanied by an explanation as to why the particular risk cannot be fairly quantified.  
FRA also continues to believe that railroads and suppliers should not be limited in the type of risk 
assessments they should be allowed to perform to demonstrate compliance with the minimum 
performance standard.  The state of the art of risk assessment methods could potentially change 
more quickly than the regulatory process will allow, and not taking advantage of these 
innovations could slow the progress of implementation of safer signal and train control systems.  
Thus, as in subpart H, FRA is allowing risk assessment methods not meeting the guidelines of this 
rule, so long as it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the FRA Associate Administrator for 
Railroad Safety/Chief Safety Officer (hereinafter Associate Administrator) that the risk 
assessment method used is suitable in the context of the particular PTC system.  FRA believes 
this determination is best left to the Associate Administrator because the FRA retains authority to 
ultimately prevent implementation of a system whose plans do not adequately demonstrate 
compliance with the performance standard under the proposed rule. 
 
FRA is aware that some types of risk are more amenable to measurement by using certain 
methods rather than others because of the type and amount of data available.  If a railroad does 
elect to use different risk assessment methods, FRA will consider this as a factor for PTC System 
Certification (see ' 236.1015).  Also, in such cases, when the margin of uncertainty has been 
inadequately described, FRA will be more likely to require FRA monitored field or laboratory 
testing (see ' 236.1035) or an independent third-party assessment (see ' 236.1017). 
 
When FRA issued the final rule establishing subpart H, FRA considered the criteria of simplicity, 
relevancy, reliability, cost, and objectivity.  FRA believes that these criteria remain applicable.  
FRA has attempted to make the requirements under subpart I simpler to the requirements of 
subpart H, so that railroads will be provided with a greater deal of flexibility to more easily 
demonstrate that its PTC system is certifiable by FRA.  Like subpart H, subpart I focuses on the 
safety-relevant characteristics of systems and emphasizes all relevant aspects of product 
performance.  FRA also drafted performance standards that can be applied reliably and precisely 
in a manner which should yield similar results each time it is applied to the same subject.  
Although RSIA08 appears to make cost a consideration secondary to safety, FRA believes that 
 
15 
demonstrating compliance under subpart I should minimize those costs when not degrading the 
primary objective of public safety.  FRA also believes that subpart I includes an objective 
performance standard whereas compliance can be determined through sound engineering 
analysis, testing, or investigation. 
 
Although FRA generally prefers performance standards to specification standards, and has used a 
performance standard in the accompanying rulemaking, in this case, the preference is almost 
irrelevant, because FRA believes that it would not have been possible to develop a specification 
standard for PTC in the time allotted, and were such a standard developed, it would have been far 
more costly.  Many of the provisions detailed below are those required to promulgate the 
performance standard.  FRA gained significant experience in administering subpart H, and has, 
except where noted below, merely done what it can to transform a standard that could be applied 
if the railroad volunteered into a standard that could be applied in a mandatory program.  The 
most obvious examples of this are minimum standards for what functions the systems must 
perform, and the level of safety at which these systems must perform those functions.  Under 
subpart H there would not have been any problem implementing a system that performed just one 
of the core functions, as long as it yielded a net improvement in safety, but under subpart I it must 
perform all four core functions.  Further, under subpart H it would have been acceptable to 
provide only a small improvement in safety, but under subpart I a system must either perform as 
well as a vital system or must yield an 80% reduction in risk.  FRA believes that these standards 
are the least that would satisfy Congressional intent. 
 
Another major difference in subpart I is the use of Type certification.  Under subpart H each 
system would have needed approval on each railroad implementing it. Type approval has the 
potential to lessen that burden.  FRA has learned from administering performance standards that it 
is not necessary to repeat proofs of performance on each railroad or line segment.  This has 
become an issue in vehicle-track interaction standards under parts 213 and 238, and FRA is at 
present developing standards to ease that problem.  The Type certification process would not add 
any new costs; it would probably reduce costs, make it easier to track PTC system performance 
across diverse railroads, and facilitate installation under the aggressive schedule mandated by 
RSIA08.  The use of the Type certification process would be optional, but FRA believes that any 
new systems would take advantage of such process. 
 
FRA did not analyze either an option with a lesser performance standard such as simply proving 
that the new system is at least as safe as what it replaces, the current subpart H standard as it 
would not meet Congressional intent, nor an option that would not permit use of Type 
certification. 
 
SECTION-BY-SECTION ANALYSIS 
 
Section 229.135  Event recorders 
 
Advances in electronics and software technology have not only enabled the development of PTC 
systems, but have also resulted in changes to the implementation of locomotive control 
 
16 
systems. These technological changes have provided for the introduction of new functional 
capabilities and the integration of different functions in ways that advance the building, operation, 
and maintenance of locomotive control systems.  FRA also recognizes that advances in 
technology may further eliminate the traditional distinctions between locomotive control and train 
control functionalities.  Indeed, technology advances may provide for opportunities for increased 
or improved functionalities in train control systems that run concurrent with locomotive control.  
 
Train control and locomotive control, however, remain two fundamentally different operations 
with different objectives. FRA does not want to restrict the adoption of new locomotive control 
functions and technologies by imposing regulations on locomotive control systems intended to 
address safety issues associated with train control.  Accordingly FRA is reviewing and enhancing 
the Locomotive Safety Standards (49 CFR part 229) to address the use of advanced electronics 
and software technologies to improve safe, efficient, and economical locomotive operations when 
a new or proposed locomotive control system function does not interfaces or comingles with a 
safety critical train control system.  In the meantime, FRA proposes to amend ' 229.135 to ensure 
its applicability to subpart I. 
 
FRA believes that existing event recorders and PTC non-volatile memory will have sufficient 
capability to perform the functions required by this section at no additional cost. 
 
Section 234.275  Processor-based systems 
 
Section 234.275 of title 49 presently requires that each new or novel technology used for active 
warning at highway-rail grade crossings be qualified using the subpart H process, including 
approval of a Product Safety Plan.  Particularly with respect to high speed rail, FRA anticipates 
that PTC systems will in some cases incorporate new or novel technology to provide for crossing 
pre-starts (reducing the length of approach circuits for high speed trains), verify crossing system 
health as between the wayside and approaching trains, or slow trains approaching locations where 
storage has been detected on a crossing, among other options. Indeed, each of these functions is 
presently incorporated in at least one train control system, and others may one day be feasible 
(including in-vehicle warning).  There would appear to be no reason why such a functionality 
intended for inclusion in a PTC system mandated by subpart I could not be qualified with the rest 
of the PTC system under subpart I.  On the other hand, care should be taken to set an appropriate 
safety standard taking into consideration road users, occupants of the high speed trains, and others 
potentially affected.  
 
In fact, with new emphasis on high speed rail, FRA needs to consider the ability of PTC systems 
to integrate this type of new technology and thereby reduce risk associated with high speed rail 
service.  Risk includes derailment of a high speed train with catastrophic consequences after 
encountering an obstacle at a highway-rail grade crossing.  To avoid such consequences, as many 
crossings as possible should be eliminated.  To that end, 49 CFR ' 213.347 requires a warning 
and barrier plan to be approved for Class 7 track (speeds above 110 mph) and prohibits grade 
crossings on Class 8 and 9 track (above 125 mph).  That leaves significant exposure on Class 5 
and 6 track that is currently not addressed by regulation.  Comment is requested on how best to 
 
17 
approach this issue, ensuring that various FRA regulations, including subpart I, address this safety 
need effectively and in harmony with one another. 
 
This section is permissive, and adds no costs. 
 
Section 235.7  Changes not requiring filing of application 
 
FRA proposes to amend this section of the regulation which allows specified changes within 
existing signal or train control systems be made without the necessity of filing an application.  
The amendment consists of adding allowance for a railroad to remove an intermittent automatic 
train stop system in conjunction with the implementation of a PTC system approved under 
subpart I of part 236. 
 
 
18 
The changes allowable under this section, without filing of an application, are those identified on 
the basis that the resultant condition will be at least no less safe than the previous condition.  The 
required functions of PTC within subpart I provide a considerably higher level of functionality 
related to both alerting and enforcing necessary operating limitations than an intermediate 
automatic train stop system does.  Additionally, in the event of the loss of PTC functionality (i.e., 
a failure en route), the operating restrictions required will provide the needed level of safety in 
lieu of the railroad being expected to keep and maintain an underlying system such as intermittent 
automatic train stop for only in such cases.  FRA therefore believes that with the implementation 
of PTC under the requirements of subpart I, the safety value of any previously existing 
intermittent automatic train stop system is entirely obviated.  There were no objections in the PTC 
Working Group to this amendment. 
 
This section avoids an unnecessary requirement for paperwork, and does not add to costs. 
 
Section 236.0 Applicability, minimum requirements, and penalties. 
 
FRA proposes to amend this existing section of the regulation to remove manual block from the 
methods of operation permitting speeds of 50 miles per hour or greater for freight trains and 60 
miles per hour or greater for passenger trains.  Manual block rules do create a reasonably secure 
means of preventing train collisions.  However, the attributes of block signal systems are not 
present, leaving the potential for misaligned switches, broken rails or fouling equipment to cause 
a train accident.  FRA believes that contemporary expectations for safe operations require this 
adjustment, which also provides a more orderly foundation for the application of PTC to the 
subject territories.  There were no objections in the RSAC to this proposed change. 
 
In the interval between adoption of this provision and 2015 this might have applied to some 
passenger lines, however at the PTC Working Group, the affected railroads told FRA that they 
were eliminating this operation.  The only affected railroads will be freight operations in manual 
block at speeds of 50 mph or greater.  The costs of restricting train speed to 50 mph on a freight 
line would be minimal, and on most affected lines such restriction will be temporary since PTC 
will be installed by 2015.  The benefits and costs of implementing this provision are negligible, 
especially in comparison to all of the other costs of implementing PTC systems. 
 
Section 236.909  Minimum performance standard 
 
FRA is proposing to modify existing ' 236.909 to make the risk metric sensitivity analysis an 
integral part of the full risk assessment required to be submitted with a product safety plan in 
accordance with ' 236.907(a)(7).  The proposed amendment of this section would also eliminate 
an alternative option for a railroad to use a risk metric in which consequences of potential 
accidents are measured strictly in terms of fatalities. 
 
Currently, ' 236.909(e)(1) indicates how safety and risk should be measured for the full risk 
assessment, but does not accentuate the need for running a sensitivity analysis on chosen risk 
metrics to assure that the worst case scenarios for the proposed system failures or malfunctions 
 
19 
are accounted for in the risk assessment.  On the other hand, Appendix B to this part mandates 
that each risk metric for the proposed product must be expressed with an upper bound, as 
estimated with a sensitivity analysis.  The FRA=s experience gained while reviewing product 
safety plans submitted to FRA in accordance with subpart H, revealed that the railroad=s did not 
understand a sensitivity analysis for the chosen risk metrics to be a mandatory requirement.  
Accordingly, to ensure clarity regarding FRA=s expectations, FRA proposes to amend paragraph 
(e)(1) to explicitly require the performance of a sensitivity analysis for the chosen risk metrics.  
The language proposed in this rule explains the need for the sensitivity analysis and describes the 
key input parameters that must be analyzed. 
 
The proposed modification to paragraph (e)(2) is intended to clarify how the exposure and its 
consequences, as main components of the risk computation formula, must be measured.  Under 
the proposed rule text, the exposure must be measured in train miles per year over the relevant 
railroad infrastructure where a proposed system is to be implemented.  When determining the 
consequences of potential accidents, the railroad must identify the total costs involved, including 
those relating to fatalities, injuries, property damage, and other incidentals.  FRA proposes to 
eliminate the option of using an alternative risk metric, which would allow the measurement of 
consequences strictly in terms of fatalities.  It is FRA=s experience that measuring consequences 
of accidents strictly in term of fatalities did not serve as an adequate alternative to metrics of total 
cost of accidents for two main reasons.  First, the statistical data on railroad accidents shows that 
accidents involving fatalities also cause injuries and significant damage to railroad property and 
infrastructure for both freight and especially passenger operations. Even though the cost of human 
life is always the highest component of monitory estimates of accident consequences, the dollar 
estimates of injuries, property losses, and damage to the environment associated with accidents 
involving fatalities cannot and should not be discounted in the risk analysis.  Second, allowing 
fatalities to serve as the only risk metric of accident consequences confused the industry and the 
risk assessment analysts attempting to determine the overall risk associated with the use of certain 
types of train control systems.  As a result, some risk analysts inappropriately converted injuries 
and property damages for observed accidents into relative estimates of fatalities.  This method 
cannot be considered acceptable because, while distorting the overall picture of accident 
consequences, it also raises questions on appropriateness of conversion coefficients.  Therefore, 
FRA considers it appropriate to eliminate from the rule the alternative option for consequences to 
be measured in fatalities only. 
 
FRA does not believe that any railroads intended to use fatalities alone as a risk metric.  FRA has 
seen some draft risk assessments where monetized costs were converted into fatality equivalents, 
defeating the original intent and value of having a single metric.  This change is not expected to 
impact railroads. 
 
Section 236.1001 Purpose and Scope 
 
This section describes both the purpose and the scope of subpart I.  Subpart I provides 
performance-based regulations for the development, test, installation, and maintenance of PTC 
 
20 
systems, and the associated personnel training requirements, that are mandated for installation by 
the FRA. 
Section 236.1003 Definitions   
 
Given that a natural language such as English contains, at any given time, a finite number of 
words, any comprehensive list of definitions must either be circular or leave some terms 
undefined.  In some cases, it is not possible and indeed not necessary to state a definition; rather, 
one simply comes to understand the use of the term.  Where possible and practicable, FRA prefers 
to provide explicit definitions for terms and concepts rather than rely solely on a shared 
understanding of a term through use. 
 
Paragraph (a) reinforces the applicability of existing definitions of subparts A through H.  The 
definitions of subparts A through H are applicable to subpart I, unless otherwise modified by this 
part.  
 
Paragraph (b) introduces definitions for a number of terms that have specific meanings within the 
context of subpart I.  
 
While definitions are important to understanding a rule, they have no regulatory force by 
themselves, and therefore neither add benefits, nor costs.    
 
Section  236.1005 Requirements for Positive Train Control systems 
 
RSIA08 specifically requires that each PTC system be designed to prevent train-to-train 
collisions, overspeed derailments, incursions into established work zone limits, and the movement 
of a train through a switch left in the wrong position.  Proposed section 236.1005 includes the 
minimum statutory requirements and provides amplifying information defining the necessary 
PTC functions and the situations under which PTC systems must be installed.  Each PTC system 
must be reliable and perform the functions specified in RSIA08.   
 
Train-to-train collisions.  Paragraph (a)(1)(I) applies the statutory requirement that a mandatory 
PTC system must be designed to prevent train-to-train collisions.  At this time, FRA understands 
this to mean head-to-head, rear-end, and side and raking collisions between trains on the same, 
converging, or intersecting tracks.  PTC technology now available can meet these needs through 
guidance to the locomotive engineer that is current and continuous and through enforcement 
using predictive braking to stop short of known targets.  
 
FRA also notes that the technology associated with currently available PTC systems may not 
completely eliminate all of these collisions risks.  For instance, a PTC system mandated by this 
subpart is not required to prevent a collision caused by a train that derails and moves over an area 
not covered by track and onto a neighboring or adjacent track (known in common parlance as a 
Asecondary collision@). 
 
 
21 
During discussions regarding available PTC technology, it has been noted that this technology 
also has inherent limitations with respect to prevention of certain collisions that might occur at 
restricted speed.  In signal territory, there are circumstances under which trains may pass red 
signals, other than absolute signals, either at restricted speed or after stopping and then 
proceeding at restricted speed.  Available PTC technology does not track the rear end of each 
train as a target but instead relies on the signal system to indicate the appropriate action.  In this 
example, the PTC system would display Arestricted speed@ to the locomotive engineer as the 
action required and would enforce the upper limit of restricted speed (i.e., 15 or 20 miles per 
hour, depending on the railroad).  This means that more serious rear end collisions will be 
prevented, because the upper limit of speed is enforced, and it also means that fewer low speed 
rear-end collisions will occur because a continuous reminder of the required action will be 
displayed to the locomotive engineer (rather than the engineer relying on the aspect displayed by 
the last signal, which may have been passed some time ago).  However, some potential for a low-
speed rear-end collision will remain in these cases, and the proposed rule is clear that this 
limitation would be accepted.  Similar exposure may occur in non-signaled territory where trains 
are conducting switching operations or other activities under joint authorities.  The PTC system 
can enforce the limits of the authority and the upper limit of restricted speed, but it cannot 
guarantee that the trains sharing the authority will not collide.  Again, however, the likelihood and 
average severity of any potential collisions would be greatly reduced.  However, FRA reserves 
the right to later modify subpart I to require PTC systems to prevent these and potentially other 
types of train-to-train collisions as technology becomes available.   
 
The proposed rule text does, however, provide an example of a potential train-to-train collision 
that a PTC system should be designed to prevent.  Rail-to-rail crossings-at-gradeCotherwise 
known as diamond crossingsCpresent a risk of side collisions.  FRA recognizes that such 
intersecting lines may or may not require PTC system implementation and operation.  Since a 
train operating with a PTC system cannot necessarily recognize a train not operating with a PTC 
system or moving on a track without a PTC system, the PTC systemCno matter how 
intelligentCitself may not be able to prevent a train-to-train collision.   
 
Accordingly, proposed paragraph (a)(1)(I) requires certain protections for such rail-to-rail 
crossings-at-grade.  While these locations are specifically referenced in paragraph (a)(1)(I), their 
inclusion is merely illustrative and does not necessarily preclude any other type of potential train-
to-train collision.  Moreover, a host railroad may have alternative arrangements to the specific 
protections referenced in the associated table under paragraph (a)(1)(I), which it must submit in 
its PTC Safety Plan (PTCSP)Cdiscussed in detail belowCand receive a PTC System Certification 
associated with that PTCSP.   
 
Rail-to-rail crossings-at-grade that have one or more PTC routes intersecting with one or more 
routes without a PTC system must have an interlocking signal arrangement in place developed in 
accordance with subparts A through G of part 236 and a PTC enforced stop on all PTC routes.  
FRA has also determined that the level of risk varies based upon the speeds at which the trains 
operate through such crossings, as well as the presence, or lack, of PTC equipped lines leading 
into the crossing.  Accordingly, under a compromise accepted by the PTC Working Group, if the 
 
22 
maximum speed on at least one of the intersecting tracks is more than 40 miles per hour, then the 
routes without a PTC system must also have either some type of positive stop enforcement or a 
split-point derail device on each approach to the crossing and incorporated into the signal system, 
and a permanent maximum speed limit of 20 miles per hour.  FRA expects that these protections 
be instituted as far in advance of the crossing as is necessary to stop the train from entering the 
crossing.  The 40 miles per hour threshold appears to be appropriate given three factors.  First, the 
frequency of collisions at these rail intersections is low, because typically one of the routes is 
favored on a regular basis and train crews expect delays until signals clear for movement.  
Second, the special track work used at these intersections, known as crossing diamonds, 
experiences heavy wear; and railroads tend to limit speeds over these locations to no more than 
40 miles per hour. Finally, FRA recognizes that for a train on either intersecting route, elevated 
speed will translate into higher kinetic energy available to do damage in a collision-induced 
derailment.  Thus, for the relatively small number of rail crossings with one or more routes having 
an authorized train speed above 40 miles per hour, including higher speed passenger routes, it is 
particularly important that any collision be prevented.  FRA appreciates that a more protective 
approach could be considered and welcomes any data or commentary that might bear on this 
issue.  
 
FRA believes that these more aggressive measures are required to ensure train safety in the event 
the engineer does not stop a train before reaching the crossing when the engineer does not have a 
cleared route displayed by the interlocking signal system and higher speed operations are possible 
on the route intersected.  The split-point derail device would prevent a collision in such a case by 
derailing the offending train onto the ground before it reaches the crossing.  Where such derails 
are used, the slower speed at which the unequipped train is required to travel would minimize the 
damage to the unequipped train and potential affect on the surrounding area should it derail as a 
result of the failure of the crew to observe the signal indication.  As an alternative to split-point 
derails, the non-PTC line may be outfitted with some other mechanism that ensures a positive 
stop of the unequipped crossing train. 
 
If a PTC system or systems are installed and operated on all crossing lines, there are no speed 
restrictions other than those that might be enforced as part of a civil of temporary speed 
restriction.  However, the crossing must be interlocked and the PTC system or systems must 
ensure that each of the crossing trains can be brought safely to a stop before reaching the crossing 
in the event that another train is already cleared through or occupying the crossing. 
 
The costs and benefits of collision avoidance are included in the general cost and benefit sections 
presented below.  The impacts of provisions regarding collision avoidance at at-grade crossings 
are included there as well.  FRA acknowledges that those provisions have costs and benefits, but 
FRA believes that they are attributable to RSIA08.  RSIA08 requires installation of PTC which 
prevents train-to-train collisions, and while FRA believes that it was not Congressional intent to 
regulate those collisions resulting from a train on one track derailing and fouling an adjacent 
track, FRA does believe that Congress, although not explicitly saying whether it did or did not 
intend the PTC systems to avoid collisions on at-grade crossings, intended to reduce train-to-train 
 
23 
collisions occurring on at-grade crossings. FRA has merely described what avoidance of 
collisions entails. 
 
Overspeed derailments.  Proposed paragraph (a)(1)(ii) requires that PTC systems mandated 
under subpart I be designed to prevent overspeed derailments and addresses specialized 
requirements associated with such provision.  FRA notes that a number of passenger accidents 
with significant numbers of casualties have been caused by trains exceeding the maximum 
allowable speed at turnouts and crossovers and upon entering stations.  Accordingly, FRA 
emphasizes the importance of enforcement of turnout and crossover speed restrictions, as well as 
civil speed restrictions.  For instance, in the Chicago region, two serious train accidents occurred 
on the same Metra commuter line when locomotive engineers operated trains at more than 60 
miles per hour while traversing between tracks using crossovers, which were designed to be 
safely traversed at 10 miles per hour. 
 
For illustrative purposes, the rule text makes clear that such derailments may be related to railroad 
civil engineering speed restrictions, slow orders, and excessive speeds over switches and through 
turnouts and these type speed restrictions are to be enforced by the system.   
 
The costs and benefits of preventing overspeed derailments are included in the general analysis of 
costs and benefits below. 
 
Roadway work zones.  Proposed paragraph (a)(1)(iii) requires that PTC systems mandated under 
subpart I be designed to prevent incursions into established work zone limits.  Work zone limits 
are defined by time and space.  The length of time a work zone limit is applicable is determined 
by human elements.  Working limits are obtained by contacting the train dispatcher, who will 
confirm an authority only after it has been transmitted to the PTC server.  Paragraph (a)(1)(iii) 
emphasizes the importance of the PTC systems to provide positive protection for roadway 
workers working within the limits of their work zone.  
 
Accordingly, once a work zone limit has been established, the PTC system must be notified.  The 
PTC system must continue to enforce that limit until it is notified from the dispatcher or roadway 
worker in charge, with verification from the other, either that the limit is released and the train is 
authorized to enter or the roadway worker in charge authorizes movement of the train through the 
work zone. 
 
To achieve this technological functionality, FRA=s Office of Railroad Development has funded 
the development of a Roadway Worker Employee in Charge (EIC) Portable Terminal that allows 
the EIC to control the entry of trains into the work zone.  While no rule includes the commonly 
used term EIC, FRA recognizes that it is the equivalent to the ARoadway Worker In Charge@ as 
used in part 214.  With the portable terminal, the EIC can directly control the entry of trains into 
the work zone and restrict the speed of the train through the work zone.  If the EIC does not grant 
authority for the train to enter the work zone, the train is enforced to a stop prior to violating the 
work zone authority limits.  If the EIC authorizes entry of the train into the work zone, the EIC 
may establish a maximum operating speed for the train consistent with the safety of the roadway 
 
24 
work employees. This speed is then enforced on the train authorized to enter and pass through the 
work zone.  The technology required for this terminal is significantly less complex than the 
technology associated with dispatching systems and the PTC onboard system.  In view of this, 
FRA strongly encourages deployment of such portable terminals as opposed to current 
approaches which only require the locomotive engineer to in some manner Aacknowledge@ his 
authority to operate into or through the limits of the work zone (e.g., by pressing a soft key on the 
onboard display). 
 
Pending the adoption of more secure technology such as the EIC Portable Terminal, FRA will 
scrutinize PTC Safety Plans to determine that they leave no opportunity for single point human 
failure in the enforcement of work zone limits.  FRA notes that some approaches in the past have 
provided that the locomotive engineer could simply acknowledge a work zone warning, even if 
inappropriately, after which ,the train could proceed into the work zone.  FRA proposes that more 
secure procedures be included in safety plans under new subpart I. 
 
The costs and benefits of protecting roadway work zones are included in the general analysis of 
costs and benefits below.  As with the costs and benefits associated with implementation of the 
collision avoidance and over-speed aspects, the costs and benefits associated with implementation 
of work zone protection are attributable to RSIA08. 
 
Movement over main line switches.  Proposed paragraph (a)(1)(iv) requires that PTC systems 
mandated under subpart I be designed to prevent the movement of a train through a main line 
switch in the improper position.  Given the complicated nature of switchesCespecially when 
operating in concert with wayside, cab, or other similar signal systemsCthe proposed rule 
provides more specific requirements in paragraph (e) as discussed further below.   
 
In numerous paragraphs, the proposed rule requires various operating requirements based 
primarily on signal indications.  Normally, these indications are communicated to the locomotive 
engineer, who is then expected to operate the train in accordance with the indications and 
authorities provided.  However, a technology that receives the same information does not 
necessarily have the wherewithal to respond unless it is programmed to do so.  Thus, proposed 
paragraph (a)(2) requires PTC systems implemented under subpart I to obey and enforce all such 
indications and authorities provided by these safety-critical underlying systems.  The integration 
of the delivery of the indication or authority with the PTC system=s response to those 
communications must be described and justified in the PTC Development Plan (PTCDP)Cfurther 
described belowCand the PTCSP, as applicable, and then must comply with those descriptions 
and justifications. 
 
The PTC Working Group had extensive discussions concerning the monitoring of main line 
switches and came to the following general conclusions: 
 
First, signal systems do a good job of monitoring switch position, and enforcement of restrictions 
imposed in accordance with the signal system is the best approach within signal territory (main 
track and controlled sidings).  As a general rule, the enforcement required for crossovers, 
 
25 
junctions and entry into and departure from controlled sidings will be a positive stop, and the 
enforcement provided for other switches (providing access to industry tracks and non-signaled 
sidings and auxiliary tracks) will be display and enforcement of restricted speed.  National 
Transportation Safety Board representatives were asked to evaluate whether this strategy meets 
the needs of safety from their perspective.  They returned with a list of accidents caused by 
misaligned switches that the Board had investigated in recent years, none of which was in signal 
territory. 
 
Second, switch monitoring functions of contemporary PTC systems provide an excellent 
approach to addressing this requirement in dark territory.  However, it is important to ensure that 
switch position is determined with the same degree of integrity that one would expect within a 
signaling system (e.g., fail safe point detection and proper verification of adjustment).  The 
Working Group puzzled over sidings in dark territory and how to handle the requirement for 
switch monitoring in connection with those situations.  (While these are not Acontrolled@ sidings, 
as such, they will often be mapped so that train movements into and out of the sidings are 
appropriately constrained.)  At the final Working Group meeting, a proposal was accepted that 
would treat a siding as part of the main line track structure requiring monitoring of each switch 
off of the siding if the authorized train speed within the siding exceeds 20 mile per hour. This 
issue is more fully discussed below.    
 
The costs and benefits of protecting movements over main line switches are included in the 
general analysis of costs and benefits below.  As with the costs and benefits associated with 
implementation of the other PTC aspects discussed above, the costs and benefits associated with 
preventing movement of a train through a main line switch in the improper position are 
attributable to RSIA08.   
 
Other functions.  While FRA has included in ' 236.1005 the core PTC system requirements, 
there is the possibility that other functions may be explicitly or implicitly required elsewhere in 
subpart I.  Accordingly, under proposed paragraph (a)(3), each PTC system required by subpart I 
must also perform any other functions specified in Subpart I.  According to 49 U.S.C. ' 20157(g), 
FRA must prescribe regulations specifying in appropriate technical detail the essential 
functionalities of positive train control systems and the means by which those systems will be 
qualified. 
 
In addition to the general performance standards required under paragraphs (a)(1)-(3), paragraph 
(a)(4) provides more prescriptive performance standards relating to the situations paragraphs 
(a)(1)-(3) intend to prevent.  Paragraph (a)(4) defines certain particular situations where FRA has 
determined that specific warning and enforcement measures are necessary to provide for the 
safety of train operations, their crews, and the public and to accomplish the goals of the PTC 
system=s essential core functions.  Under paragraph (a)(4)(I), FRA intends to prevent unintended 
movements onto PTC main lines and possible collisions at switches by ensuring proper 
integration and enforcement of the PTC system as it relates to derails and switches protecting 
access to the main line.  Paragraph (a)(4)(ii) intends to account for operating restrictions 
associated with a highway-rail grade crossing active warning system that is in a reduced or non-
 
26 
operative state and unable to provide the required warning for the motoring public.  In this 
situation, the PTC system must provide positive protection and enforcement related to the 
operational restrictions of alternative warning that must be issued to the crew of any train 
operating over such crossing in accordance with part 234.  Paragraph (a)(4)(iii) concerns the 
movement of a PTC operated train in conjunction with the issuance of an after arrival mandatory 
directive.  While FRA recognizes that the use of after arrival mandatory directives poses a risk 
that the train crew will misidentify one or more trains and proceed prematurely, PTC provides a 
means to intervene should that occur.  Further such directives may sometimes be considered 
operationally useful.  Accordingly, FRA fully expects that the PTC system will prevent collisions 
between the receiving trains and the train or trains to be waited upon.   
 
FRA recognizes that movable bridges, including draw bridges, present an operational issue for 
PTC systems.  Under subpart C, ' 236.312 already governs the interlocking of signal appliances 
with movable bridge devices and FRA believes that this section should equally apply to PTC 
systems governing movement over such bridges.  While subparts A through H apply to PTC 
systemsCas stated in ' 236.1001Cparagraph (a)(4)(iv) seeks to make this abundantly clear.   
 
Accordingly, in accordance with paragraph (a)(4)(iv) and ' 232.312, movable bridges within a 
PTC route are equipped with an interlocked signal arrangement which is also to be integrated into 
the PTC system.  A train shall be enforced to a stop prior to the bridge in the event that the bridge 
locking mechanism is not locked, or the locking device is out of position, or the bridge rails of the 
movable span are out of position vertically or horizontally from the rails of the fixed span.  
Effective locking of the bridge is necessary to assure that the bridge is properly seated thereby 
capable to support both the weight of the bridge and that of a passing train(s) and preventing 
possible derailment that could result in the train going into the water or other potential unsafe 
condition.  Proper track rail alignment is also necessary to preclude derailments, which again 
could result in damage to the bridge or the train going into the water.  
 
Proposed Paragraph (a)(4)(v) requires that hazard detectors integrated into the PTC systemCas 
required by paragraph (c) of this section or the FRA approved PTCSPCmust provide an 
appropriate warning and associated applicable enforcement through the PTC system.  There are 
many types of hazard detection systems and devices.  Each type has varying operational 
requirements, limitations, and warnings based on the types and levels of hazard indications and 
severities.  FRA expects this enforcement to include a positive stop where necessary to protect the 
train (e.g., areas with high water, flood, rock slide, or track structure flaws) or to provide an 
appropriate warning with possible movement restriction be acknowledged (i.e., hot journal or flat 
wheel detection).  The details of these warnings and associated required enforcements are to be 
specifically addressed within a PTCDP and PTCSP subject to FRA approval, and the PTC system 
functions are to be maintained in accordance with the system specifications.  FRA does not expect 
that all hazard detectors be integrated into the PTC systems, but where they are, they must 
interact properly with the PTC system to protect the train from the hazard that the detector is 
monitoring. 
 
 
27 
Paragraph (a)(5) addresses the issue of broken rails, which is the leading cause of train 
derailments.  For this reason, FRA will strictly limit the speed of passenger and freight operations 
in those areas where broken rail detection is not provided.  Under ' 236.0(c), as amended in this 
rule to sunset of the manual block allowance 24 months after the effective date of a final rule, 
freight trains operating at or above 50 miles per hour, and passenger trains operating at or above 
60 miles per hour are required to have a block signal system.  Since current technology for block 
signal systems relies on track circuitsCwhich also provide for broken rail detectionCFRA 
proposes limiting speeds where broken rail detection is not available to the maximums allowed 
under ' 236.0 when a block signal system is not installed. 
 
The costs and benefits of performing other functions are included in the general analysis of costs 
and benefits below.  Even though these other functions were not specifically delineated in 
RSIA08, FRA believes that they were intended by Congress, and therefore the costs and benefits 
are attributable to RSIA08.  
 
Deployment requirements.  Proposed paragraph (b) regulates where and when PTC systems must 
be installed.  Under RSIA08, each applicable railroad carrier must implement a PTC system in 
accordance with its PTC Implementation Plan (PTCIP)Cas further discussed belowCwhich must 
be submitted by April 16, 2010, and explain how the railroad or railroads intend to implement a 
PTC system by December 31, 2015.  Essentially, a PTC system must be installed on certain tracks 
and onboard components required for and responsive to the system must be installed on each lead 
locomotive that operate over those tracks. 
 
According to ' 229.5, the lead locomotive means the first locomotive proceeding in the direction 
of movement.  In addition to the head end unit locomotive that controls the train while moving in a 
forward direction, a PTC system must be installed on any rear end unit control cab locomotive that 
controls the train while it moves backwards.  These requirements assume that locomotives 
controlling the train may be placed only at each end.  At this time, FRA is unaware of any 
locomotives not placed at either end of the train that may independently control the train. 
 
As a threshold matter, RSIA08 requires that a PTC system be installed on certain main lines of 
each entity required to file a PTCIP.  According to the statute, a main line is, with certain 
exceptions, a Class I railroad track over which 5 million or more gross tons of railroad traffic is 
transported annually.  Pursuant to the statute, FRA may also designate additional tracks as main 
line and may provide exceptions for intercity rail or commuter passenger transportation over track 
where limited or no freight railroad operations occur. 
 
The statutory language does not indicate whether the phrase Amain line@ refers to the route used or 
actual trackage owned by the subject railroad.  It is clear, however, that Congress intended to limit 
implementation and operation of PTC systems to the extent practicable on railroad tracks owned or 
used by Class I railroads for freight operations specifically designated by the statute.   
 
For instance, by referencing Class I railroadsCand not referencing any other type of freight 
railroadCFRA believes that Congress did not intend to have the smaller freight railroads incur the 
 
28 
tremendous costs involved in PTC system implementation and operation.  If a Class I railroad=s 
main line is determined by its route, and that route goes over track owned by a Class II railroad, 
the Class II railroad may be forced to incur substantial costs to equip its track and locomotives 
with PTC technology.  By specifically referencing Class I railroads in the statute, however, it is 
FRA=s understanding that Congress intended to avoid such a result.  Thus, FRA believes it was 
Congress= intent that for freight operations, PTC systems must be installed and operated based on 
freight density and consist only on Class I railroad owned track. 
 
The Surface Transportation Board (STB) has established a statutory definition for Class I. II, and 
III railroads based on the reported revenues in 1992.  A reference to Class I railroads in this 
subpart refers to those railroads that have been designated as such by the Surface Transportation 
Board (STB).  According to STB, a Class I railroad has revenues greater than $250 million 
(adjusted annually for inflation); a Class II railroad has revenues ranging from $20 million to $250 
million (adjusted annually for inflation); and a Class III railroad has revenues that are less than $20 
million (adjusted annually for inflation).  All switching and terminal railroads, regardless of 
revenue size, are Class III railroads. The STB railroad classification determines the amount of 
reporting which a carrier must file with the STB.  Class I railroads are required to file an annual R-
1 Report, a detailed income, expense, and operating data report, quarterly and annual freight 
carload commodity reports, and reports on types of employees and employee compensation (Wage 
Form A and B). 
 
From time to time, as some Class II railroads approached the Class I railroad revenue threshold, 
these carriers petitioned the STB to remain as Class II railroads, so that these carriers would not be 
burdened with the additional reporting requirements.  Generally the STB allowed this exemption.  
Accordingly, there may be some large railroadsCincluding Montana Rail Link and Florida East 
CoastCthat are Class II railroads Aby waiver,@ thereby freeing them from having to file Class I 
railroad reports with the STB.  
 
In drafts of this proposed rule provided to the RSAC PTC Working Group, it was suggested that a 
Class I railroad=s main line be defined as track owned and controlled by the Class I railroad.  By 
also including track Acontrolled@ by the Class I railroad, FRA intended to include tracks not owned 
by Class I railroads, but used in a manner as if the Class I railroad did own that track.  For 
instance, under the term Acontrolled,@ FRA intended that a track owned by a Class II or III railroad 
would be considered a main line if a Class I railroad had effective control over the Class II or III 
railroad or that specific track.  Without the Acontrol@ requirement, Class I railroads may be free to 
divest themselves of track ownership while maintaining effective control for the purposes of 
avoiding PTC system implementation. 
 
The American Short Line and Regional Railroad Association (ASLRRA), however, expressed 
concern with this provision, instead suggesting that a Class I railroad=s main line include only 
those lines owned and operated by the Class I railroad.  FRA believes that the underlying 
ASLRRA concern is the financial costs associated with PTC system installation would impose 
completely untenable costs on their member railroads, and result in many of these railroad out of 
 
29 
business as a result.  FRA agreed that, from the point of view of the congressional mandate, a 
narrower concept is appropriate. 
 
To avoid confusion, FRA intends to define main line in the regulation by standards applicable to a 
single element.  In its proposal to define a Class I railroad=s main line as track owned and 
controlled by the Class I railroad, FRA focused the definition on the status of the track.  To also 
focus on the issue of operations could raise confusion and irreconcilable understandings.  Thus, 
FRA is not comfortable with ASLRRA=s suggestion. 
 
To accomplish FRA=s goal and respond to ASLRRA=s concerns, however, FRA has limited a Class 
I railroad=s main lines to tracks and segments documented in current timetables filed by the Class I 
railroads with FRA under ' 217.7 of this title over which 5 million or more gross tons of railroad 
traffic is transported annually.  For railroads that are required to submit a PTCIP by April 16, 
2010, the gross tonnage will be based on 2008 year traffic.  To the extent rail traffic exceeds 5 
million gross tons in any year after 2008, the tonnage shall be calculated for the preceding two 
calendar years in determining whether a PTCIP or its amendment is required. 
\
The RSIA08 requires certain tracks to be considered main line where a certain amount of railroad 
traffic is transported.  However, in certain yard or terminal locations, trains are prepared for 
transportation, but railroad traffic is not Atransported.@  Moreover, FRA recognizes that in such 
locations, PTC system operation would be especially cumbersome and onerous and possibly 
resulting in a reduction of safety.  Accordingly, in such locations, FRA may not consider the 
subject tracks as main line.  For such locations that only include freight operations, FRA proposes 
to consider these tracks other than main line by definition if all trains in the location are limited to 
restricted speed.   
 
However, for any tracks used by passenger trains, FRA proposes that any designation of track as 
other than main line should be performed on a case-by-case basis in accordance with ' 236.1019. 
 
Once a Class I railroad=s main lines are determined, a PTC system must be installed and operated 
on those main line tracks over which passenger trains are operated, or any TIH materials are 
transported.  As a corollary, PTC systems are not required on Class I railroad=s main lines over 
which any TIH or passenger trains are not transported.  In addition to an applicable Class I 
railroad=s main lines, a PTC system must be implemented and operated on all railroads= main lines 
over which intercity rail passenger transportation or commuter rail passenger transportation, as 
defined by 49 U.S.C. ' 24102, is regularly provided.  However, FRA does not intend to require 
PTC systems over tracks that tourist and excursion operations operate. 
 
According to 49 U.S.C. ' 24102, Aintercity rail passenger transportation@ means rail passenger 
transportation, except commuter rail passenger transportation.  49 U.S.C. ' 24102 defines 
commuter rail passenger transportation as Ashort-haul rail passenger transportation in metropolitan 
and suburban areas usually having reduced fare, multiple-ride, and commuter tickets and morning 
and evening peak period operations.@   
 
 
30 
49 C.F.R. ' 238.5 provides further guidance, defining a long-distance intercity passenger train as 
Aa passenger train that provides service between large cities more than 125 miles apart and is not 
operated exclusively in the National Railroad Passenger Corporation=s Northeast Corridor@ and a 
commuter train as Aa passenger train providing commuter service within an urban, suburban, or 
metropolitan area.  The term includes a passenger train provided by an instrumentality of a State or 
a political subdivision of a State.@  Section 238.5 also defines passenger service as Aa train or 
passenger equipment that is carrying, or available to carry, passengers.  Passengers need not have 
paid a fare in order for the equipment to be considered in passenger or in revenue service.@  
According to ' 238.5, a passenger train is Aa train that transports or is available to transport 
members of the general public.  If a train is composed of a mixture of passenger and freight 
equipment, that train is a passenger train for purposes of this part.@ 
 
While the statute generally limits PTC system implementation and operation to certain main 
linesCdefined for freight purposes as track over which 5 million or more gross tons of railroad 
traffic is transported annuallyCFRA is required to define passenger main line by regulation.  In 
that regard has determined that freight density, as such, is not a relevant factor (see 49 U.S.C. ' 
20157(i)(2)(B).  FRA intends for intercity and commuter passenger service to have the same 
meaning for purposes of this part as has been applied under 49 CFR part 238 (Passenger 
Equipment Safety Standards).  That is scheduled service for the purpose of transporting persons 
from one place to another is passenger service for purposes of defining the PTC route system, and 
can be distinguished on that basis from tourist, historic or excursion service.  See, also, Appendix 
A to part 209.   
 
As a corollary, after the implementation date no intercity or commuter passenger operations may 
operate on any track that does not have a PTC system installed, except as described in the 
proposed rule.  A PTC system must be installed on any trackCregardless of its ownership or the 
weight of annual trafficCbefore any passenger trains may operate.  Thus, any passenger or freight 
track over which passenger trains operate must be PTC equipped.  
 
RSIA08 requires each intercity and commuter railroad to implement PTC AonYits main line over 
which intercity rail passenger transportation or commuter rail passenger transportation, as defined 
in section 24102, is regularly provided.@  Section 24102 uses the terms Aintercity@ and Acommuter@ 
in essentially the same way FRA has used the terms for safety regulatory purposes.   The single 
question that has been puzzling in considering this mandate has been the meaning of the 
possessive article, Aits,@ before Amain line.@  It appears clear from the course of congressional 
consideration that the expression was intended to apply to the passenger railroad=s entire route 
system, regardless of ownership.  Amtrak=s route system includes predominately trackage owned 
or controlled by others.  Many commuter railroads operate partially or even exclusively over lines 
owned by freight railroads.  On the other hand, FRA is persuaded that the same intention does not 
apply as to Class I freight railroads.  A Class I freight railroad might operate a train under trackage 
rights over a Class II or III railroad, but it does not appear that was intended to burden the smaller 
railroad with the responsibility to install PTC.    
 
 
31 
Accordingly, FRA is proposing to consider as passenger train main lines all tracks across the 
nation over which passenger trains are transported.  For the purposes of passenger trains, a main 
line is determined regardless of the amount (i.e., 5 million or more gross tons annually) or 
frequency (i.e., regularly provided) of railroad traffic or the ownership of the track segment.  Thus, 
if a passenger train is transported over a track, the track requires PTC implementation and 
operation, regardless of whether the track is owned by a passenger railroad entity, a Class I 
railroad, or any smaller freight railroads, including Class II and short line railroads. 
 
This approach is consistent both with FRA=s understanding of congressional intent and FRA=s 
historical safety sensitivity to regulating passenger transportation and is permissible under 49 
U.S.C. ' 20157(a)(1)(C).  For example, in the relatively recent final rule governing continuous 
welded rail, different schedules were developed for track inspection intervals associated with 
freight and passenger train operations.  See 71 Fed. Reg. 59,677, 59,681 (Oct. 11, 2006).  
According to FRA, the different schedules for track inspection were developed to consider the 
potentially greater severity, especially in terms of loss of life, from possible future track-related 
passenger train accidents. 
 
If FRA were to otherwise restrict PTC systems on passenger train main lines that are only owned 
by the passenger railroads, then PTC systems would only be required on 11% of all track used by 
the passenger railroads across the nation, which would mostly include only the Northeast Corridor 
(NEC) and some passenger lines in Michigan.  Considering Congress= concern with accidents 
involving multiple passenger fatalities, which appears to be a significant impetus for Congress= 
final passage of RSIA08, FRA believes that Congress did not intend in 49 U.S.C. ' 20157 to limit 
PTC system operation to this narrow passenger territory. 
 
Nevertheless, while all passenger routes, including those over track owned by freight railroads, are 
automatically deemed main lines under the proposed rule, the proposed rule also provides an 
exception for those main lines that would not be main lines but for the existence of passenger 
trains and are not deemed by FRA main lines due to limited or no freight railroad operations.  This 
exception is permissible pursuant to 49 U.S.C. ' 20157(i)(2)(B).  The proposed procedure for such 
exceptions can be found under '' 236.1011 and 236.1019, as further discussed below. 
 
In addition to determining which tracks require PTC system implementation and operation, 
paragraph (b) requires such installation be performed by the Ahost railroad.@  Subpart I makes a 
distinction between the railroad that has effective operating control over a segment of track, and a 
railroad that is simply passing its trains across the same segment of track.  While the concept of 
actual ownership of the track segment plays a significant role in determining the host railroad, a 
PTC system may be required on a track segment that is not owned by a PTC railroad.  To avoid 
confusion, FRA designates the host railroad as the railroad that exercises operational control of the 
movement of trains on the segment, irrespective of the actual ownership of the segment.  This is in 
contrast to a tenant railroad, which is any railroad that uses a segment of track but does not 
exercise operational control of the movements of its trains.  The terms Ahost railroad@ and Atenant 
railroad@ are defined as such in the definitions listed under ' 235.1003. 
 
 
32 
FRA has analyzed the costs and benefits below based on the deployment requirements of RSIA08 
discussed above. 
 
Defining an enforceable system  
 
On route segments which are not part of passenger main track, the two triggers that would require 
a Class I railroad to install PTC systems are freight traffic volume and whether the route is used to 
transport PIH/TIH materials.  Railroads have some control (although limited by existing PHMSA 
regulations and their common carrier obligation) over both volume and PIH/TIH routing .  
Therefore, in order to develop a regulation that meets Congressional intent which may be 
enforceable, FRA needs to define the portion of the rail system that is covered, and can only do 
that by limiting changes to the system definition.  Once a PTC system is installed, a railroad would 
not be permitted to remove or treat it as inoperative unless such discontinuance or modification is 
approved by FRA in accordance with ' 236.1021, as discussed below.  This is the case even if the 
track segment ceases to be defined as a main line in accordance with subpart I due to traffic pattern 
or consist changes, such as annual traffic levels possibly dipping below the 5 million gross ton 
threshold referenced in the statute and in '' 236.1003 and 236.1005 or the rerouting of TIH traffic. 
 This result is consistent with longstanding practice under 49 U.S.C. ' 20502 (see 49 CFR part 
235). 
 
The requirements for PTC contained in RSIA08 pertaining to freight lines define the intended 
route structure by reference to the presence or absence of TIH traffic and the annual gross tonnage. 
 The law requires installation and operation of a PTC system where it (1) is part of a Class I 
railroad system, (2) carries at least 5 million gross tons of rail traffic, and (3) carries at least some 
TIH traffic.  Based upon information available to FRA, and assuming a level of rail operations 
consistent with normal economic conditions, these requirements describe approximately 45,000 
miles of freight-only territory plus almost 18,000 miles where both TIH and passengers are 
carried.  There are another 6,000 miles track owned by a Class I railroad and used for passenger 
service that would not otherwise be required to be equipped, for a total build-out of about 69,000 
route miles.  These lines basically describe the heart or Acore@ of the Class I freight network, albeit 
with some gaps. 
 
However, the railroads carry only about 100,000 carloads of TIH products annually 
(approximately 0.3% of all rail traffic).  Facing an extraordinary potential for tort liability 
associated with this traffic, the railroads have sought through various means to reduce the potential 
for release of these commodities through safety improvements; but they have also sought to be 
relieved of their common carrier obligation to carry them.  The RSIA mandate, which entails an 
expenditure of billions of dollars, most of it nominally because the lines in question carry TIH, 
presents an additional enormous incentive for the Class I railroads to shed TIH traffic and, further, 
to concentrate the remaining TIH traffic on the fewest possible lines of railroad. 
 
FRA is first concerned that TIH traffic could be diverted from the rail mode.  Although the risks of 
transporting these commodities can be reduced by product substitution, by coordination of 
transportation that reduces length of haul, and by other means, and although the US Department of 
 
33 
Transportation continues to support these means where feasible, for the present there are still 
realistic and supportable demands for transportation of these TIH commodities that implicate the 
national interest in a very strong way.  Hazardous materials are vital to maintaining the health of 
the economy of the United States and are essential to the well-being of its people.  These materials 
are used in water purification, farming, manufacturing, and other industrial applications.  The need 
for hazardous materials to support essential services means that transportation of hazardous 
materials is unavoidable.  There are over 20 hazardous materials considered to be TIH that are 
shipped by rail in tank car quantities.  In 2003, over 77,000 tank car loads of TIH materials were 
shipped by rail.   
 
Examples of TIH materials include anhydrous ammonia and chlorine.  Anhydrous ammonia is an 
important source of nitrogen fertilizer for crops and is used in the continuous cycle cooling units 
found in various appliances and vehicles and in the production of explosives and manufacturing of 
nitric acid and certain alkalis, pharmaceuticals, synthetic textile fibers, plastics, and latex 
stabilizers.  Chlorine is used as an elemental disinfectant for over 84 percent of large drinking 
water systems (those serving more than 10,000 people), according to the American Water Works 
Association.  For pharmaceuticals, chlorine chemistry is essential to manufacturing 85 percent of 
their products.  Chlorine chemistry is also used in 25 percent of all medical plastics, and 70 percent 
of all disposable medical applications.  The single largest use of chlorine is for the production of 
polyvinyl chloride (PVC), which is used for building and construction materials such as siding, 
windows, pipes, decks and fences. 
 
The only effective modal alternative for transporting TIH materials is by road, and for the present 
insufficient capacity exists in the form of suitable packages (tank trucks, intermodal tanks).  
Further, diversion to highways would entail significantly higher societal costs, including adverse 
safety trade-offs from more trucks on the highways--even before the potential for accidental 
release of product or further security vulnerabilities are considered.  
 
FRA is also concerned that TIH traffic could be retained on the railroads but concentrated in such 
a way as to result in circuitous routings with greater exposure to derailment hazards and security 
threats.  Although security concerns may be addressed to some extent by rerouting during periods 
of high alert in specified urban areas, these detour routes would inevitably be over lines not 
equipped with PTC systems.  These are the kinds of unfavorable trade-offs that the recent 
amendments to PHMSA=s rail security ruleCbased on a separate statutory mandate and developed 
in concert with FRACwere intended to prevent.  See, e.g., 73 FR 20752 (April 16, 2008); 73 FR 
72182 (Nov. 26, 2008).); 49 CFR ' 172.820. 
 
Finally, FRA believes that, while the presence of TIH traffic on the rail network was viewed by the 
Congress as a good proxy for risk sufficient to warrant PTC system installation and operation, 
FRA is not persuaded that it was the intent of Congress that TIH traffic be driven from the 
railroads or concentrated on a smaller number of lines with more circuitous routings.  The final 
legislation constituting the RSIA emerged following the Chatsworth collision of September 12, 
2008, which claimed 25 lives (one rail employee and 24 passengers).  However, neither H.R. 2095, 
as initially passed by the House of Representatives on October 17, 2007, nor the Senate version of 
 
34 
the bill passed on August 1, 2008, was limited to TIH routes.  All versions of the bill, including 
that finally enacted, preserved FRA=s ability to apply the technology to additional routes. 
 
Although FRA recognizes that the congressional trade-offs in September 2008 were driven by the 
impending end of the 110th Congress, the Chatsworth accident, and the desire on the part of some 
senators to see a rapid deployment of PTC technology (more rapid, in fact, than provided in either 
the Senate- or House-enacted versions), FRA does not believe that the Congress intended an 
implementation that would create substantial incentives to drive TIH traffic off of the railroads or 
concentrate it in such a way that large urban areas would see an increase in volume above that 
expected using normal, direct routing of the shipments.  Accordingly, FRA proposes to use its 
discretion in crafting implementing regulations to preserve the presumed congressional intent.  
FRA does this by proposing in paragraph (b) that implementation plans required to be filed by 
April 16, 2010, be based on 2008 traffic levels.  Although rail traffic, including TIH traffic, 
declined in the second half of the year, 2008 constitutes a much more Anormal@ base year than 
2009 is expected to be due to the current economic conditions.  It was also the year during which 
the Congress enacted the subject mandate. 
 
In taking this action, FRA departs from the RSAC consensus that 2009 be used as the base year.  
Since the RSAC initially took up this subject, rail traffic levels have continued to plummet, and 
that decision now appears to be inappropriate.  FRA did advise that PTC Working Group that it 
reserved the right to Alock in@ the PTC route structure as of passage of RSIA08 to prevent 
unintended consequences.  From a technical standpoint, ' 236.1005(b) attempts to do just that, but 
with ample room for adjustment in light of normal changes in market conditions. 
 
Paragraph (b)(2) would require that the determination of Class I freight railroad main lines 
required to be equipped be initially established and reported as follows using a 2008 traffic base 
for gross tonnage and determine the presence of TIH traffic based on 2008 shipments and routings. 
 If increases in traffic occur that require a line to be equipped and the PTCIP has already been 
filed, an amendment would be required.  As suggested by the RSAC, gross tonnage would be 
measured over two years to avoid unusual spikes in traffic driving investments inappropriately.  
However, if the 5 million gross tons threshold was met based on the prior two years of traffic, and 
TIH was added to the route, the railroad would be required to promptly file a PTCIP amendment 
and thereafter equip the line by the end of December 31, 2015 or within two years, whichever is 
later.   
 
Once a PTC system is installed, it cannot be removed or treated as inoperative unless such 
discontinuance or modification is approved by FRA in accordance with ' 236.1021, as discussed 
below.  This is the case even if the track segment ceases to be defined as a main line in accordance 
with subpart I due to traffic pattern or consist changes, such as annual traffic levels possibly 
dipping below the 5 million gross ton threshold referenced in the statute and in '' 236.1003 and 
236.1005 or the rerouting of TIH traffic.  This result is consistent with longstanding practice under 
49 U.S.C. ' 20502 (see 49 CFR part 235).  To the extent traffic levels decline or TIH traffic ceases 
prior to April 16, 2010, or during the implementation period, a railroad could ask FRA to except a 
line segment from the requirement that it be equipped.  The railroad would need to provide 
 
35 
estimated traffic projections for the next 5 years (e.g., as a result of planned rerouting, 
coordinations, location of new business on the line).  Where the request involves prior or planned 
rerouting of TIH traffic, the railroad would be required to provide a supporting analysis that takes 
into consideration the requirements of the PHMSA rail routing rule, including any railroad-specific 
and interline routing impacts.  For example, the request should include information where multiple 
railroad carriers may coordinate traffic, especially where there are parallel lines directing traffic in 
opposite directions.  FRA could approve an exception if FRA finds that it would be consistent with 
safety and in the public interest. 
 
There was discussion in the PTC Working Group regarding how to handle new passenger service.  
Amtrak in particular suggested that FRA might consider some leeway for new intercity service 
that could be instituted within a short period if the sponsor (most likely a state government) 
requested.  FRA considered this contingency but concluded that new passenger service should be 
adequately planned and deliberately executed with safety as its first priority.  The proposal in 
paragraph (b) states that, after December 31, 2015, no intercity or commuter rail passenger service 
could continue or commence until a PTC system has been installed and made operative.  FRA 
requests comment on this proposal and on whether a new rail passenger service commenced after 
April 10, 2010, but before December 31, 2015, should be permitted any leeway for installation of 
PTC after 2015 and, if so, what special circumstances would warrant that treatment. 
 
Paragraph (c) provides amplifying information regarding the installation and integration of hazard 
detectors into PTC systems.  Paragraph (c)(1) reiterates FRA=s position that any hazard detectors 
that are currently integrated into an existing signal and train control system must be integrated into 
mandatory PTC systems and that the PTC system will enforce as appropriately on receipt of a 
warning from the detector.  Paragraph (c)(2) requires each PTCSP submitted by a railroad must 
also identify any additional hazard detector to provide warnings to the crew that a railroad may 
elect to install.  The PTCSP must also clearly define the actions required by the crew upon receipt 
of the alarm or other warning or alert.  FRA does not expect that railroads will install hazard 
detectors at every location where a hazard might possibly exist. 
 
The preceding being identified, paragraph (c)(3) specifies, in the case of high speed service (as 
described in ' 236.1007 as any service operating at speeds greater than 90 mph) that FRA will 
require the hazard analysis to address any hazards on the route, along with a reason why additional 
hazard detectors are not required to provide warning and enforcement for hazards not already 
protected by an existing hazard detector.  The hazard analysis must clearly identify the risk 
associated with the hazard, and the mitigation(s) measures implemented if a hazard detector is not 
installed and interfacing with a PTC system.  For instance, in the past large motor vehicles have 
left parallel or overhead structures and have fouled active passenger rail lines.  Depending upon 
the circumstances, such events can cause catastrophic train accidents.  Although not every such 
event can be prevented, detection of obstacles such as this may make it possible to prevent an 
accident. 
 
Under paragraph (d), FRA proposes that each lead locomotive operating within a PTC system in 
operation be equipped with an operative event recorder that captures safety-critical data routed to 
 
36 
the engineer=s display that the engineer must obey, as well as the text of mandatory directives and 
authorized speeds.  FRA intends that this information be available in the event of an accident with 
a PTC equipped system to determine root causes and the necessary actions that must be taken to 
prevent reoccurrence.  Although FRA expects implemented PTC systems will prevent PTC-
preventable accidents, in the event of system failure FRA believes it is necessary to capture 
available data relating to the event.  Further, FRA sees value in capturing information regarding 
any accident that may occur outside of the control of a PTC system as it is currently 
designedCincluding the prevention of collisions with trains not equipped with PTC systemsCand 
accidents that could otherwise have been prevented by PTC technology, but were unanticipated by 
the system developers, the employing railroad, or FRA. 
 
The data may be captured in the locomotive event recorder, or a separate memory module.  If the 
locomotive is placed in service on or after October 1, 2009, the event recorder and memory 
module, if used, shall be crashworthy, otherwise known as crash-hardened, in accordance with ' 
229.135.  For locomotives built prior to that period, the data shall be protected to the maximum 
extent possible within the limits of the technology being used in the event recorder and memory 
module. 
 
A PTC system required by subpart I must be designed to prevent the movement of a train through 
a main line switch in the wrong position.  Paragraph (e) provides amplifying information on switch 
point monitoring, indication, warning of misalignment, and associated enforcement. 
 
According to the statute, each PTC system must be designed to prevent Athe movement of a train 
through a switch left in the wrong position.@  FRA understands Awrong position@ to mean not in the 
position for the intended movement of the train.  FRA believes that Congress= use of the phrase 
Aleft in the wrong position@ was primarily directed at switches in non-signaled (dark) territory such 
as the switch involved in the aforementioned accident at Graniteville, South Carolina.  FRA also 
believes that, in order to prevent potential derailment or divergence to an unintended route, it is 
critical that all switches be monitored by a PTC system in some manner to detect they are in their 
proper position for train movements.  If a switch is misaligned, the PTC system shall provide an 
acceptable safe state of train operations. 
 
Prior to the statute, FRA=s concept of PTC, based on RSAC recommendations, provided for 
positive train separation, speed enforcement, and work zone protection.  The addition of switch 
point monitoring and run through prevention would have eliminated the Graniteville, South 
Carolina accident where a misaligned switch resulted in the unintended divergence of a train 
operating on the main track onto a siding track and the collision of that train with another parked 
train on the siding.  As noted earlier, the collision resulted in the release of chlorine gas, nine 
deaths, and required the evacuation of the entire town for two weeks while remediation efforts 
were in progress. 
 
As discussed above, FRA considered requiring PTC systems to be interconnected with each main 
line switch and to individually monitor each switch=s point position in such a manner as to provide 
for a positive stop short of any misalignment condition.  However, after further consideration and 
 
37 
discussion with the PTC Working Group, FRA believes that such an approach may be overly 
aggressive and very expensive in signal territory.   
 
Under paragraph (e), FRA instead proposes to treat switches differently, depending upon whether 
they are within a wayside or cab signal systemCor are provided other similar safeguards (i.e., 
distant switch indicators and associated locking circuitry) required to meet the applicable switch 
position standards and requirements of subparts A-GCor are within non-signaled (dark) territory.   
 
While a PTC system in dark territory would be required to enforce a positive stopCas discussed in 
more detail belowCa PTC system in signal territory would require a train to operate at restricted 
speed between the associated signal, over any switch in the block governed by the signal, and until 
reaching the next subsequent signal that is displaying a signal indication more permissive than 
proceed at restricted speed.   
 
Signal territory includes various types of switches, including power-operated switches, hand-
operated switches, spring switches, electrically-locked switches, electro-pneumatic switches, and 
hydra switches, to name the majority.  Each type of switch pose different issues as it relates to 
PTC system enforcement.  We look at power- and hand-operated switches as examples.  
 
On a territory without a PTC system, if a power-operated switch at an interlocking or control point 
would be in a condition resulting in the signal system displaying a stop indication, an approaching 
train would have to stop generally only a few feet from the switch, and in the large majority of 
cases no more than several hundred feet.  In contrast, in PTC territory adhering to the 
aforementioned overly aggressive requirement, a train would have to stop at the signal, which may 
be in close proximity to its associated switch, and operate at restricted speed to that switch, where 
it would have to stop again.  FRA believes that, since the train would be required to stop at the 
signal, and must operate at restricted speed until it completely passes the switch (with the crew by 
rule watching for and prepared to stop short of, among other concerns, an improperly lined 
switch), another enforced stop at the switch would be unnecessarily redundant. 
 
Operations using hand-operated switches would provide different, and arguably greater, 
difficulties and potential risks.  Generally, in between each successive interlocking and control 
point, signal spacing along the right of way can approximately be 1 to 3 miles or more apart, 
determined by the usual length of track circuits and the sufficient number of indications that would 
provide optimal use for train operations.  Each signal governs the movement through the entire 
associated block up to the next signal.  Thus, a train approaching a hand-operated switch may 
encounter further difficulties since its governing signal may be much further away than one would 
be for a power-operated switch.  If within signaled territory a hand-operated switch outside of an 
interlocking or control point would be in a condition resulting in the signal system displaying a 
restricted speed signal indication, an approaching train may be required to stop before entering the 
block governed by the signal and proceed at restricted speed, or to otherwise reduce its speed to 
restricted speed as it enters the block governed by the signal, and be operated at restricted speed 
until the train reaches the next signal displaying an indication more permissive than proceed at 
restricted speed, including while passing over any switch within the block.  The governing signal, 
 
38 
however, may be anywhere from a few feet to more than a mile from the hand-operated switch.  
For instance, if a signal governs a 3 mile long block, and there is a switch at 1.8 miles after passing 
the governing signal (stated in advance of the signal), and that switch is misaligned, the train 
would have to travel that 1.8 miles at restricted speed.  Even if they were able to normal the 
misaligned switch, they would need to remain at restricted speed at least until the next signal 
(absent an upgrade of the cab signal indication). 
 
In signaled territory, to require a PTC system to enforce a positive stop of an approaching train at 
each individual switch that is misaligned would be an unnecessary burden on the industry, 
particularly since movement beyond the governing signal would be enforced by the PTC system to 
restricted speed.  Accordingly, in signal territory, FRA proposes in paragraph (e)(1) to require a 
PTC system to enforce restricted speed through the block.  By definition, at restricted speed, the 
locomotive engineer must be prepared to stop within one-half the range of vision short of any 
misaligned switch or broken rail, etc., not to exceed 15 or 20 miles per hour depending on the 
operating rule of the railroad.  Accordingly, if a PTC system is integrated with the signal system, 
and a train is enforced by the PTC system to move at restricted speed past a signal displaying a 
restricted speed indication, FRA feels comfortable that the PTC system will meet the statutory 
mandate by preventing the movement of the train through the switch left in the wrong position.  
While this solution would not completely eliminate human factors, it would significantly mitigate 
the risk of a train moving through a misaligned switch and would be much more cost effective. 
Moreover, it would be cost prohibitive to require the industry to equip individually each of the 
many thousands of hand-operated switches with a wayside interface unit (WIU) necessary to 
interconnect with a PTC system in order to provide a positive stop short of any such switch that 
may be misaligned.  Currently each switch in signal territory has its position monitored by a switch 
circuit controller (SCC). When a switch is not in its normal position, the SCC opens a signal 
control circuit to set the signals governing movement over the switch location to display its most 
restrictive aspect (usually red). A train encountering a red signal at the entrance to a block will be 
required to operate at restricted speed through the entire block, which be several miles in length 
depending on signal spacing. The signal system is not capable of informing the train crew which 
switch, if any, in the block may be in an improper position since none of switches are equipped 
with an independent WIU. There could be many switches within the same block in a city or other 
congested area. Thus, there is a possibility that one or more switches may be not in its proper 
position and the signal system is unable to transmit which switch or switches are not in normal 
position. The governing signal could also be displaying a red aspect on account of a broken rail, 
broken bond wire, broken or wrapped line wire, bad insulated joint, bad insulated switch or gage 
rods, or other defective condition.  
 
However, in dark territory, by definition, there are no signals available to provide any signal 
indication or to interconnect with the switches or PTC system.  Without the benefit of a wayside or 
cab signal system, or other similar system of equivalent safety, the PTC system will have no 
signals to obey. In such a case, the PTC system may be designed to allow for virtual signals, that is 
waypoints in the track database that would correspond to the physical location of the signals had 
they existed.  Accordingly, in dark territory where PTC systems are implemented and governed by 
this subpart, the PTC system must enforce a positive stop for each misaligned switch whereas the 
 
39 
lead locomotive must be stopped short of the switch to preclude any fouling of the switch.  Once 
the train stops, the railroad will have an opportunity to correct the switch=s positioning and then 
continue its route as intended.  
 
Unlike in signal territory, FRA expects that on lines requiring PTC in dark territory, each switch 
will be equipped with a WIU to monitor the switch's position.  A Wayside Interface Unit is a 
device that aggregates control and status information from one or more trackside devices for 
transmission to a central office and/or an approaching train=s onboard PTC equipment, as well as 
disaggregating received requests for information, and promulgates that request to the appropriate 
wayside device.  Most of the switches in dark territory are hand-operated with a much smaller 
amount of them being spring and hydra switches.  In dark territory, usually none of switches have 
their position monitored by a switch circuit controller and railroads have been relied on the proper 
handling of these switches by railroad personnel.  When it is necessary to throw a main line switch 
from normal to reverse, an obligation arises under the railroad=s rules to restore the switch upon 
completion of the authorized activity.  Switch targets or banners are intended to provide minimal 
indication of the switch=s position, but in the typical case trains are not required to operate at a 
speed permitting them to stop short of open switches.   As evidenced by the issuance of 
Emergency Order No. 24 and the subsequent Railroad Operating Rules Final Rule (73 FR 8442; 
Feb. 13, 2008), proper handling of main line switches cannot be guaranteed in every case.   
However, now with the implementation and operation of PTC technology, if a switch is not in the 
normal position, that information will be transmitted to the locomotive.  The PTC system will then 
know which switch is not in the normal position and require a positive stop at that switch location 
only.  FRA acknowledges that regardless of a switch=s position, and regardless of whether the 
switch is in dark or signaled territory, movement through the switchCeven at low speedsCmay still 
create an unacceptable risk of collision with another train.   
 
FRA understands the term Aunacceptable risk@ to mean risk that cannot be tolerated by the 
managing activity.  It is a type of identified risk that must be eliminated or controlled. 
For instance, such an unacceptable risk may exist with a hand-operated crossover between the 
tracks or a hand-operated switch leading to a passing siding or access to another subdivision or 
branch line.   The switches mentioned in (e)(1)(ii)(B) are in locations where, if the switch is left 
lined in the wrong position, a train would be allowed to traverse through the crossover and 
potentially into the path of another train operating on an adjoining main track, siding, or other 
route.  Even if such switches were located within a signaled territory, the signal governing 
movements over the switch locations, for both tracks as may be applicable, would be displaying 
their most restrictive aspect (usually red).  This restrictive signal indication would in turn allow 
both trains to approach the location at restricted speed where one or both of the crossover switches 
are lined in the reverse position.  Since the PTC system is not capable of actually enforcing 
restricted speed other than its upper limits, the PTC system would enforce a 15 or 20 mile per hour 
speed limit dependent upon the operating rules of the railroad. However, there is normally up to as 
much as a 5 mile per hour tolerance allowed for each speed limit before the PTC system will 
actually enforce the applicable required speed.  Thus, in reality, the PTC system would not enforce 
the restricted speed condition until each train obtained a speed of up to 25 miles per hour.  In this 
scenario, it is conceivable that two trains both operating at a speed of 25 miles per hour could 
 
40 
collide with each other at a combined impact speed (closing speed) of up to 50 miles per hour.  
While these examples are provided in the rule text, they are merely illustrative and do not limit the 
universe of what FRA may consider an unacceptable risk for the purpose of paragraph (e).  FRA 
emphasizes that FRA maintains the final determination as to what constitutes acceptable or 
unacceptable risk in accordance with paragraph (e)(1). 
  
The PTC system must also enforce a positive stop short of any misaligned switch on a PTC 
controlled siding in dark territory where the allowable track speed is in excess of 20 miles per 
hour.  Sidings are used for meeting and passing trains and where those siding movements are 
governed by the PTC system necessities the position of the switches located on them to be 
monitored in order to protect train movements operating on the siding.  Conversely, on signaled 
sidings, train movements are governed and protected by the associated signal indications, track 
circuits, and monitored switches, none of which are present in dark territory. 
 
Paragraph (e)(2) provides that the PTCSP include a safety analysis for PTC system enforcement 
associated with switch position and an identification and justification of any alternate means of 
protection other than that provided in this section shall be identified and justified.  FRA recognizes 
that in certain circumstances this flexibility may allow the reasonable use of a track circuit in lieu 
of individually monitored switches.   
 
Paragraph (e)(3) provides amplifying information regarding existing standards of subparts A 
through G related to switches, movable-point frogs, and derails in the route governed that are 
equally applicable to PTC systems unless otherwise provided in a PTCSP approved under this 
subpart.  This paragraph explains the FRA required and accepted railroad industry standard types 
of components used to monitored switch point position and how those devices are required to 
function.  This paragraph allows for some alternative method to be used to accomplish the same 
level of protection if it is identified and justified in a PTCSP approved under this subpart. 
 
Paragraph (f) provides amplifying information for determining whether a PTC system is 
considered to be configured to prevent train-to-train collisions, as required under paragraph (a).  
Paragraph (f) spells out when a PTC system may be considered to provide the necessary 
protections to provide the statutory requirement for prevention of train-to-train collisions.  FRA 
will consider the PTC system providing the required protection if the PTC system enforces the 
upper limits of restricted speed.  These criteria will allow following trains to pass intermediate 
signals displaying a restricting aspect and will allow for the issuance of joint mandatory directives. 
 
Where a wayside signal displays a AStop,@ AStop and Proceed,@ or ARestricted Proceed@ indication, 
paragraph (f)(1)(i) requires the PTC system to enforce the signal indication accordingly.  In the 
case of a AStop@ or AStop and Proceed@ indication, the train will be brought to a stop prior to 
passing the signal displaying the indication.  The train may then proceed at 15 or 20 miles per 
hour, as applicable according to the host railroad=s operating rule(s) for restricted speed.  In the 
case of a ARestricted Proceed@ indication, the train would be allowed to pass the signal at 15 or 20 
miles per hour.  In either event, the speed restriction would be enforced until the train passes a 
more favorable signal indication.  In dark territory where trains operate by mandatory directive, 
 
41 
the PTC system would be expected to enforce restricted speed on a train when the train was 
allowed into a block already occupied by another preceding train traveling in the same direction.  
FRA would expect each PTC system to function in this way and that each railroad will test each 
system to ensure such proper functioning. 
 
Paragraphs (g) through (k) all concern situations where temporary rerouting may be necessary and 
would affect application of the operational rules under subpart I.  While the proposed rule attempts 
to reduce the opportunity for PTC and non-PTC trains to co-exist on the same track, FRA 
recognizes that this may not always be possible, especially when a track segment is out of service 
and a train must be rerouted in order to continue to destination.  Accordingly, paragraph (g) allows 
for temporary rerouting of traffic between PTC equipped lines and lines not equipped with PTC 
systems.  FRA anticipates two situationsCemergencies and planned maintenanceCthat would 
justify such rerouting. 
 
Paragraph (g) provides the preconditions and procedural rules to allow or otherwise effectuate a 
temporary rerouting in the event of an emergency or planned maintenance that would prevent 
usage of the regularly used track.  Historically, FRA has dealt with temporary rerouting on an ad 
hoc basis.  For instance, on November 12, 1996, FRA granted UP, under its application RS&I-AP-
No. 1099, conditional approval for relief from the requirements of ' 236.566, which required 
equipping controlling locomotives with an operative apparatus responsive to all automatic train 
stop, train control, or cab signal territory equipment.  The conditional approval provided for 
Adetour train movements necessitated by catastrophic occurrence such as derailment, flood, fire, or 
hurricane@ on certain listed UP territories configured with automatic cab signals (ACS) or 
automatic train stop (ATS).  Ultimately, the relief would allow trains not equipped with the 
apparatus required under ' 236.566 to enter those ACS and ATS territories.  However, the relief 
was conditional upon establishing an absolute block in advance of each train movementCas 
prescribed by General Code of Operating Rules (GCOR) 11.1 and 11.2Cand notifying the 
applicable FRA Regional Headquarters.  The detour would only be permissible for up to seven 
days and FRA could modify or rescind the relief for railroad non-compliance.   
 
On February 7, 2006, that relief was temporarily extended to include defined territory where 
approximately two months of extensive track improvements were necessary.  Additional 
conditions for this relief included a maximum train speed of 65 miles per hour and notification to 
the FRA Region 8 Headquarters within 24 hours of the beginning of the non-equipped detour train 
movements and immediately upon any accident or incident.  On February 27, 2007, FRA provided 
similar temporary relief for another three months on the same territory.  
 
While the aforementioned conditional relief was provided on an ad hoc basis, FRA feels that 
codifying rules regulating temporary rerouting involving PTC system track or locomotive 
equipment is necessary due to the potential dangers of allowing mixed PTC and non-PTC traffic 
on the same track and the inevitable increased presence of PTC and PTC-like technologies.  
Moreover, FRA believes that the subject railroads and FRA would benefit from more regulatory 
flexibility to work more quickly and efficiently to provide for temporary rerouting to mitigate the 
problems associated with emergency situations and infrastructure maintenance. 
 
42 
 
Under the proposed rule, FRA is providing for temporary rerouting of non-PTC trains onto PTC 
track and PTC trains onto non-PTC track.  (Please note that any train operated on a PTC line that 
is other than it=s Anormal route@, which is equipped and functionally responsive to the PTC system 
over which it is subsequently operated; or any non-PTC train (not a passenger train or a freight 
train having any TIH) operated on a non-PTC line that is other than it=s Anormal route@, are not 
considered being rerouted for purposes of the conditions set forth in this section.) 
 
Paragraph (g) effectively provides temporary civil penalty immunity from various applicable 
requirements of this subpart, including paragraph (b) of this section as it relates to lead 
locomotives, similarly to how waivers from FRA have provided certain railroads immunity from ' 
236.566.  FRA seeks comments on what other requirements under part 236 should also be 
included. 
 
FRA expects that emergency rerouting will require some flexibility in order to respond to 
circumstances outside of the railroad=s controlCmost notably changes in the weather, vandalism, 
and other unexpected occurrencesCthat would result in potential loss of life or property or prevent 
the train from continuing on its normal route.  While paragraph (g) lists a number of possible 
emergency circumstances, they are primarily included for illustrative purposes and are not a 
limiting factor in determining whether an event rises to an emergency.  For instance, FRA would 
also consider allowing rerouting in the event use of the track is prevented by vandalism or 
terrorism.  While these events are not the primary reasons FRA proposes paragraph (g) to allow 
rerouting, FRA recognizes that they may fall outside of the railroad=s control. 
 
In the event of an emergency that would prevent usage of the track, temporary rerouting may occur 
instantly by the railroad without immediate FRA notice or approval.  By contrast, the vast majority 
of maintenance activities can be predicted by railroad operators.  While the proposed rule provides 
for temporary rerouting for such activities, the lack of exigent circumstances do not require the 
allowance of instantaneous rerouting without an appropriate request and, in cases where the 
request is for rerouting to exceed 30 days, FRA approval.  
 
Accordingly, under paragraph (g), procedurally speaking, temporary rerouting for emergency 
circumstances will be treated differently than temporary rerouting for planned maintenance.  While 
FRA continues to have an interest in monitoring all temporary rerouting to ensure that it is 
occurring as contemplated by FRA and within the confines of the rule, the timing of FRA 
notification and the approval procedures, reflect the aforementioned differences. 
 
When an emergency circumstance occurs that would prevent usage of the regularly used track, and 
would require temporary rerouting, the subject railroad must notify FRA within one business day 
after the rerouting commences.  To provide for communicative flexibility in emergency situations, 
the proposed rule provides for such notification to be made in writing or by telephone.  FRA 
proposes that written notification may be accomplished via overnight mail, e-mail, or facsimile.  In 
any event, the railroad should take the steps necessary for the method of notification selected to 
include confirmation that an appropriate person actually on duty with FRA receives the 
 
43 
notification and FRA is duly aware of the situation.  Such notification may be made to the National 
Response Center, clearly describing the actions taken, and the railroad point of contact s that FRA 
may follow up for additional information. 
 
While telephone notification may provide for easy communications by the railroad, a mere phone 
call would not provide for documentation of information required under paragraph (g).  Moreover, 
if for some reason the phone call is made at a time when the designated telephone operator is not 
on duty or if the caller is only able to leave a message with the FRA voice mail system, the 
possibility exists that the applicable FRA personnel would not be timely notified of the 
communication and its contents.  Thus, while not in the proposed rules, FRA is considering 
requiring any telephonic notification performed in accordance with paragraph (g) to be followed 
up with written notification within 48 hours.  FRA seeks comments on this issue. 
 
If the National Response Center is not used to receive and distribute the notifications of emergency 
rerouting, FRA is considering using particular contact mail and e-mail addresses and telephone 
and facsimile numbers to be used exclusively for the notifications required by paragraph (g) as 
they relate to emergency rerouting.  Otherwise, if a railroad would notify a particular member of 
the FRA staff in writing, and that staff member is unavailable (e.g., on annual or sick leave, 
working in the field, or otherwise indisposed), FRA would not be timely notified of the emergency 
situation and the rerouting actions that are occurring.  If there is a singular contact address for each 
form of written notification, FRA could attempt to provide continuous personnel assignment to 
monitor incoming notifications.  FRA seeks comments on this issue.  FRA also seeks comments on 
the possible need to include requirements relating to confirmation of receipt of notifications 
required under paragraph (g). 
 
Emergency rerouting can only occur without FRA approval for fourteen (14) consecutive calendar 
days.  If the railroad requires more time, it must make a request to the Associate Administrator.  
The request must be made directly to the Associate Administrator and separately from the initial 
notification sometime before the 14-day emergency rerouting period expires.  Unless the Associate 
Administrator notifies the railroad of his or her approval before the end of the allowable 
emergency rerouting timeframe, the civil penalty immunity provided by paragraph (g) will expire 
at the end of that timeframe. 
 
While a mere notification is necessary to commence emergency rerouting, a request must be made, 
with subsequent FRA approval, to perform planned maintenance rerouting.  The relative 
predictability of planned maintenance activities allows railroads to provide FRA with much more 
advanced request of any necessary rerouting and allows FRA to review that request.  FRA 
proposes that the request must be made at least 10 calendar days before the planned maintenance 
rerouting commences. 
 
To ensure a retrievable record, the request must be made in writing.  It may be submitted to FRA 
by fax, email, or courier.  Because of security protocols placed in effect after 9/11,  regular mail 
undergoes irradiation to ensure that any pathogens have been destroyed prior to delivery.  The 
irradiation process adds significant delay to FRA=s receipt of the document,  and the submitted 
 
44 
document may be damaged due to the irradiation process.  The lack of emergency circumstances 
makes telephonic communication less necessary and less preferable.  Like notifications for 
emergency rerouting, the request for planned rerouting must include the number of days that the 
rerouting should occur.  If the planned maintenance will require rerouting up to 30 days, then the 
request must be made with the Regional Administrator.  If it will require rerouting for more than 
30 days, then the request must be made with the Associate Administrator.  These longer time 
periods reflects FRA=s opportunity to review and approve the request.  In other words, since FRA 
expects that the review and approval process will provide more confidence that a higher level of 
safety will be maintained, the rerouting period for planned maintenance activities may be more 
than the 14 days allotted for emergency rerouting. 
 
Regardless of whether the temporary rerouting is the result of an emergency situation or planned 
maintenance, the communication to FRA required under paragraph (g) must include the 
information listed under paragraph letter (i).  This information is necessary to provide FRA with 
context and details of the rerouting.  To attempt to provide railroads with the flexibility intended 
under paragraph (g), and to attempt to prevent enforcement of the rules from which the railroad 
should be receiving civil penalty immunity, FRA must be able to coordinate with its inspectors and 
other personnel.  This information may also eventually be important to FRA in developing 
statistical analyses and models, reevaluating its rules, and determining the actual level of danger 
inherent in mixing PTC and non-PTC traffic on the same tracks. 
 
For emergency rerouting purposes, the information is also necessary for FRA to determine whether  
it should order the railroad or railroads to cease rerouting or provide additional conditions that 
differ from the standard conditions specified in paragraph (i).  FRA recognizes the importance of 
allowing temporary rerouting to occur automatically in emergency circumstances.  However, FRA 
must also maintain its responsibility of ensuring that such rerouting occurs lawfully and as 
intended by the rules.  Accordingly, the proposed rules provide for the opportunity for FRA to 
review the information required by paragraph (g) to be submitted in accordance with paragraph 
letter (i) and order the railroad or railroads to cease rerouting if FRA finds that such rerouting is 
not appropriate or permissible  in accordance with the requirements of paragraphs (g) through (i), 
and as may be so directed in accordance with paragraph (k), as discussed further below. 
 
If FRA determines that an emergency rerouting should not have occurred, and that the railroad 
instituted the emergency rerouting knowing that it should not have been instituted, then the civil 
immunity intended under paragraph (g) would not apply.  As a result, FRA may impose a civil 
penalty for each violation caused by rerouting performed during this period.  FRA may also 
impose a civil penalty against the railroad for submitting to FRA a willfully fraudulent or incorrect 
emergency rerouting notification.  Due to the Awillful@ requirement, FRA does not believe that this 
would chill railroads from genuinely rerouting in emergency situations and notifying FRA of such 
rerouting. 
 
For rerouting due to planned maintenance, the information required under paragraph letter (i) is 
equally applicable and will be used to determine whether the railroad should not reroute at all.  If 
the request for planned maintenance is for a period of up to 30 days, then the request and 
 
45 
information must be sent in writing to the Regional Administrator of the region in which the 
temporary rerouting will occur.  While such a request is self-executingCmeaning that it will 
automatically be considered permissible if not otherwise responded toCthe Regional Administrator 
may prevent the temporary rerouting from starting by simply notifying the railroad or railroads 
that its request is not approved.  The Regional Administrator may otherwise provide conditional 
approval, request that further information be supplied to the Regional Administrator of Associate 
Administrator, or disapprove the request altogether.  For instance, a Regional Administrator the 
Associate Administrator may prevent or adjust rerouting in the event he or she finds that the 
rerouting indicated by the railroad is unsuitable or not permissive, the rerouting conditions should 
differ, or if he or she believes that a better, safer route is available for rerouting the traffic. 
 
If the railroad still seeks to reroute due to planned maintenance activities, it must provide the 
Regional Administrator or Associate Administrator, as applicable, the requested information.  If 
the Regional Administrator requests further information, no planned maintenance rerouting may 
occur until the information is received and reviewed and the Regional Administrator provides his 
or her approval.  Likewise, no planned maintenance rerouting may occur if the Regional 
Administrator disapproves of the request.  
 
If the Regional Administrator does not provide notice preventing the temporary rerouting, then the 
planned maintenance rerouting may begin and occur as requested.  However, once the planned 
maintenance rerouting begins, the Regional Administrator may at any time order the railroad or 
railroads to cease the rerouting in accordance with paragraph (k). 
 
Requests for planned maintenance rerouting exceeding 30 days, however, must be made to the 
Associate Administrator and are not self-executing.  No such rerouting may occur without 
Associate Administrator approval, even if the date passes on which the planned maintenance was 
scheduled to commence.  Like the Regional Administrator, the Associate Administrator may 
provide conditional approval, request further information, or disapprove of the request to reroute.  
Once approved rerouting commences, the Associate Administrator may also order the rerouting to 
cease in accordance with paragraph (k). 
 
Proposed paragraph (j) requires that, once temporary rerouting onto a non-PTC equipped line 
commences, regardless of whether it is for emergency or planned maintenance purposes, the track 
segments upon which the train will be rerouted must have an absolute block established in advance 
of each rerouted train movement and that each rerouted train movement shall not exceed 59 miles 
per hour for passenger and 49 miles per hour for freight 
 
Moreover, as referenced in proposed paragraph (g) as it applies to both emergency and planned 
maintenance circumstances, the track upon which FRA expects the rerouting to occur would 
require certain mitigating protections listed under paragraph (j) in light of the mixed PTC and non-
PTC traffic.  While FRA purposefully intends paragraph (j) to apply similarly to ' 236.567, FRA 
recognizes that ' 236.567 does not account for the statutory mandates of interoperability and the 
core PTC safety functions.  Accordingly, paragraph (j) must be more restrictive. 
 
 
46 
Section 236.567, which applies to territories where Aan automatic train stop, train control, or cab 
signal device fails and/or is cut out en route,@ requires trains to proceed at either restricted speed 
or, if an automatic block signal system is in operation according to signal indication, at no more 
than 40 miles per hour to the next available point of communication where report must be made to 
a designated officer.  Where no automatic block signal system is in use, the train shall be permitted 
to proceed at restricted speed or where an automatic block signal system is in operation according 
to signal indication but not to exceed medium speed to a point where absolute block can be 
established.  Where an absolute block is established in advance of the train on which the device is 
inoperative, train may proceed at not to exceed 79 miles per hour.  Paragraph (j) utilizes that 
absolute block condition, which more actively engages the train dispatcher in managing movement 
of the train over the territory (in both signaled and non-signaled territory).  Recognizing that re-
routes under this section will occur in non-signaled territory, the maximum authorized speeds 
associated with such territory are used as limitations on the speed of re-routed trains.  FRA agrees 
with the comments of labor representatives in the Working Group who contend that the PTC 
mandate alters to some extent what would otherwise be considered reasonable for these 
circumstances.  FRA welcomes comments on whether restrictions associated with re-routing 
should vary depending on whether the actual train in question is a passenger train or includes cars 
containing TIH materials. 
 
It should be noted that this paragraph (j) was added by FRA after further consideration of this issue 
and was no part of the RSAC consensus.  FRA believes that special precautions may be 
appropriate given the heightened safety expectations suggested by the RSIA mandate.  Comment is 
requested on the appropriateness of these restrictions, including any impact on other rail traffic. 
 
Paragraph (k), as previously noted, provides the Regional Administrator with the ability to order 
the railroad or railroads to cease rerouting operations that were requested for up to 30 days.  The 
Associate Administrator may order a railroad or railroads to cease rerouting operations regardless 
of the length of planned maintenance rerouting requested.  FRA believes this is an important 
measure necessary to prevent rerouting performed not in accordance with the rules and FRA=s 
expectations based on the railroad=s communications and to ensure the protection of train crews 
and the public.  However, FRA is confident that in the vast majority of cases railroads will utilize 
the afforded latitude reasonably and only under necessary circumstances. 
 
FRA expects each host railroad to develop a plan to govern operations in the event rerouting is 
performed in accordance with this section.  Thus, as noted further below in ' 236.1015, FRA 
proposes each PTCSP to include a plan accounting for such rerouted operations. 
 
FRA believes that were it not to add the rerouting procedures described in this section, that 
railroads would face extremely high costs.  A line problem could shut down an entire system and 
damage a regional economy, if rerouting was not an allowable option.  On the other hand, allowing 
unlimited rerouting would defeat the underlying purpose of the rule, and would not meet the intent 
of RSIA08.  The costs and benefits are included in the general analysis of costs and benefits 
below.  Although there are costs associated with the proposed rerouting procedures, in absence of 
such procedures rerouting could not occur at all and the negative cost impact to the railroad would 
 
47 
be greater.  Thus, this provision would add flexibility and minimize compliance costs. 
 
Section 236.1006 Equipping locomotives operating in PTC territory. 
 
The PTC working group discussed at great length the issues related to operation of PTC-equipped 
locomotives, and locomotives not equipped with PTC on-board apparatus, over lines equipped 
with PTC.  The working group recognized that the typical rule with respect to train control 
territory is that all controlling locomotives must be equipped and the system must be operative (see 
' 236.566).  It was also noted in the discussion that the Interstate Commerce Commission (FRA=s 
predecessor agency in the regulation of this subject matter) and FRA have provided some relief 
from this requirement in discrete circumstances where safety exposure was considered relatively 
low and the hardship associated with equipping additional locomotives was considered substantial. 
 
ASLRRA noted that its member railroads conduct limited operations over Class I railroad lines 
that will be required to be equipped with PTC in a substantial number of locations.  These 
operations are principally related to the receipt and delivery of carload traffic in interchange.  The 
small railroad service extends onto the Class I railroad in order to hold down costs and permit both 
the small railroad and the Class I to retain traffic that might be priced off the railroad if the Class I 
had to dispatch a crew to pick up or place the cars.  This, in turn, supports competitive 
transportation options for small businesses, including marginal small businesses in rural areas.   
 
ASLRRA advocated an exception that would permit the trains of its members and other small 
railroads to continue use of existing trackage rights and agreements without the necessity for 
equipping their locomotives with PTC.  They suggested that any incremental risk be mitigated by 
requiring that such trains proceed subject to the requirement for an absolute block in advance 
(similar to operating rules consistent with ' 236.567 applicable to trains with failed on-board train 
control systems).  This position was consistently opposed both by the rail labor organizations and 
the Class I railroads.  These organizations took the position that all trains should be equipped with 
PTC in order to gain the benefits sought by the congressional enactment and to provide the host 
railroad the full benefit of its investment in safety.  Informal discussions suggested that Class I 
railroads might offer assistance to certain small railroads in equipping of their locomotives (either 
technical or financial), but that this would, of course, be done based on the corporate interest of the 
Class I railroad. 
 
In the PTC working group and in informal discussions around the RSAC activities, Class I 
railroads indicated that they intended to take a strong position against non-equipped trains 
operating on their PTC lines, and that in order to enforce this restriction fairly they understood that 
their own locomotives would all need to be equipped (including older road switchers that might 
venture onto PTC-equipped lines only occasionally).  However, during these discussions FRA was 
not able to develop a clear understanding regarding the extent to which the Class I railroads under 
previously executed private agreements enjoy the effective ability outside the scope of FRA 
regulations to enforce a requirement that all trains be equipped.  FRA presumes for purposes of 
this proposal that there will be circumstances rooted in previously executed private agreements 
under which the Class I would be entitled to require the small railroad to use a controlling 
 
48 
locomotive equipped with PTC as a condition of coming onto the property.  FRA wishes to 
emphasize that, in making this regulatory proposal, FRA does not intend to influence the exercise 
of private rights or to suggest that public policy would disfavor an otherwise legitimate restriction 
on the use of unequipped locomotives on PTC lines.  Rather, this proposal is intended to explore 
limited exceptions that might be acceptable from the point of view of safety, and helpful from the 
point of view of the public interest in rail service, where it might be compatible with prior rights of 
the railroads involved.  FRA also notes that, in the absence of clear guidance on this issue, a 
substantial number of waiver requests could be expected that would have to be resolved without 
the benefit of decisional criteria previously examined and refined through the rulemaking process. 
 
Paragraph (a) states that, as general rule, all trains operating over PTC territory must be PTC-
equipped.  In other words, paragraph (a) requires that each lead locomotive should be operated 
with a PTC onboard apparatus if it is controlling a train operating on a track equipped with a PTC 
system in accordance subpart I.  The PTC onboard apparatus should operate and function in 
accordance with the PTCSP governing the particular territory.  Accordingly, it must successfully 
and sufficiently interoperate with the host railroad=s PTC system. 
 
Generally, the four parts of each PTC system are office, wayside, communications, and onboard 
components.  No need to invent new term.  FRA recognizes that a PTC onboard apparatus for a 
lead locomotive owned and operated by one railroad may not be part of the PTC system upon 
which the locomotive operates.  For example, a Class II railroad lead locomotive equipped with a 
PTC onboard apparatus may operate on a Class I railroad=s PTC line.  Throughout this rule, the use 
of the term APTC system,@ depending upon its context, usually refers to the host railroad=s PTC 
system, and not the tenant railroad=s lead locomotive.  When using the term, PTC onboard 
apparatus, however, FRA intends to cover all such mobile equipment, regardless of whether it on a 
locomotive owned or controlled by a host or tenant railroad. 
 
Under paragraph (b), this is followed by a series of qualifications and exceptions. 
 
First, it is understood that during the time PTC is being deployed, there will be unequipped 
movements over PTC lines.  In general, Class I locomotives are used throughout the owning 
railroad=s system and, under shared power agreements, on other railroads nationally.  FRA 
anticipates that the gradual equipping of locomotives, which will occur at a relatively small 
number of specialized facilities and which will require a day or two out of service as well as time 
in transit, will extend well into the implementation period that ends on December 31, 2015.  It will 
not be feasible to tie locomotives down to PTC lines, and the RSAC stakeholders fully understood 
that point.  Labor organizations did urge that railroads make every effort to use equipped 
locomotives as controlling units, and FRA believes that in general railroads will do so in order to 
obtain the benefits of their investment.   
 
Second, FRA has included a transitional provision related to PTC apparatus that fails upon 
attempted initialization that is specifically intended to encourage placement of PTC-equipped 
locomotives on the point during the period when reliability may be an issue.  This provision would 
allow a stated, declining percentage of locomotives equipped with PTC to be dispatched even if 
 
49 
the on-board apparatus fails.  Although FRA agrees with the objective of rail labor=s suggestion for 
Aconsist management@ that puts equipped locomotives on the point, FRA also recognizes that a 
number of factors related to the age and condition of locomotives may influence this decision.  
Further, in the early stages of implementation, requiring that power units be switched if 
initialization fails could result in significant train delays and contribute to congestion in yards and 
terminals.  Some Aslack@ in the system will be required to implement PTC intelligently and 
successfully.  Of course, if FRA determines during implementation that good faith efforts are not 
being made to take advantage of PTC-equipped locomotives, FRA could step in with more 
prescriptive requirements after notice and opportunity for comment. 
 
Recognizing that matching PTC lines with PTC-equipped controlling locomotives will be a key 
factor in obtaining the benefits of this technology in the period up to December 31, 2015, FRA 
requests comments on whether PTC Implementation Plans should be required to include power 
management elements describing how this will be accomplished to the degree feasible. 
 
Third, the section provides a cross-reference to Section 236.1029 pertaining to PTC on-board 
apparatus failing en route. 
 
Fourth, this provision includes exceptions for trains operated by Class II and III railroads, 
including a tourist or excursion railroads.  The exceptions are limited to lines not carrying intercity 
or commuter passenger service, except where the Class I freight railroad and the passenger railroad 
have requested an exception in the PTC Implementation Plan’s main line track exception 
addendum (MTEA) in accordance with § 236.1019 and FRA has approved that element of the 
plan. FRA believes that providing this flexibility is an important part of FRA=s compliance with 
the Regulatory Flexibility Act. 
 
FRA has considered whether to provide an exception for equipping Class II and Class III railroad 
locomotives operating over passenger routes equipped with PTC, but FRA has not been able to 
define conditions that would apparently be suitable in every case.  FRA is open to consideration of 
exceptions within the context of a PTC Implementation Plan.  To the extent that the host Class I or 
passenger railroad would need to be supportive of the exception, FRA recognizes that options may 
be foreclosed prior to FRA consideration.  However, railroads have historically exercised 
substantial control of operations over track that they own or dispatch, and in this case those 
interests significantly parallel the apparent intent of the Congress to achieve a high level of safety 
in mixed freight and passenger operations.  If FRA were to handle exceptions through PTC 
Implementation Plans, FRA seeks comments on how that should be accomplished.  FRA also 
seeks comments on whether there should be an assumption that the lead locomotives not equipped 
with PTC onboard apparatus’ on four unequipped Class II or III railroad trains will be permitted 
daily on a segment of PTC-equipped track and that variances from that are permitted in a PTC 
Implementation Plan.  If so, FRA questions whether that should be subject to the agreement of 
both railroads.  If agreement by the Class II or III railroad is not required, FRA seeks comments on 
what assurance there would be that the Class I railroad would not effectively shut out the Class II 
or III railroad’s operation. 
 
 
50 
FRA recognizes that most of the justifications stated for these proposed exceptions pertain to short 
movements for interchange that would constitute a small portion of the movements over the PTC-
equipped line.  The accident/incident data show that the risk related to these movements is small.  
A review of the last seven years of accident data covering 3,312 accidents that were potentially 
preventable by PTC showed that only two of those accidents involved a Class I railroad and a 
Class II or Class III railroad’s train.  FRA believes that the low level of risk revealed by these 
statistics justifies an exception for Class II and III railroad trains traversing a PTC-equipped line 
for a short distance.  FRA notes that the cost of equipping those trains would be high when viewed 
in the context of the financial strength of the Class II or III railroad and the marginal safety 
benefits would be relatively low in those cases where a small volume of traffic is moved over the 
PTC-equipped line.   
 
FRA also believes that it is clearly desirable to eventually have every locomotive using PTC-
equipped lines equipped with PTC.   However, FRA seeks comments on the length of time the 
exception should last and a justification of that length of time.  Other considerations aside, FRA 
seeks comments on whether FRA should not require a Class II or III railroad locomotive used on a 
PTC-equipped line to be equipped with PTC when it is rebuilt or replaced (i.e., when the cost of 
equipping a locomotive is lowest).  In other cases, the Class II or III railroad has dedicated 
locomotives serving the line to be equipped with PTC.  From the facts presently available to FRA, 
it appears to be appropriate for those locomotives to be equipped with PTC.  Moreover, FRA is 
aware of other cases where Class II and III railroads have rather more extensive operations over 
Class I railroad lines; and, in these cases, the risks incurred could be more substantial.  Further, in 
some of these cases the smaller railroads are aligned with the Class I railroads over which they 
operate or may even be under common ownership and control.  For purposes of  prompting a more 
complete public dialogue on this issue, FRA is proposing to limit unequipped movements by any 
single Class II or III railroad to not more than 4 trains per day over any given track segment on a 
PTC-equipped line.  A train moving from the small railroad to the point of interchange and back 
within the same calendar day would count as two trains. 
 
To the extent the movements in question did not exceed 20 miles, this exception would be 
available at least until FRA next considered the issue of PTC deployment.  Information available 
to FRA indicates that this would accommodate a substantial majority of the affected operations.   
 
51 
In the preamble FRA asks how it should apply if the small railroad=s locomotives were equipped 
for PTC. 
 
To the extent the movements in question exceeded 20 miles, the exception would be available only 
until December 31, 2020.  In some cases, small railroads operate over Class I railroads for over 
one hundred miles, and these operations may be integral to their service plans (e.g., permitting 
them to reach lines branching off from the Class I route structure for which the smaller railroad 
provides local service).  FRA recognizes that in these circumstances the smaller railroads would 
face overwhelming competition for supplier attention as well as significant challenges related to 
pricing that will attend the initial period of implementation.  Accordingly, FRA proposes to 
provide additional time for these railroads to equip the necessary locomotives.  In conjunction with 
this latitude, FRA would ask for progress reports to focus the attention of the railroads= 
management teams and ensure that the agency could not be presented with unreasonable demands 
for further extensions at the end of the extended implementation period. 
 
FRA recognizes that small railroads carry a wide variety of commodities, including TIH traffic.  
FRA invites comments on whether the small railroad exceptions for freight operations that FRA is 
proposing should be altered if the small railroad is transporting TIH traffic on PTC equipped track 
through a densely populated area.  Commenters are requested to detail any alternative standards 
they believe should be adopted to address such a situation.    
 
The costs and benefits of this section are included in the general analysis below.  The added 
flexibility this may provide for small entities is a key part of FRA=s compliance with the 
Regulatory Flexibility Act, as discussed below. 
 
Section 236.1007  Additional Requirements for High Speed Service 
 
Since the early 1990=s, there has been an interest centered around designated high speed corridors 
for the introduction of high speed rail, and a number of States have made progress in preparing rail 
corridors through safety improvements at highway-rail grade crossings, investments in track 
structure, and other improvements.  FRA has administered limited programs of assistance using 
appropriated funds.  With the passage of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009, 
Pub. L. No. 111-5, 123 Stat. 115 (2009), which provides $8 billion in capital assistance for high 
speed rail corridors and intercity passenger rail service, and the President=s announcement of a 
Vision for High Speed Rail in America in April of 2009, FRA expects those efforts to increase 
considerably.  FRA believes that railroads conducting high speed operations in the United States 
can provide a world class service as safe as, or better than, any high speed operations being 
conducted elsewhere. 
 
In anticipation of such service, and to ensure public safety, FRA has developed for PTC systems 
three tiers of requirements. The performance thresholds are intended to increase safety 
performance targets as the maximum speed limits increase to compensate for increased risks, 
including the potential frequency and adverse consequences of a collision or derailment.   
 
52 
Section 236.1007 proposes setting the intervals for the high speed safety performance targets for 
operations with: maximum speeds at or greater than 60 and 50 miles per hour for passenger service 
and freight operations, respectively, under paragraph (a); maximum speeds greater than 90 miles 
per hour under paragraph (b); and maximum speeds greater than 125 miles per hour under 
paragraph (c) and maximum speeds greater than 150 mph in paragraph (d). The reader should note 
that the requirements are additive as speed rises.  So, for instance, requirements above 90 miles per 
hour apply equally above 125 miles per hour and above 150 miles per hour. 
 
Paragraph (a) addresses the PTC system requirements for territories where speeds are greater than 
59 miles per hour for passenger service and 49 miles per hour for freight service.    Under existing 
regulations (49 CFR ' 236.0), block signal systems are required at these speeds (unless a manual 
block system is in place, an option that this proposal would phase out). The proposed rule expects 
covered operations moving at these speeds to have implemented a PTC system that provides, 
either directly or with another technology, all of the statutory PTC system functions along with the 
safety-critical functions of a block signal system.  Track circuits assist in broken rail detection and 
unintended track occupancies (equipment rolling out).  Fouling circuits can identify equipment that 
is intruding on the clearance envelope and may prevent raking collisions.    
 
FRA recognizes that advances in technology may render current block signal, fouling, and broken 
rail detection systems obsolete and FRA does not want to preclude the introduction of suitable and 
appropriate advanced technologies.  Accordingly, FRA believes that alternative mechanisms 
providing the same functionality are entirely acceptable and FRA encourages their development 
and use to the extent they do not have an adverse impact on the level of safety. 
 
Proposed paragraph (b) addresses system requirements for territories where operating speeds are 
greater than 90 miles per hour.  At these higher speeds, the implemented PTC system must not 
only comply with paragraph (a), but also be shown to be fail-safe (as defined in Appendix C) and 
prevent entry of rail traffic onto the higher speed line operating with a PTC system.  FRA intends 
this concept of fail-safe application to be understood in its commonplace meaning, i.e., that insofar 
as feasible the system is designed to fail to a safe state, which normally means that trains will be 
brought to a stop.   
 
Further, FRA understands that there are aspects of current system design and operation that may 
create a remote opportunity for a Awrong-side@ or unsafe failure and that these issues would be 
described in the PTCSP and mitigations would be provided.  FRA recognizes that, as applied in 
the general freight system, this proposal could create a significant challenge related to 
interoperability of freight equipment operating over the same territory.  Accordingly FRA requests 
comment on whether, where operations do not exceed 125 miles per hour or some other value, the 
requirement for compliance with Appendix C safety assurance principles might be limited to the 
passenger trains involved, with Anon-vital@ on-board processing permitted for the intermingled 
freight trains.   
 
As speed increases, it also becomes more important that inadvertent incursions on the PTC-
equipped track be prevented.  FRA proposes that this be done by effective means that might 
 
53 
include use of split-point derails properly placed, equipping of tracks providing entry with PTC, or 
arrangement of tracks and switches in such a way as to divert an approaching movement which is 
not authorized to enter onto the PTC line.  The protection mechanism on the slower speed line 
must be integrated with the PTC system on the higher speed line in a manner to provide 
appropriate control of trains operating on the higher speed line if a violation is not prevented for 
whatever reason.   
 
Paragraph (c) addresses very high speed rail operations exceeding 125 miles per hour, which is the 
maximum speed for Class 7 track under ' 213.307.  At these higher speeds, the consequences of a 
derailment or collision are significantly greater than at lower speeds due to the involved vehicle=s 
increased kinetic energy.  In such circumstances, in addition to meeting the requirements under 
paragraphs (a) and (b), including having a fail-safe PTC system, the entity operating above 125 
miles per hour must provide an additional safety analysis (the HSR-125) providing suitable 
evidence to the Associate Administrator that the PTC system can support a level of safety 
equivalent to, or better than, the best level of safety of comparable rail service in either the United 
States or a foreign country over the 5 year period preceding the submission of the PTCSP.     
 
Additionally, PTC systems on these high speed lines must provide the capability, as appropriate, to 
detect incursion from outside the right of way and provide warnings to trains.  Each subject 
railroad is free to suggest in its HSR-125 any method to the Associate Administrator that ensures 
that the subject high speed lines are corridors effectively sealed and protected from such incursions 
(see ' 213.347 of this title), including such hazards as large motor vehicles falling on the track 
structure from highway bridges. 
 
Paragraph (d) addresses the highest speeds existing or contemplated for rail operations exceeding 
150 miles per hour.  FRA expects these operations to be governed by a Rule of Particular 
Applicability and the HSR-125 required by paragraph (c) shall be developed as part of an overall 
system safety plan approved by the Associate Administrator. 
 
The quantitative risk showing required above 125 miles per hour is not required to include 
consideration of acts of deliberate violence.  The reason for this exclusion is simply to remove 
speculate or extraordinary considerations from the analysis.  FRA and the Department of 
Homeland Security will of course expect that security considerations are taken into account in 
system planning.   
 
FRA does not believe that this section creates any new costs or benefits, as any high-speed system 
would have had a very reliable version of PTC. 
 
Section 236.1009  Procedural requirements. 
 
RSIA08 and the proposed rule require that by April 16, 2010, each Class I railroad carrier and each 
entity providing regularly scheduled intercity or commuter rail passenger transportation develop 
and submit to FRA a plan for implementing a PTC system by December 31, 2015, and that FRA 
shall not permit the installation of any PTC system or component in revenue service unless the 
 
54 
Administrator has certified them through the approval process set forth in, and complies with the 
requirements of part 236. 
 
As noted earlier, current subpart H provides a technically sound procedure suitable to provide FRA 
approval for various processor-based signal and train control systems.  However, as based on 
experience gained during BNSF=s ETMS 1 project, FRA believes that its process does not support 
rapid FRA review and decision making and requires redundant submission of information common 
to multiple railroads.  FRA also believes that although the risk analysis required by subpart H fully 
reflects operational parameters associated with the different type of operations, it is excessively 
cumbersome and overly time consuming for the purposes of deploying PTC system technologies at 
the rate required under RSIA08. 
 
Moreover, subpart H does not require an implementation plan and does not provide for 
Acertification.@  Arguably FRA could simply amend subpart H to include requirements relating to 
implementation plans and to modify the language to equate Aapproval@ under Subpart H with 
Acertification@ under the statute.  However, FRA believes that such a resultant amended Subpart H 
would remain unsuitable for a PTC system certification process in light of the congressional 
mandates.  Those potential amendments alone would not remedy subpart H=s inability to provide 
quick and efficient FRA review.   
 
Accordingly, for PTC system implementation, certification, and build-out completion to occur 
within the very aggressive dates set by Congress, FRA is proposing a new subpart I, with some 
minor modifications to subpart H.  Under subpart I, ' 236.1007 establishes and explains the 
process by which each railroad may ultimately receive PTC System Certification for its PTC 
system.  Under ' 236.1007, FRA intends to avoid procedural redundancy, provide sufficient 
procedural flexibility to accompany the varying needs of those seeking certification, mitigate the 
financial risk associated with technological investment necessary to comply with the regulatory 
requirements, and otherwise develop a streamlined process to provide for quick review and 
resolution of the issues leading to certification.   
 
Generally speaking, there are three major elements of the PTC System Certification process: 
PTCIP submission and approval, receipt or use of a Type Approval numberCwhich may be 
provided with approval of a PTCDPCand PTCSP submission to receive PTC System Certification. 
 While ' 236.1007 provides for the procedural requirements for this process, the contents for the 
applicable filings are provided for under '' 236.1009, 236.1011, and 236.1013.  The PTCIP is the 
written plan that defines the specific details of how and when the railroad will implement the PTC 
system.  The PTCDP provides a detailed discussion of specific elements of the proposed 
technology and product that will be used to implement PTC as required by RSIA08.  Approval of 
the PTCDP comes in the form of a Type Approval number that applies to the subject PTC system. 
 The PTCSP provides the railroad-specific elements demonstrating that the system, as installed, 
meets the required safety performance objectives.  Approval of the PTCSP comes in the form of a 
PTC System Certification. 
 
 
55 
Under paragraph (a), the April 16, 2010, PTCIP submission deadline applies to all host railroads 
required to install a PTC system on each waysideCas defined in ' 236.1003 and further discussed 
above in the analysis of ' 236.1005(b)Cthat exist at that time.  FRA believes that the railroad that 
maintains operational control over a particular track segment is in the best position to develop and 
submit the PTCIP, since that railroad is more knowledgeable of the conditions of and operations 
over its track. 
 
Under paragraph (a), FRA expects that a PTCIP will be filed by railroads that are host railroads to 
track upon which passenger trains traverse and thus require PTC installation and operation.  FRA 
recognizes that the statute requires timely submission of a PTCIP by each Class I railroad and each 
entity providing regularly scheduled intercity or commuter rail passenger transportation.  Class II 
and III railroads that host intercity or commuter rail service will need to file implementation plans, 
whether or not they directly procure or manage installation of the PTC system.   
 
The tenant passenger railroad will need to file jointly with the Class I, II or III railroad. This is 
consistent with RSIA, which requires each subject passenger railroad to file an implementation 
plan.  In the case of an intercity or commuter railroad providing service over a Class I railroad, it 
may be sufficient for the passenger railroad to file a letter associating itself with the Class I=s plan 
to the extent it impacts the passenger service.  FRA does not propose any requirement for joint 
filing in the more common case where another railroad has freight trackage rights over a Class I 
railroad=s PTC line.  However, the Class I railroad will, of course, address the issue of 
interoperability in its plan as required by law.   
 
If a host freight railroad and tenant passenger railroad cannot come to an agreement on a PTCIP to 
jointly file by April 16, 2010, they must instead each file a PTCIP separately with a notification 
separate from the PTCIP to the Associate Administrator indicating that a joint filing was not 
possible and an explanation of why the subject railroads could not agree upon a final PTCIP draft 
for joint filing.  Under such a circumstance, each subject railroad may still be subject to a civil 
penalty assessed for each day past the deadline that a PTCIP is not jointly filed.  FRA believes that 
these measures are necessary to ensure timely PTC system implementation and operation under the 
statute and in the interest of public safety.  Once each railroad separately files its PTCIP, with a 
notification and explanation why joint filing was not possible, then the railroads must confer with 
the Associate Administrator.  The Associate Administrator may use any means to mediate the 
dispute so that the railroads may submit a mutually acceptable PTCIP. 
 
If a PTCIP or request for amendment (RFA) must be submitted in accordance with the rule after 
April 16, 2010, paragraph (a) does not provide the subject railroads with an opportunity to file 
separately.  Since there would be no statutory or regulatory deadline for such submissions, FRA 
does not believe it is necessary for the Associate Administrator to mediate the dispute.  If a 
railroad intends to use track that would require the installation of a PTC system in accordance with 
paragraph (a)(3), then such usage would merely be delayed until the parties come to a mutually 
acceptable PTCIP for joint filing. 
 
Paragraph (b) provides the process for receiving a Type Approval number for a particular PTC 
 
56 
system.  Under the proposed rule, each PTC system must receive a Type Approval number.   The 
Type Approval is a number assigned to a particular on-the-shelf PTC system productCdescribed in 
a PTCDP in accordance with ' 236.1013Cindicating FRA=s belief that the product could fulfill the 
requirements of subpart I.  FRA=s issuance of a Type Approval does not mean that the product will 
meet the requirements of subpart I.  The Type Approval applies to the technology designed and 
developed, but not yet implemented, and does bestow any ownership or other similar interests or 
rights to any railroad.  Each Type Approval number remains under the control of the FRA, which 
can issue or revoke in accordance with the rules. 
 
FRA expects the proposed Type Approval process to provide a variety of benefits to FRA and the 
industry.  If a railroad submits a PTC Development Plan (PTCDP)Cdiscussed in more detail 
belowCdescribing a PTC system, and the PTC system receives a Type Approval, then other 
railroads, under paragraph (b)(1), may simply rely on the Type Approval number without having 
to file a separate PTCDP, if the railroad intends to use the same PTC system without certain 
variances.  While the railroad filing the PTCDP must expend resources to develop and submit the 
PTCDP, all other railroads would not.  This would not only provide significant cost and time 
savings for a number of railroads, but will remove a significant level of redundancy from the 
approval process that is inherent in subpart H. 
 
If, however, a railroad intends to use a modified version of a PTC system that has already received 
a Type Approval number, and the variances between the two systems are safety-critical, the 
railroad must submit a new PTCDP.  The new PTCDP can either fully comply with the content 
requirements under ' 236.1011 or supply a Type Approval number for the other PTC system upon 
which the modified PTC system will rely and a document fulfilling the content requirements under 
' 236.1011 as it applies to the safety-critical variances. 
 
In any event, to receive a new Type Approval number, the railroad must submit to FRA a PTCDP, 
drafted in accordance with ' 236.1011, no later than when it submits its PTCIP.  While the PTCDP 
may be drafted by the PTC system vendor, FRA believes it is the railroads= regulatory 
responsibility and duty to submit its PTCIP to FRA.  FRA believes that requiring the submission 
of the PTCDP with the PTCIP would facilitate a reduction in regulatory activities, thus 
maximizing the time available for the railroads to carry out the necessary activities to complete 
PTC implementation within the 65 months available between April 2010, and December 2015.  
During that time, the each railroad is expected to carry out all of the required actions necessary to 
complete design, manufacture, test, and complete installation of the PTC office, onboard, and 
wayside subsystems.   FRA believes that the process defined by paragraph (b) provides the 
railroads greater flexibility. 
 
By requiring that a railroad=s PTCDP be submitted no later than its PTCIP, FRA intends to ensure 
that FRA has the opportunity early in the regulatory approval process to review and determine 
whether the proposed technical solution in the PTCDP has the potential to satisfy the statutory 
requirements.  If a PTCDP is submitted at a later time, the length of time available to the railroad 
to perform a complete PTC implementation will be decreased even further.   
 
 
57 
Many issues relating to FRA=s review of the railroad=s PTCDP may also cause further delays, thus 
reducing the time between the receipt of a Type Approval and the statutory deadline of December 
15, 2015, upon which the PTC system must be installed and operating.  For instance, FRA may 
find that the PTCDP does not adequately conform to the rules or otherwise has insufficient 
information to justify approval.   FRA may also determine that there are issues raised by the 
PTCDP that would adversely affect the ability of FRA to eventually certify the system.  If such a 
situation were to arise, the railroad and its vendor would need to address the issues, and resubmit 
the PTCDP for FRA approval.  
 
Given the magnitude of the tasks faced by the railroads, any additional delays beyond April 16, 
2010, will increase the risk of the railroad failing to meet the December 31, 2015, completion date 
required by RSIA08 and the length of time that the risk to the public and railroad employees 
remains unmitigated by PTC technologies.  More specifically, FRA recognizes that any loss of 
time would make it more difficult for a railroad to perform the installation, testing, and analyses 
necessary to submit its PTCSP for PTC System Certification.  Such installation, testing, and 
analyses cannot occur until the railroad knows the PTC system that it may use, as identified by a 
Type Approval number.  Accordingly, paragraph (b) proposes that each PTCDP be filed no later 
than when its associated PTCIP is submitted in order to preserve as much time as possible to 
ensure that each railroad meets the statutory deadline and that Congress= intent is not otherwise 
frustrated. 
 
FRA believes that the existence of certain overlapping issues in each PTCDP and PTCIP also 
requires their contemporaneous submission.  FRA strongly believes that a meaningful 
implementation plan cannot be created if the railroad has not identified and understands the 
technology they propose to implement.  Without an understanding of the technology, and the 
issues associated with the design, test, and implementation, any schedules developed by the 
railroad would be meaningless.  Unless there is an understanding of the PTC system it hopes to 
use, and how it expects to implement that system, evaluation of a deployment schedule can not be 
undertaken. 
 
Moreover, the PTCIP requires that the railroad address the issue of interoperability with other PTC 
systems.  Any meaningful discussion regarding interoperability requires that the railroad have a 
clear understanding of the technical capabilities of the system that it proposes to implement before 
it can make an informed judgment of how the system will interoperate with other systems.  The 
information required in the PTCDP provides the implementing railroad, other railroads with which 
the implementing railroad interfaces, and FRA with an understanding of the technical requirements 
necessary for interoperability.  FRA believes that early identification of technical capabilities of 
the proposed PTC systems will allow the concerned parties to make more timely design 
adjustments to facilitate interoperability, reducing any delays that may increase the level of risk of 
the railroad meeting its statutory deadline. 
 
FRA also believes that the process defined by paragraph (b) would also reduce each railroad=s 
financial risk involved in implementing a technological system that requires governmental 
approval.  Members of the PTC Working Group expressed concern about having to expend 
 
58 
significant resources to implement and test a PTC system prior to submitting a PTCSP reflecting 
its findings and in order to receive PTC System Certification.  FRA believes that paragraphs (b) 
and (e) together addresses this concern.  By requiring submission of a PTCDP earlier in the 
process, FRA intends to be involved in the implementation process from the beginning.  After 
contemporaneously reviewing a railroad=s PTCIP and PTCDP, FRA may be able to predetermine, 
and share with the railroad, an appropriate course of action to adequately address the various 
issues specific to the railroad and related to drafting a successful PTCSP.  Moreover, in accordance 
with paragraph (e)Cas discussed further belowCeach subject railroad may have the benefit of FRA 
monitoring its progress in implementing its PTC system.  With FRA=s involvement in the process, 
each subject railroad=s risk of not having a sufficient and suitable PTCSP will be mitigated.  
 
While FRA expects each subject railroad to submit its PTCDP with its PTCIP, the proposed rule 
does not preclude a railroad from submitting its PTCDP beforehand for FRA review and approval. 
 FRA encourages an earlier submission of the PTCDP so as to further reduce the required 
regulatory effort necessary to review the PTCIP and PTCDP if submitted together.  More 
importantly, it would present an opportunity for FRA to issue a Type Approval for the proposed 
PTC system before April 16, 2010, thus providing other railroads intending to use the same or 
similar PTC system the opportunity to leverage off of the work already accomplished by simply 
submitting the Type ApprovalCand a much less burdensome PTCDP in the event of variances.  
FRA also believes that the regulatory procedure may create an incentive for railroads using the 
same or similar PTC system to jointly develop and submit a PTCDP, thus further reducing the 
paperwork burden on FRA and the industry as a whole and increasing confidence in the 
interoperability between systems. 
 
Under proposed paragraph (c), in order to receive PTC System CertificationCas required by statute 
prior to PTC system installation in revenue serviceCeach subject railroad must either file a 
Request for Expedited Certification (REC) or submit an approved PTCIP and a PTCSP developed 
in accordance with ' 236.1015.   
 
A REC applies only to PTC systems that have already been in revenue service and meet the 
criteria of ' 236.1031(a), as further discussed below.  If a PTC system is not eligible for expedited 
certification, its must submit a PTCSP.  As required under proposed ' 236.1015, the PTCSP must 
include information relating to the operation and safety of the PTC system as defined in the 
PTCDP and as applied to the railroad=s actual territory.  To determine the sufficiency of the PTC 
system=s applicability on the railroad=s territory, the railroad may be required, as referenced in 
paragraph (e), to perform laboratory or field testing or have an independent assessment performed. 
  
 
Ultimately, PTC System CertificationCissued by FRA based on a review and approval of the 
PTCSPCis FRA=s formal recognition that the PTC system, as described and implemented, meets 
the statutory requirements of subpart I and the terms of the regulation.  It does not imply FRA 
endorsement of the PTC system itself. 
 
To be clear, proposed paragraph (d) requires that each PTCIP, PTCDP, and PTCSP must comply 
 
59 
with the content requirements under '' 236.1011, 236.1013, and 236.1015, respectively.  If the 
submissions do not comply with their respective regulatory requirements, then they may not be 
approved.  Without approval, a PTC system may not receive a Type Approval or PTC System 
Certification. 
 
Paragraph (d) also requires that the contents of the submitted plans be understood by FRA 
personnel.  In the interest of an open market, FRA does not want to preclude the ability of PTC 
system suppliers outside of the United States from manufacturing or selling PTC systems to the 
subject railroads.  However, in order to ensure the safety and reliability of those systems, FRA 
needs to adequately review the submitted plans.  Accordingly, FRA proposes to require that all 
materials submitted in accordance with this subpart be in the English language, or have been 
translated into the English language and certified as true and correct.  FRA seeks comments on this 
proposal and whether any additional requirements are necessary to ensure FRA=s adequate 
understanding of the submissions. 
 
Under subpart H, a railroad may seek confidential treatment for certain information required to be 
submitted under that subpart.  According to ' 236.901(c), a railroad may label that information as 
confidentialCif it deems it to be trade secrets, or commercial or financial information that is 
privileged or confidential under Exemption 4 of the Freedom of Information Act, 5 U.S.C. 
552(b)(4)Cand submit the information in accordance with ' 209.11.  FRA believes that the same 
concept should be applied to materials submitted in accordance with subpart I.  FRA continues to 
believe that the referenced information should receive the protections under the Freedom of 
Information Act (FOIA) (5 U.S.C. ' 552) and the Trade Secrets Act (18 U.S.C. ' 1905).  FRA also 
continues to believe that it cannot make any flat pronouncements about the confidentiality of 
information it has not yet received.  Should a FOIA request be made for information submitted 
under this rule that the submitting party as claimed should be withheld, the submitting company 
will be notified of the request in accordance with the submitter consultation provisions of the 
Department's FOIA regulations (' 7.17) and will be afforded the opportunity to submit detailed 
written objections to the release of information protected by exemption 4 as provided for in ' 
7.17(a).  Since FRA proposes to place in a docket for public comment the redacted versions of the 
submitted plans, FRA strongly encourages submitting parties to request protection from 
withholding only for those portions of documents that truly justify such treatment (trade secrets, 
security sensitive information).  
 
While FRA continues to believe that there is no need at this time to substantially revise ' 209.11, 
FRA proposes in subpart I to require an additional document to assist FRA in efficiently and 
correctly reviewing confidential information.  Under ' 209.11, a redacted and an unredacted copy 
of the same document must be submitted.  When FRA review is required to determine 
confidentiality, FRA personnel must painstakingly compare side-by-side the two versions to 
determine what information has been redacted.  To reduce this burden, FRA proposes that any 
material submitted for confidential treatment under subpart I and ' 209.11 must include a third 
version that would indicate, without fully obscuring, the redacted portions.  For instance, to this 
end, such a submission may use color or light gray highlighting, underlining, or strikethrough 
functions of its word processing program.  This document will also be treated as confidential under 
 
60 
' 209.11.  While FRA could instead amend ' 209.11 to include this requirement, FRA does not 
believe it to be necessary at this time.  If more regulatory procedures in other subparts or parts 
provide for confidential treatment under ' 209.11, FRA will then consider whether amendment of 
' 209.11 would be appropriate at that time. 
 
As discussed more specifically below, FRA is considering requiring the submission of an adequate 
GIS shapefile to fulfill some of the PTCIP content requirements under ' 236.1011.  Redacting 
word processing documents includes the simple task of blocking the text wished to be deemed 
confidential.  However, in a GIS shapefile, which includes primarily map data, visually blocking 
out the information would defeat the purpose.  For instance, a black dot over a particular map 
location, or a black line over a particular route, would actually reveal the location.  FRA expects 
that a railroad seeking confidentiality for portions of a GIS shapefile will submit three versions of 
the shapefile to comply with paragraph (d).  FRA expects that the version for public consumption 
would merely not include the confidential information.  FRA seeks comments on this proposal.  
FRA also seeks comments on how a third version of the GIS shapefile would indicate, without 
fully obscuring, the confidential portions. 
 
As previously noted, FRA expects that FRA-monitored laboratory or field testing or an 
independent third party assessment may be necessary to support conclusions made and included in 
a railroad=s submitted PTCDP or PTCSP.  This issue is initially addressed in paragraph (e).  The 
procedural requirements to effectuate either of those requirements can be found in '' 236.1035 
and ' 236.1017, respectively. 
 
Paragraph (f) makes clear that FRA approval of a plan submitted under subpart I may be 
contingent upon any number of factors and that once the plan is approved, FRA maintains the 
authority to modify or revoke the resulting Type Approval or PTC System Certification. 
 
Under paragraph (f)(1), FRA=s would reserve the right to attach additional requirements as a 
condition for approval of a PTCIP, PTCDP, or PTCSP.  A risk-informed and performance-based 
approach is one in which the risk insights, and engineering analysis and performance history, are 
used to: (1) focus attention on the most important activities; (2) establish objective criteria based 
upon risk insights for evaluating performance; (3) develop measurable or calculable parameters for 
monitoring systems performance; and (4) focus on the results as the primary basis of regulatory 
decision-making.  To accomplish these tasks, it is necessary to identify, analyze, assess, and 
control hazards and risks within all components of a system -- including people, cultures and 
attitudes, procedures, materials, tools, equipment, facilities and software.  In the preparation of any 
of these plans, railroads may have inadvertently failed to fully address hazards and risks associated 
with all of these components.   
 
FRA believes that proposed paragraph (f)(1) will provide make the regulatory process more 
efficient and stable.  Rather than reject a railroads plan completely, and consequently delay the 
railroad=s implementation of its PTC system, FRA would prefer to add additional conditions 
during the approval process to address these oversights.  When determining whether to attach 
conditions to plan approval, FRA will consider whether : (1) the plan includes there is a well-
 
61 
defined and discrete technical or security issue that affects system safety; (2) the risk/ or safety 
significance of an issue can be adequately determined; (3) the issue affects public health and 
safety; (4) the issue is not already being processed under an existing program or process; and (5) 
the issue cannot be readily addressed through other regulatory programs and processes, existing 
regulations, policies, guidance, or voluntary industry initiatives. 
 
Paragraph (f)(2) provides FRA the right to withdraw a Type Approval or a PTC System 
Certification as a consequence of the discovery of new information regarding system safety that 
was not previously identified.  FRA issuance of each Type Approval or PTC System Certification 
under performance-based regulations assumes that the model of the train control system and its 
associated probabilistic data adequately accounts for the behavior of all design features of the 
system that could contribute to system risk.  Different system design approaches may result in 
different levels of detail introducing different approximations/errors associated with the safety 
performance.  There are some characteristics for which modeling methods may not fully capture 
the behavior of the system, or there may be elements of the system for which historical 
performance data may not be currently available.  These potential inconsistencies in the failure 
analysis could introduce significant variations in the predicted performance from the actual 
performance.  Because of the design complexity associated with train control systems, FRA 
recognizes that these inconsistencies are not the results of deliberate acts by any individuals or 
organizations, but simply reflects the level of detail of the analysis, the availability of 
comprehensive information as well as the qualification and experience of the team of analysts, and 
the resource limitations of both the railroad and FRA.   
 
In paragraph (f)(3),  FRA indicates that the railroad may be allowed to continue operations using 
the system, although such continued operations may have special conditions attached to mitigate 
any adverse consequences.  It is FRA=s intent, to the maximum extent possible and when 
consistent with safety, to assist railroads in keeping the systems in operation.  FRA expects that if 
it places a condition on PTC system operations, each railroad will have a predefined process and 
procedure in place that would allow continued railroad operations, albeit under reduced capability, 
until appropriate mitigations are in place, and the system can be restored to full operation.  In 
certain dire situations, FRA may actually order the suspension or discontinuation of operations 
until the root cause of the situation is understood and adequate mitigations are in place.  FRA 
believes that suspending a Type Approval or a PTC System Certification pending a more detailed 
analysis of the situation may be appropriate, and that any such suspension must be done without 
prejudice.  FRA expects to take such an action only in the most extreme circumstances and after 
consultation with the affected parties. 
 
After reconsidering its issuance of a Type Approval or PTC System Certification, under paragraph 
(f)(4), FRA may either dismiss its reconsideration, continue to recognize the existing FRA 
approved Type Approval, allow continued operations with certain conditions attached, or order the 
railroad to cease applicable operations by revoking its Type Approval or PTC System 
Certification.  If FRA dismisses its reconsideration or continue to recognize the Type Approval, 
any conditions required during the reconsideration period would no longer be applicable.  If FRA 
will allow continued operations, FRA may order that the same or other conditions apply.  FRA 
 
62 
expects that revocation of a Type Approval or PTC System Certification may occur in very narrow 
circumstances, where the risks to safety appear insurmountable.  Regrettably, there may be a few 
situations in which the inconsistencies are the result of deliberate fraudulent representations.  In 
such situations, FRA may also seek criminal or civil penalties against the entities involved. 
 
Paragraph (g) enables FRA to engage in the proper inspection to ensure that a railroad is in 
compliance with subpart I.  FRA inspections may be required to determine whether a particular 
railroad has not implemented a PTC system where necessary.  For instance, FRA may need to 
confirm whether a track segment has traversing over it 5 million gross tons or more of annual 
railroad traffic, TIH materials, or passenger traffic.  FRA may also need to inspect locomotives to 
determine whether they are equipped with an onboard PTC apparatus or locomotive logs to 
determine whether it has entered PTC territory.  Paragraph (g) provides FRA with the power to 
inspect the railroads and gather information necessary to enforce subpart I. 
 
As noted above, in order to maintain an open marketplace, the proposed rule has been drafted to 
allow domestic railroads to purchase PTC systems from outside of the United States.  FRA 
recognizes that PTC systems have been used in revenue service across the globe and that 
acceptable products may be available in other countries.  FRA also recognizes that such use may 
come under a regulatory entity much like FRA.  Accordingly, under paragraph (h), in the event 
information relating to a particular PTC system has been certified under the auspices of a 
regulatory entity in a foreign government, FRA is willing to consider that information as 
independently Verified and Validated in accordance with the proposed rule to support the 
railroad=s PTCSP development.  The phrase Aunder the auspices@ intends to reflect the possibility 
of certification contractually performed by a private entity on behalf of a foreign government 
agency.  However, the foreign regulatory entity must be one recognized by the Associate 
Administrator.  A railroad seeking to enjoy the benefits of paragraph (h) must communicate that 
interest in its PTCSP. 
 
The costs and benefits of this section are included in the general analysis below.  FRA believes 
that the submission and approval costs associated with meeting the requirements of proposed 
subpart I are significantly less onerous than the submission and approval costs associated with 
meeting requirements equivalent to those in subpart H.  Thus, FRA has attempted to minimize the 
procedural cost burden associated with obtaining PTC system certification. 
 
Section 236.1011  PTC Implementation Plan content requirements 
 
This section describes the minimum required contents of a PTC Implementation Plan.  A PTCIP is 
a railroad=s plan for complying with the installation of mandatory PTC systems required by 
RSIA08 and administered by the Federal Railroad Administrator.  The PTCIP consists of 
implementation schedules, narratives, rules, technical documentation, and relevant excerpts of 
agreements that an individual railroad will use to complete mandatory PTC implementation. 
 
A PTCIP is an engineering document that must establish the railroad=s commitment regarding how 
it will meet the PTC implementation requirements under RSIA08.  FRA will measure the railroad=s 
 
63 
progress in meeting the required implementation date based on the schedule and other information 
in the PTCIP.  While the proposed rule does not specify or mandate any format for the PTCIP, it 
must at least clearly indicate which portions intend to address compliance with the various plan 
requirements under ' 236.1011. 
 
To facilitate timely and successful submittals, FRA, through assistance from a PTCIP Task Force 
drawn from the PTC Working Group, is developing a template that could be used to format the 
documents that must be submitted.  FRA, however, wishes to emphasize that the use of such a 
template is strictly voluntary, and encourages railroads to prepare and submit the documents in 
whatever structure that is most economical for the railroad.  FRA does not choose to require that 
the railroads expend their limited resources in reformatting of documents when such an activity 
adds no real value.  However, while the template may be a useful tool, and in light of the various 
forms a PTCIP may be required to take due to the system the railroad intends to implement, 
complete adherence to the template may not necessarily guarantee FRA approval of the submitted 
PTCIP. 
 
FRA expects each PTCIP to include various highly specific and descriptive elements relating to 
each railroad=s infrastructure and operations.  FRA recognizes that to manually assemble each 
piece of data into a PTCIP may be exceptionally onerous and time consuming and may make the 
PTCIP prone to errors.  In light of the foregoing and of the statutory requirement that Congress be 
apprised on the progress of the railroad carriers in implementing their PTC systems, FRA believes 
that electronic submission of much of this information may be warranted and preferred.  To 
facilitate collection of this data, FRA proposes to require submission of this data in electronic 
format.  Such electronic submission would fulfill the requirements under ' 236.1011 to which they 
apply. 
 
FRA believes that the preferred, least costly, and least error-prone method to comply with ' 
236.1011 is for railroads to submit an electronic geographic digital system map containing the 
aforementioned segment attribute information in shapefile format, which is a data format structure 
compatible with most Geographic Information System (GIS) software packages.  Using a GIS 
provides an efficient means for organizing basic transportation-related geographic data to facilitate 
the input, analysis, and display of transport networks.  Railways around the world rely on GIS to 
manage key information for rail operations, maintenance, asset management, and decision support 
systems.  FRA believes that the railroads may have already identified track segments, and their 
physical and operational characteristics, in shapefile format.  For instance, FRA believes that it 
may be preferable that for each track segment, a shapefile should provide the following 
identifiable information: owning railroad(s); distance; signal system; track class; subdivision; 
number and location of sidings; maximum allowable speed;  number and location of mainline 
tracks; annual volume of gross tonnage; annual number of cars carrying hazmat; annual number of 
cars carrying TIH; passenger traffic volume; average daily through trains; WIUs; switches; and at-
grade rail-to-rail crossings.  The requirements under paragraph (a) may be changed to 
accommodate any of these informational elements.  FRA seeks comments on this proposal.  
 
 
64 
Paragraph (a)(1) requires that the railroad describe the technology that will be employed.  Here, 
FRA intends to use the term Atechnology@ broadly to include all applicable tools, machines, 
methods, and techniques.   
 
Under paragraph (a)(2), FRA addresses the statutory requirements that the PTCIP shall describe 
how the PTC system will provide interoperability with movements of trains of other railroad 
carriers over its lines.  Practically speaking, this means that each locomotive operating within PTC 
territory must be able to communicate with the PTC systems installed on that territory=s track and 
signal system and on each locomotive operating on that territory, except in limited situations 
established elsewhere in this proposed rule. 
 
Interoperability means the ability of diverse systems and organizations to work together (inter-
operate), taking into account the technical, operational, and organizational factors that may impact 
system-to-system performance.   FRA expects each PTC system required by subpart I to exhibit 
syntactic interoperabilityCso that it may successfully communicate and exchange data with other 
PTC systemsCand semantic interoperabilityCso that it may automatically, accurately, and 
meaningfully interpret the exchanged information to prove useful to the end user of each 
communicating PTC system.  To achieve semantic interoperability, both sides must defer to a 
common information exchange reference model.  In other words, the content of the information 
sent must be the same as what is received and understood.  Taking syntactic and semantic 
interoperability together, FRA expects each PTC system to provide services to, and accept services 
from, other PTC systems and to use those services exchanged to enable the PTC systems to 
operate effectively together and to provide the intended results.  The degree of interoperability 
should be defined in the PTCIP when referring to specific cases. 
 
Interoperability is achieved through four interrelated means: product testing, industry and 
community partnership, common technology and intellectual property, and standard 
implementation. 
 
Product testing includes conformance testing and product comparison.  Conformance testing 
ensures that the product complies with an appropriate standard.  FRA recognizes that certain 
standards attempt to create a framework that would result in the development of the same end 
product.  However, many standards apply only to core elements and allow developers to enhance 
or otherwise modify products as long as they adhere to those core elements.  Thus, if an end 
product is developed in different ways to conform to the same standard, there may still be 
discrepancies between each instantiation of the end product due to the existence of those variables. 
 Accordingly, FRA believes that comparison testing must also occur to ensure that each 
instantiation of the same product, regardless of the means upon which it is created to meet the 
same standard, is ultimately identical.  In regards to PTC systems, such comparison testing must 
occur on all portions that relate to each system=s interoperability with other systems.  Thus, it is 
also important that the PTC system be formally tested in a production scenarioCas they will be 
finally implementedCto ensure that it will actually will intercommunicate and interoperate with 
other PTC systems as advertised and intended. 
 
 
65 
To reach interoperability between the various applicable PTC systems, each PTCDP must also 
show that the systems share common product engineering.  Product engineering refers to the 
common standard, or a sub-profile thereof, as defined by the industry/community partnerships, 
specifically intended to achieve interoperability.  Without common product engineering, the 
systems will be unable to intercommunicate or otherwise interact as necessary to comply with the 
proposed rule.   
 
FRA expects that each interoperability standard for PTC systems will be developed by a 
partnership between various industry participants.  Industry and community partnerships, either 
domestic or international, usually sponsor standard workgroups to define a common standard to 
provide system intercommunications for a specific purpose. At times, an industry or community 
will sub-profile an existing standard produced by another organization to reduce options and thus 
making interoperability more achievable.  Thus, in each PTCDP, the railroad must discuss how it 
developed or adopted a standard commonly accepted by that partnership.   
 
Means of achieving interoperability include having the various entities involved using the same 
PTC system product or obtaining its components from the same developer.  While FRA does not 
necessarily require this approachCsince the agency seeks to maintain an open and competitive 
marketplaceCFRA believes that this is a suitable means to achieve interoperability.  This 
technique may provide similar technical results when using PTC system products from different 
vendors relying on the same intellectual property.  FRA recognizes that certain developers with an 
intellectual property interest in a particular technology may provide a non-exclusive license of its 
intellectual property to another entity so that the licensee may introduce into the marketplace a 
substantially similar product reliant on that intellectual property.  In such a case, FRA foresees that 
the use of a common PTC system technologyCeven if it is proprietary to a single or multiple 
entities and licensed to railroadsCcould reduce the variability between components, thus providing 
for a more efficient means to achieve interoperability.   
 
In order for interoperability to actually occur between multiple entities= PTC systems, there must 
be some standard by which they all adhere to.  Thus, FRA also expects that each PTCDP will 
provide assurances of a common interoperability standard agreed to between all entities using PTC 
systems that must interoperate. 
 
Since each of these interrelated means has an important role in reducing variability in 
intercommunication, each railroad=s PTCIP must clearly describe the elements required under 
paragraph (a)(1)-(3). 
 
Much of the remaining information required in a PTCIP under the proposed rule relies on the 
location, length, and characteristics of each track segment.  Therefore, a common understanding of 
a track segment is necessary.  A track is the main designation for describing a physical linear 
portion of the network.  Each track has a station location referencing system, which serves to 
locate inventory features and defects along the length of the track.  Because some tracks can be 
very long, track segments are established to divide the track into smaller Amanagement units.@  
Typically, segment=s boundaries are established at point of switch (POS) locations, but may also 
 
66 
be located at mile markers, grade crossings, or other readily identifiable locations.  Inspection, 
condition assessment, and maintenance planning is performed individually on each segment.  After 
the track network hierarchy is established, the attribute information associated with each track is 
defined. This attribute information describes the track layout (e.g., curves and grades), the track 
structure (e.g., rail weights and tie specifications), track clearance issues, and other track related 
items such as turnouts, rail crossings, grade crossings, drainage culverts, and bridges.  Inventory 
information about these track attributes can be quite detailed.  The benefits of a complete and 
accurate track inventory provides a record of the track network=s properties and information about 
the existing track materials at the specific locations when maintenance or repair is necessary. 
 
Paragraphs (a)(4) and (a)(5) together require the railroad to put its entire implementation plan into 
an understandable context, primarily as it relates to the sequence and schedule of line segment 
implementation events.  Under RSIA08, Congress requires each subject railroad, in its PTCIP, to 
describe how it shall, to the extent practical, implement the PTC system in a manner that addresses 
areas of greater risk before areas of lesser risk.  Accordingly, the PTCIP must discuss the railroad=s 
areas of risk and the criteria by which these risks were evaluated and prioritized for PTC system 
implementation.  To this end, the railroad must clearly identify all track segments that must be 
equipped, the basis for that decision for each segment (which might be done by categories of 
segments), and the implementation date for each segment will be completed, taking into account 
the time necessary to fulfill the procedural requirements related to PTCSP submission, review, and 
approval.  At a minimum, the deployment decisions must be based on segment traffic 
characteristics such as passenger and freight traffic volumes, the quantity of TIH and other 
hazardous materials, current methods of operations, existence of block signals and other traditional 
train control technologies, the number and class of tracks, authorized and allowable speeds for 
each segment, and other unusual characteristics that may adversely impact safety, such as unusual 
ruling grades and other track geometries.  In cases where deployment of the PTC system cannot be 
accomplished in order of areas with the greatest risk to areas with the least risk, the railroad must 
explain why such a deployment was not practical and the steps that will be taken to minimize 
adverse consequences to the public until the line segment can be equipped. 
 
Paragraphs (a)(6) and (a)(7) require the PTCIP to include information regarding the rolling stock 
and wayside devices that will be equipped with the appropriate PTC technology.  For a PTC 
system to work as intended, PTC system components must be installed and operated in all 
applicable offices and on all applicable onboard and wayside subsystems.  Accordingly, the PTCIP 
must identify which technologies will be installed on each subsystem and when they are scheduled 
to be installed. 
 
Under paragraph (a)(6), each host railroad filing the PTCIP must include a comprehensive list of 
all rolling stock upon which a PTC onboard apparatus must be operative. FRA understands that in 
most situations, the rolling stock referenced in paragraph (a)(6) may only apply to lead 
locomotives.  However, in the interest of not hindering creative technological innovations, FRA 
presumes the possibility that PTC system technology may also be attached to additional rolling 
stock to provide other functions, including determining train capacity and length or providing 
certain acceptable and novel train controls.  To be kept apprised of these possibilities, FRA is 
 
67 
proposing in paragraph (a)(6) that each PTCIP include a list of all rolling stock equipped with PTC 
technology. 
 
FRA understands that a host railroad may not receive cooperation from a tenant railroad in 
collecting the necessary rolling stock information.  Nevertheless, FRA expects each host railroad 
to make a good faith effort.  Identification of those tenant railroads that the host railroad attempted 
to obtain the requisite and applicable information from and that failed to address a host railroad=s 
written request may establish a good faith effort by the host railroad. 
 
Paragraph (a)(7) requires the PTCIP to provide a detailed schedule of and the railroad to 
subsequently report WIU installation.  The selection and identification of a technology selected as 
part of the PTCIP will also, to a great extent, determine the distribution of the functional behaviors 
of each of the PTC subsystems (e.g., office, wayside, communications, and back office).  The WIU 
is a type of remote terminal unit (RTU) that is part of a larger PTC system, which is a type of 
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition System (SCADA).  As a whole, the safe and efficient 
operation of a SCADACa centralized system that covers large areas, monitors and control 
systems, and passes status information from, and operational commands to, RTUsCis largely 
dependent on the ability of each of its RTUs to accurately receive and distribute the required 
information.  As such, a PTC system cannot properly operate without properly functioning WIUs 
to provide and receive status information and react appropriately to control information. 
 
It is commonly understood that a WIU device is capable of communicating directly to the office, 
train, or other wayside unit.  FRA recognizes that there may not the same amount of WIUs and 
devices that they monitor.  Depending on the architecture and technology used, a single WIU may 
communicate the necessarily information as it relates to multiple devices.  FRA is comfortable 
with this type of consolidation provided that, in the event of a failure of any one of the devices 
being monitored, the most restrictive condition will be transmitted to the train or office, except 
where the system may uniquely identify the failed device in a manner that will provide safe 
movement of the train when it reaches the subject location. 
 
Because of the critical role that WIU=s play in the proper and safe operation of PTC systems, 
paragraph (a)(7) proposes that the railroad identify the number of WIU=s required to be installed on 
any given track segment and the schedule for installing the WIU=s associated with that segment.  
This information is necessary to fully and meaningfully fulfill the RSIA08 requirements that by 
December 31, 2012, Congress shall receive a report on the progress of the railroad carriers in 
implementing PTC systems.  See 49 U.S.C. ' 20157(d).  To comply with this statutory 
requirement, each railroad must determine the number of WIUs it will need to procure and the 
locationCas defined by the applicable subdivisionCthat each WIU will be installed.  FRA believes 
that if a railroad does not perform these traditional engineering tasks, it will risk exceeding the 
statutory implementation deadline of December 31, 2015.  FRA considers this information an 
integral part of the PTCIP that must be submitted to FRA for approval. 
 
FRA recognizes the potential for technological improvements that may modify the number and 
types of WIU=s required.  FRA also recognizes that during test and installation, it may be 
 
68 
discovered that additional WIU installation may be necessary.   In either case, the railroad will be 
required to submit an RFA in accordance with ' 236.1021 indicating how the railroad intends to 
appropriately revise its schedule to reflect the resulting necessary changes.  Nevertheless, 
regardless of whether FRA approves or disapproves of the RFA, if a railroad is required to submit 
its PTCIP by April 16, 2010, implementation must still be completed by the statutory deadline 
December 31, 2015.   
 
Under paragraph (a)(8), each railroad must also identify in its PTCIP which of its track segments 
are either main line or not main line.  This list must be made based solely on the statutory and 
regulatory definitions regardless of whether FRA may later deem a track segment as other than 
main line.  If a railroad has a main line that it believes should be considered not main line, it may 
file with the PTCIP a main line track exception addendum (MTEA) in accordance with ' 
236.1019, as further discussed below.  Each track segment included in the MTEA should be 
indicated as much on the list required under paragraph (a)(8) so that the PTCIP accounts for each 
track segment with an appropriate cross-reference to the subject MTEA. 
 
Under Paragraph (a)(9), as previously mentioned, ' 236.1005(a) requires each applicable PTC 
system be designed to prevent train-to-train collisions.  Under that section, FRA has proposed that 
certain requirements apply to at-grade rail-to-rail crossings, also known as diamond crossings.  
While the proposed rule text includes certain specific technical requirements, it also provides the 
opportunity for each subject railroad to submit an alternative arrangement providing an equivalent 
level of safety as specified in an FRA approved PTCSP.  Accordingly, under paragraph (a)(10), if 
the railroad intends to utilize alternative arrangements providing an equivalent level of safety to 
that of the table provided under ' 236.1005(a)(1)(i), the PTCSP must identify those alternative 
arrangements and methods, with any associated risk reduction measures, in its PTCSP. 
 
Paragraph (b) addresses further deployment of PTC.  As noted elsewhere in this preamble, the 
specific characteristics of the PTC route structure, with the focus on TIH traffic as an indicator of 
risk, was a late addition to the bill that would become RSIA08, not having appeared in either the 
House or Senate bills until the final package was assembled using consultations between the 
committee staffs in lieu of a formal committee of conference.  Although the statutory construct 
(Class I rail line with 5 million gross tons and some TIH) adequately defines most of the core of 
the national freight rail system, it is a construct that will introduce distortions at both ends of the 
spectrum of risk.   
 
On the one hand, a line with a maximum speed limit of 25 miles per hour ending at a grain 
elevator that receives a few cars of anhydrous ammonia is a Amain line@ if it has at least 5 million 
gross tons of traffic (a very low threshold for a Class I railroad).  This is not a line without risk, 
particularly if it lacks wayside signals, but FRA analysis shows that the potential for a catastrophic 
release from a pressure tank car is very low at an operating speed of 25 miles per hour, and the low 
tonnage is likely associated with relatively infrequent train movementsClimiting the chance of a 
collision.  As FRA understands the congressional mandate, the law gives FRA little choice but to 
require PTC under these circumstances. 
 
 
69 
On the other end of the spectrum, lines with greater risk may go unaddressed.  For instance, a line 
carrying significant volumes of other hazardous materials, without any TIH or passenger traffic, 
would not be equipped.  This example is not likely to be present to any significant extent under 
current conditions.  However, should the Class I railroads raise freight rates sufficiently to 
eliminate PIH traffic by making rail transportation prohibitively expensive, the issue would be 
presented as a substantial one.  Most of the transportation riskCincluding hazards to train crews 
and roadway workers and exposure to other hazardous materials if releasedCwould remain, but not 
the few carloads of TIH.  FRA believes that the intent of the Congress with respect to deployment 
of PTC would be defeated, even though the literal language of the legislation would be satisfied. 
 
Other lines carrying very heavy volumes of bulk commodities such as coal and intermodal traffic 
may or may not include TIH traffic.  Putting aside the risk associated with TIH materials, 
significant risk exists to train crews and persons in the immediate vicinity of the right-of-way if a 
collision or other PTC-preventable accident occurs.  Any place on the national rail system is a 
potential roadway work zone, but special challenges are presented in providing for on-track safety 
where train movements are very frequent. 
 
Risk on the larger Class II and III railroads= lines is also a matter of concern, and the presence of 
significant numbers of Class I railroad trains on some of those properties presents the opportunity 
for further risk reduction, since over the coming years virtually all Class I road locomotives will be 
equipped with PTC.  Examples include trackage and haulage rights retained over Class II and III 
railroads following asset sales in which the Class Is divested the subject lines.  Other prominent 
examples involve switching and terminal railroads, the largest of which are owned and controlled 
by two or more Class I railroads and function, in effect, as extensions of their systems.  Conrail 
Shared Assets, a large regional switching railroad that is owned by Norfolk Southern and CSX and 
is comprised of major segments of the former Conrail, then a Class I railroad, is perhaps the classic 
example. 
 
FRA notes that there has also been a trend, only recently and temporarily abated by the downturn 
in the economy, toward higher train counts on some non-signaled lines of the Class I railroads.  On 
a train-mile basis, these operations present about twice the risk as similar operations on signalized 
lines.  These safety gaps need to be filled; and, while most will be filled due to the presence of TIH 
traffic, FRA cannot verify that this is the case in every instance. 
 
FRA concludes that the mandated deployment of PTC will leave some substantial gaps in the 
Class I route structure, including gaps in some major urban areas.  FRA believes that these gaps 
will, over time, be Afilled in@ by voluntary actions of the Class I railroads as they establish the 
reliability of their PTC systems, verify effective interoperability, and begin to enjoy the safety and 
other business benefits from use of these systems.  FRA fully understands both the desire of the 
labor stakeholders in the PTC Working Group to see a broader build-out of PTC systems than that 
Aminimally@ required by RSIA08 and the concerns of the Class I railroads= representatives who 
noted the extreme challenge associated with equipping tends of thousands of wayside units, some 
20,000 locomotives, and their dispatching centers= back offices (back offices are the combined 
dispatch system and central office system associated with PTC) within the statutory 
 
70 
implementation period.  
 
The Congress recognized that all of these issues are legitimate concerns and so mandated the 
establishment of Risk Reduction Programs under the same legislation.  Section 103 of RSIA08 
codifies language that includes, within the Risk Reduction Program, a Technology Implementation 
Plan that is specifically required to address technology alternatives, including PTC.  Accordingly, 
the PTC and Risk Reduction provisions in RSIA08 are clearly aligned in purpose; and there are 
also references in the technology plan elements of the Risk Reduction language that address 
installation of PTC by other railroads.  Further, FRA has been charged with a separate rulemaking 
under section 406 of RSIA08 regarding risk in non-signaled (dark) territory that significantly 
overlaps the issue set in this rulemaking and the Risk Reduction section.  Use of technologies that 
are integral to PTC constitute the best response to hazards associated with non-signaled lines.  
Switch position monitoring systems, track integrity circuits, digital data links and other technology 
used to address dark territory issues should be and, as presently conceived, are forward-compatible 
with PTC.  FRA proposes in paragraph (b) to dovetail these requirements by requiring that each 
Class I railroad include in its PTCIP deployment strategies indicating how it will approach the 
further build-out of full PTC or partial PTC implementation.  These railroads would then be 
required to include in the technology elements of their initial Risk Reduction plans a specification 
of which lines will be equipped and with what PTC system elements.  Proposed paragraph (b) 
makes clear that there would be no expectation regarding additional lines being equipped until 
those mandated by subpart I have been addressed.  FRA shares the view of the Class I railroads 
and the passenger railroads that the December 31, 2015, deadline already presents a substantial 
challenge for railroads, suppliers and the employees affected. 
 
Paragraph (c) codifies in regulation the statutory mandate that FRA review the PTCIP and 
determine, within 90 days upon receipt of the plan, whether to provide its approval or disapproval. 
 FRA believes it is also important to provide procedural rules to communicate approval or 
disapproval.  Thus, under proposed paragraph (b), FRA proposes that any approval or disapproval 
of a PTCIP requires FRA to provide written notice.  In the event that FRA disapproves of the 
PTCIP, the notice will also include a narrative explaining the reasons for disapproval.  Once the 
railroad receives notification that its PTCIP has been disapproved by FRA, it will have 30 days to 
resubmit its PTCIP for review and approval.  A railroad may be subject to civil penalties if it fails 
to timely file its PTCIP under this section. 
 
As noted previously, subpart I applies to each railroad that Congress and FRA has mandated to 
install a PTC system.  A railroad that is not required to install a PTC system may still do so under 
its own volition.  In such a case, it may either seek approval of its system under either subpart H or 
I.  Paragraph (d) intends to make this choice clear. 
 
The costs and benefits of this section are included in the general analysis below.  The MTEA 
provisions may grant important flexibility to small entities. 
 
Section 236.1013  PTCDP content requirements and Type Approval 
 
 
71 
As noted in the discussion above regarding ' 236.1009, each PTCSP must be submitted with a 
Type Approval number identifying a PTC system that FRA believes could fulfill the requirements 
of subpart I.  Under ' 236.1009, a railroad may submit an existing Type Approval number in lieu 
of a PTC Development Plan (PTCDP) if the PTC system it intends to implement and operate is 
identical to the one described in that Type Approval=s associated PTCDP.  In the event, however, 
that a railroad intends to install a system for which a Type Approval number has not yet been 
assigned, or to use a system with an assigned Type Approval number that may have certain 
variances to its safety-critical functions, then the railroad must submit a PTCDP to obtain a new 
Type Approval number.   
 
The PTCDP is the core document that provides the Associate Administrator sufficient information 
to determine whether the PTC system proposed for installation by the railroad could meet the 
statutory requirements for PTC systems specified by RSIA08 and the regulatory requirements 
under subpart I.  Issuance of a product Type Approval number is contingent upon the approval of 
the PTCDP by the Associate Administrator.  While filing of a PTCDP is optional in the sense that 
the railroad may proceed directly to submission of the PTCSP by the April 16, 2010 deadline (see 
' 236.1009), FRA encourages railroads engaged in joint operations to do so.  Approval of the 
PTCDP, and issuance of a Type Approval, presents the opportunity for other railroads to reduce 
the effort required to obtain a PTC System Certification.  If a Type Approval for a PTC system 
exists, another railroad may also use that Type Approval provided there are no variances in the 
system as described in the Type Approval=s PTCDP.  In such cases, the other railroad may avoid 
submitting its own PTCDP by simply incorporating by reference the supporting information in the 
Type Approval=s PTCDP and certifying that no variances in the PTC system have been made. 
 
This section describes the contents of the PTCDP required to obtain FRA approval in the form of 
issuance of a Type Approval number.  The provisions of this section require each PTCDP to 
include all the elements and practices listed in this section to provide reasonable assurance that the 
subject PTC system will meet the statutory requirements and are developed consistent with 
generally-accepted principles and risk-oriented proof of safety methods surrounding this 
technology.  FRA believes it is necessary to include the provisions contained in this section in 
order to provide reasonable assurance that the product, when developed and deployed, will have 
no adverse impact on the safety of railroad employees, the public, and the movement of trains. 
 
FRA recognizes that much of the information required by ' 236.1013 normally resides with the 
PTC system=s developer or supplier maintains and not the client railroad.  While FRA expects that 
each railroad and its PTC system supplier may jointly draft a PTCDP, the railroad has the primary 
responsibility for the safety of its operations and for providing the information required under ' 
236.1013.  Accordingly, each railroad required to submit a PTCDP under subpart I should make 
the necessary arrangements to ensure that the requisite information is readily available from the 
supplier for submission to the agency. 
 
FRA believes that suppliers and railroads will develop a PTCDP for most products that adequately 
address the requirements of the new subpart without substantial additional expense.  As part of the 
design and evaluation process, it is essential to ensure that an adequate analysis of the features and 
 
72 
capabilities is made to minimize the possibility of conflicts resulting from any use or feature, 
including a software fault. Since this analysis is a normal cost of software engineering 
development, we do not believe it imposes any additional significant costs beyond what should 
already be done when developing safety critical software. 
 
In proposed '' 236.1013 and 236.1015, various adjectives may precede the requirement.  For 
instance, certain paragraphs require Aa complete description,@ Aa detailed description,@ or simply a 
Adescription.@  These phrases are inherited from subpart H.  Their inclusion in subpart I are 
similarly not to imply that any description should be more or less detailed or complete than any 
other description required.  By contrast, they are included merely for the purposes of emphasis. 
 
Paragraph (a)(1) proposes to require that the PTCDP include system specifications that describe 
the overall product and identify each component and its physical relationship in the system.  FRA 
will not dictate specific product architectures, but will examine each PTC system to fully 
understand how its various parts interrelate.  Safety-critical functions in particular will be reviewed 
to determine whether they are designed to be fail-safe.  FRA believes this provision is an important 
element that can be applied to determine whether safety is maximized and maintainability can be 
achieved. 
 
Paragraph (a)(2) proposes to require a description of the operation where the product will be used. 
Upon receipt of this information within a PTCDP, FRA will have better contextual knowledge of 
the product as it applies to the type of operation on which it is designed to be used.  Where 
operational behaviors are not applicable to a particular railroad, or the product design is not 
intended to address a particular operational behavior, FRA would expect a short statement 
indicating which operational characteristics do not apply and why they are not applicable. 
 
Paragraph (a)(3) requires that the PTCDP include a concept of operations, a list of the product=s 
functional characteristics, and a description explaining how various components within the system 
are controlled.  FRA expects that the information provided under paragraphs (a)(2) and (a)(3) will 
together provide a thorough understanding of the PTC system.   
 
FRA will review this informationCprimarily by comparing the subject PTC system=s 
functionalities with those underlying principles contained in standards for existing signal and train 
control systemsCto determine whether the PTC system is designed to account for all relevant 
safety issues.  While FRA proposes to not prescribe PTC system design standards, FRA will 
require that the applicant compare the concepts contained in existing standards to the operational 
concepts, functionalities, and controls contemplated for the PTC system in order to determine 
whether a sufficient level of safety will be achieved.  For example, FRA requirements prescribe 
that where a track relay is de-energized, a switch or derail is improperly lined, a rail is removed, or 
a control circuit is opened, each signal governing movements into the subject block occupied by a 
train, locomotive, or car must display its most restrictive aspect for the safety of train operations.  
FRA intends to apply the same and similar concept when reviewing each PTCDP to assure that 
such minimum safety requirements exist. 
 
 
73 
Paragraph (a)(4) requires that each PTCDP include a document that identifies and describes each 
safety critical function of the subject PTC system.  The product architecture includes both 
hardware and software aspects which identify the protection developed against random hardware 
faults and systematic errors. Further, the document should identify the extent to which the 
architecture is fault tolerant.  FRA intends to use this information to determine whether appropriate 
safety concepts have been incorporated into the proposed PTC system.  For example, existing 
regulations require that when a route has been cleared for a train movement, it cannot be changed 
until the governing signal has been caused to display its most restrictive indication and a 
predetermined time interval has expired where time locking is used or where a train is in approach 
to the location where approach locking is used.  FRA will apply this concept, among others, to 
determine whether all the safety-critical functions are included.  Where such functionalities are not 
clearly determined to exist as a result of technology development, FRA will expect the reasoning 
to be stated and a justification provided describing how that technology provides the required level 
of safety. Where FRA identifies a void in safety-critical functions, FRA may not approve the 
PTCDP until remedial action is taken to rectify the concern. 
 
FRA recognizes that the information required under paragraph (a)(4) may already be provided 
when complying with paragraph (a)(1).  In such a case, the railroad shall cross reference where in 
the PTCDP that both paragraphs (a)(1) and (a)(4) are jointly satisfied. 
 
Proposed paragraph (a)(5) requires that each PTCDP address the minimum requirements under ' 
236.1005 for development of safety-critical PTC systems.  FRA expects the information provided 
under paragraph (a)(5) to cover: identification of all safety requirements that govern the operation 
of a system; evaluation of the total system to identify known or potential safety hazards that may 
arise over the life cycle of the system; identification of all safety issues during the design phase of 
the process; elimination or reduction of the risk posed by the hazards identified; resolution of 
safety issues presented; development of a process to track progress; and development of a program 
of testing and analysis to demonstrate that safety requirements are met.  Paragraph (a)(5) also 
requires that each railroad identify the PTC system=s safety assurance concepts. 
 
Proposed paragraph (a)(6) requires a preliminary human factors analysis which must address each 
applicable human-machine interface (HMI) and all proposed product functions to be performed by 
humans to enhance or preserve safety.  FRA expects this analysis to place special emphasis on 
proposed human factors responsesCand the result of any failure to perform such a responseCto 
safety-critical hazards including the consequences of human failure to perform.  For each HMI, the 
PTCDP should address the proposed basis of assumptions used for selecting each such interface, 
its potential affect upon safety, and all potential hazards associated with each interface. Where 
more than one employee is expected to perform duties dependent upon HMI input or output, the 
analysis must address the consequences of failure by one or multiple employees.  FRA intends to 
use this information to determine the proposed HMI=s effect upon the safety of railroad operations. 
The preliminary human factors analysis must propose how the railroad or its PTC system supplier 
plans to address the HMI criteria listed in Appendix E or any alternatives proposed by the railroad 
and deemed acceptable by the Associate Administrator.   
 
 
74 
Proposed paragraph (a)(6) also requires that the PTCDP explain how the proposed HMI will affect 
interoperability.  RSIA08 requires that each subject railroad explain how it intends to obtain 
system interoperability.  The ability of a train crew member to operate another railroad=s PTC 
system significantly depends upon a commonly understood HMI.  The HMI provides the end user 
with a method of interacting with the underlying system and accessing the PTC functionality.  
FRA expects that each railroad will adopt an HMI standard that will ensure ease of use of the PTC 
system both within, and between, railroads. 
 
Proposed paragraph (a)(7) requires an analysis regarding how subparts A through G of part 236 
apply, or no longer apply, to the subject PTC system. FRA recognizes that while a PTC system 
may be designed in accordance with the underlying safety concepts of subparts A through G, the 
specific existing requirements contained in those subparts are not applicable.  In any event, the 
PTCDP must identify each pertinent requirement considered to be inapplicable, fully describe the 
alternative method used to fulfill that underlying safety concept, and explain how the proposed 
PTC system supports the underlying safety principle.  FRA notes that certain sections in subparts 
A though G may always be applicable to PTC systems certified under subpart I. 
 
FRA is concerned about all dimensions of system security.  Proposed paragraph (a)(8) requires the 
PTCDP  to include a description of the security measures necessary to meet the specifications for 
each product. Security is an important element in the design and development of products and 
covers issues such as developing measures to prevent hackers from gaining access to software and 
developing measures to preclude sudden system shutdown, mechanisms to provide message 
integrity, and means to authenticate the communicating parties. 
 
Safety and security are two closely related topics.   Both are conditions that, when met, the subject 
is protected and without risk of harm.  In the industrial marketplace, the goals of safety and 
security are to create an environment protecting assets from hazards or harm.  While activities to 
ensure safety usually relate to the possibility of accidental harm, activities to ensure security 
usually relate to protecting a subject from intentional malicious act such as espionage, theft, or 
attack.  Since system performance may be affected by either inadvertent or deliberate hazards or 
harms, the safety and security involved in the implementation and operation of a PTC system must 
both be considered.  
 
Integrated security recognizes that optimum protection comes from three mutually supporting 
elements: physical security measures, operational procedures and procedural security measures.  
Today the convergence of information and physical security is being driven by several powerful 
forces. These include interdependency, efficiency and organizational simplification, security 
awareness, regulations, directives, standards and the evolving global communications 
infrastructure.   Physical security describes both measures that prevent or deter attackers from 
accessing a facility, resource, or information stored on physical media and guidance on how to 
design structures to resist various hostile acts.  Communications security describes measures and 
controls taken to deny unauthorized persons information derived from telecommunications and  
 
75 
ensure the authenticity of such telecommunications.  Because of the integrated nature of security,  
FRA expects that the railroads discussion will also address security as a holistic concept,  and not 
restrict discussions of security to one specific aspect of security. 
 
Paragraph (a)(9) proposes to require documentation of assumptions concerning reliability and 
availability targets of mechanical, electric, and electronic components.  When building a PTC 
system, designers may make numerous assumptions that will directly impact specific 
implementation decisions. These fundamental assumptions usually come in the form of data (e.g., 
facts collected as the result of experience, observation or experiment, or processes, or premises) 
that can be randomly sampled.  FRA does not expect to audit all of the fundamental assumptions 
on which a PTC system has been developed.  Instead, FRA envisions sampling and reviewing 
fundamental assumptions prior to product implementation and after operation for some time.  FRA 
expects that the data sampled may vary, depending upon the PTC system.  It is not possible to 
provide a single set of quantitative numbers applicable to all systems, especially when systems 
have yet to be designed and for which the fundamental assumptions are yet to be determined.   
Quantification is part of the risk management process for each project.  FRA believes that the 
actual performance of the system observed during the pre-operational testing and post-
implementation phases will provide indications of the validity of the fundamental assumptions.  
FRA proposes that this review process will occur for the life of the PTC system (i.e., as long as the 
product is kept in operation). The depth of details required will depend upon what FRA 
observes. The range of difference between a PTC system=s predicted and actual performance may 
indicate to FRA the validity of the underlying fundamental assumptions.  Generally, if the actual 
performance matches the predicted performance, FRA believes that it will not have to extensively 
review the fundamental assumptions. If the actual performance does not match predicted 
performance, FRA may need to more extensively review the fundamental assumptions. 
 
FRA expects each subject railroad to confirm the validity of initial assumptions by comparing 
them to actual in-service data.  FRA is aware that mechanical and electronic component failure 
rates and times to repair are easily quantified data, and usually are kept as part of the logistical 
tracking and maintenance management of a railroad.  FRA believes that this proposed criterion 
will enhance the quality of risk assessments conducted pursuant to this subpart by forcing PTC 
system designers and users to consider the long-term effects of operation over the course of the 
PTC system=s projected life-cycle.  If a PTC system can be used beyond its design lifecycle, FRA 
expects that any continued use would be only under a waiver provided in accordance with part 211 
or under a PTCDP amended in accordance with ' 236.1021.  In its request for waiver or request 
for amendment, the railroad should address any new risks associated with the life cycle extension.  
 
Proposed paragraph (a)(9) also requires specification of the target safety levels.  This includes the  
identity of each potential hazard and how the events leading to a hazard will be identified for each 
safety-critical subsystems; the proposed safety integrity level of each safety-critical subsystem and 
the proposed way that accomplishment of these targets will be evaluated.  This paragraph also 
requires identification of the proposed backup methods of operation and safety critical 
assumptions regarding availability of the product.  FRA believes this information is essential for 
making determinations about the safety of a product and both the immediate and long-term effect 
 
76 
of its failure.  FRA contends that availability is directly related to safety to the extent the backup 
means of controlling operations involves greater risk (either inherently or because it is infrequently 
practiced). 
 
Proposed paragraph (a)(10) requires a complete description of how the PTC system will enforce 
all pertinent authorities and block signal, cab signal, or other signal related indications.  FRA 
appreciates that not all PTC architectures will seek to enforce the speed restrictions associated with 
intermediate signals directly, but nevertheless a clear description of these functions is necessary 
for clarity and evaluation. 
 
Proposed paragraph (b) specifies the approval standard that will be employed by the Associate 
Administrator.  The PTCDP is not expected to provide absolute assurance to the Associate 
Administrator for Safety.  It only needs to show it meets the appropriate statutory and regulatory 
requirements for a PTC system required under this subpart, and that there is a reasonable chance 
that once built, it will meet the required safety standards for its intended use.    FRA emphasizes 
that approval of a PTCDP and issuance of a type approval does not constitute final approval to 
operate the product in revenue service.  Such approval only comes after the Associate 
Administrator for Safety approves the PTCSP, and issues a PTC System Certification. 
 
Proposed paragraph (c) establishes a time limit on the validity of a Type Approval.  The purpose 
of this limit is to encourage the railroad to build and install a product, not merely to plan such a 
system.  Further, the time limit will allow FRA to avoid maintaining records on Type Approvals 
which are not in use, and not likely to be in use.  Provided that at least one product is certified 
within the 5 year period after issuance of the type approval, the type approval remains valid until 
final retirement of the system. 
 
Proposed paragraph (d) provides the conditions under which a type approval may be used by 
another railroad.  These conditions consist of the railroad maintaining a continually updated 
PTCPVL pursuant to ' 236.1023(c), and the railroad provides licensing information associated 
with the use of the type approval.  When a railroad submits for its PTC system a previously issued 
Type Approval provided for another railroad=s system, FRA expects that all the proper licensing 
agreements provide for continued use and maintenance of the PTC system.  To ensure FRA=s 
confidence in this area, FRA proposes to require each Type Approval submission to include this 
relevant licensing information.  FRA recognizes that there may be various licensing arrangements 
available relating to the exclusivity and sublicensing of manufacturing or vending of a particular 
PTC system.  There may be other intellectual property variables that may make arrangements even 
more complex.  To adequately capture all applicable arrangements, FRA proposes to generally 
require the submission of Alicensing information.@  More specific language may preclude FRA=s 
ability to collect information necessary to fulfill its intent.  If any of this information were to 
change, either through any type of sale, transfer, or sublicense of any right or ownership, then FRA 
would expect the railroad to submit a request for amendment of its PTCDP in accordance with ' 
236.1021.  FRA recognizes that this may be difficult for a railroad to accomplish, given the 
railroad may not be privy to any intellectual property transactions that may occur outside of its 
control.  In any event, FRA would expect that a railroad would ensure, either through contractual 
 
77 
obligation or otherwise, that its vendor or supplier continually provide it with updated licensing 
information.  FRA seeks comments on this proposal. 
 
Proposed paragraph (e) would require that a railroad submitting a PTCDP demonstrate that its 
vendor has a suitable quality control system.  This requirement provides protection to the railroad 
and FRA that there is a reasonable probability that the vendor can design and manufacture the 
product such that it will meet the design targets specified in paragraph (a).  FRA expects 
compliance with paragraph (e) will eliminate the operation of a PTC system where its vendor has 
inadequate quality control procedures and processes to support the proper development of a safety 
critical product. 
 
Proposed paragraph (f) provides formal notification that the Associate Administrator for Safety 
may impose whatever conditions that are necessary to insure the safety of the public, train crews, 
and train operations when approving the PTCDP and issuing a type certificate.  While FRA 
expects that adherence to the remainder of this section=s requirements should justify issuance of a 
Type Approval, FRA also recognizes that there may be situations where other unaccounted for 
variables may reduce the Associate Administrator=s confidence in the PTC system, its 
manufacturer, supplier, vendor, or operator. 
 
The costs and benefits associated with Type approval are included in the general analysis below.  
Type approval is a cost minimizing alternative for meeting the PTCDP requirement.   
 
Section 236.1015  PTCSP content requirements and PTC System Certification 
 
The PTCSP is the core document which provides the Associate Administrator for Safety the 
information necessary to certify the as-built PTC system fulfills the required statutory PTC 
functions and is in compliance with the requirements of this s  Issuance of a System Certification 
is contingent upon the approval of the PTCSP by the Associate Administrator for Safety. Under 
the proposed rules, the filing and approval of the PTCSP and issuance of a PTC System 
Certification is a mandatory prerequisite for PTC system operation in revenue service.   Each 
PTCSP is unique to each railroad and must addresses railroad-specific implementation issues 
associated with the PTC system identified by the submitted Type Approval.  Paragraph (a) codifies 
these meanings and limits. 
 
When filing a PTCSP, as an initial matter, paragraph (b) requires each railroad to: include the 
applicable and approved PTCIP, PTCDP, and Type Approval; describe any changes subsequently 
made to the PTC system, as reflected in the PTCSP, that would require amendment of the PTCIP 
or PTCDP; and assure FRA whether the PTC system built is the same PTC system described in the 
PTCDP and PTCSP. 
 
Paragraph (b)(1) effectively merges the approved PTCIP and PTCDP into the PTCSP so that there 
will be a single Apackage@ available for PTC operations and FRA review before and after issuance  
 
78 
of a PTC System Certification.  If a PTCSP is approved, and the railroad receives a PTC System 
Certification, all three plans continue to Alive@ and can only be amended in accordance with ' 
236.1021. 
 
FRA recognizes the possibility that between PTCIP or PTCDP approval, and prior to PTCSP 
submission, there may be changes to the former two documents.  While such changes may only be 
made in accordance with ' 236.1021, documentation of those changes may not be readily apparent 
to the reader of the PTCSP.  Accordingly, under proposed paragraph (b)(2), FRA expects that each 
PTCSP shall include a clear and complete description of any such changes by specifically and 
rigorously documenting each variance.  Paragraph (b)(2) also proposes to require that the PTCSP 
include an explanation of each variance=s significance.  To ensure that there are no other existing 
variances not documented in the PTCSP, FRA also proposes under this paragraph to require the 
railroad to attest that there are no further variances.  For the same reason, FRA proposes in 
paragraph (b)(3) that, if there have been no changes to the plans or to the PTC system as intended, 
the railroad be required to attest that there are no such  variances. 
 
Paragraph (c) delineates the contents of the PTCSP.  The first elements of the PTCSP are the same 
elements as the PTCDP (and are described more fully in the section by section for 236.1013).  The 
additional, railroad specific elements are as follows:  
 
Paragraph (c)(1) requires that a hazard log be included in the PTCSP. This log consists of a 
comprehensive description of all hazards to be addressed during the life-cycle of the product, 
including maximum threshold limits for each hazard.  For unidentified hazards, the threshold shall 
be exceeded at one occurrence.  In other words, if the hazard has not been predicted, then any 
single occurrence of that hazard is unacceptable.    The hazard log addresses safety-relevant 
hazards, or incidents/ failures which affect the safety and risk assumptions of the product. Safety 
relevant hazards include events such as false proceed signal indications and false restrictive signal 
indications. If false restrictive signal indications happen with any type of frequency, they could 
cause train crew members or other users (roadway workers, dispatchers, etc.) to develop a 
lackadaisical attitude towards complying with signal indications or instructions from the product, 
creating human factors problems.  
 
Incidents in which stop indications are inappropriately displayed may also necessitate sudden 
brake applications that may involve risk of derailment due to in-train forces. Other unsafe or 
wrong-side failures that affect the safety of the product will be recorded on the hazard log.  The 
intent of this paragraph is to identify all possible safety-relevant hazards which would have a 
negative effect on the safety of the product.  Right-side failures, or product failures which have no 
adverse effect on the safety of the product (i.e., do not result in a hazard) would not be required to 
be recorded on the hazard log. 
 
Paragraph (c)(2) requires that a risk assessment be included in the PTCSP. FRA will use this 
information as a basis to confirm compliance with the appropriate performance standard. A 
performance standard specifies the outcome required, but leaves the specific measures to achieve 
that outcome up to the discretion of the regulated entity.  In contrast to a design standard or a 
 
79 
technology-based standard that specifies exactly how to achieve compliance, a performance 
standard sets a goal and lets each regulated entity decide how to meet it.  An appropriate 
performance standard includes provisions to provide reasonable assurance of safe and effective 
performance.  It includes (1) provisions respecting the construction, components, ingredients, and 
properties of the device and its compatibility with other systems and connections to such systems; 
(2) provisions for the testing (on a sample basis or, if necessary, on an individual basis); (3) 
provisions for the measurement of the performance characteristics; and (4) provisions requiring 
that the results of each or of certain of the tests required show that the device is in conformity with 
the portions of the standard for which the test or tests were required.  The Administrator may 
recognize all or part of an appropriate standard established by a nationally or internationally 
recognized standard development organization.   
 
Paragraph (c)(3) requires that a hazard mitigation analysis be included in the PTCSP. The hazard 
mitigation analysis must identify the techniques used to investigate the consequences of various 
hazards and list all hazards addressed in the system hardware and software including failure mode, 
possible cause, effect of failure, and remedial actions. A safety-critical system must satisfy certain 
specific safety requirements.   
 
ATo determine if these requirements are satisfied, the safety assessor must review and assess the 
results of the following tasks: 
 
1. Hazards associated with the system have been comprehensively identified. 
2. Hazards have been appropriately categorized according to risk (likelihood and severity). 
3. Appropriate techniques for mitigating the hazards have been identified. 
4. Hazard mitigation techniques have been effectively applied.@1 
 
FRA does not expect that the safety assessment will prove that a product is absolutely safe. 
However, the safety assessment should provide evidence that risks associated with the product 
have been carefully considered and that steps have been taken to eliminate or mitigate them. 
Hazards associated with product use need to be identified, with particular focus on those hazards 
found to have significant safety effects. Any hazards that cannot be mitigated by system designs 
e.g. human over-reliance of the automated systems, need to be included in the risk assessment 
described in paragraph (c)(2) no matter how low the probabilities may be.  Then the designer must 
take steps to remove them or mitigate their effects. Hazard analysis methods are employed to 
identify, eliminate and mitigate hazards. Under certain circumstances, these methods will be 
required to be reviewed by an independent third party for FRA approval. 
 
Proposed paragraph (c)(4) also requires that the PTCSP address safety verification and validation 
procedures. FRA believes verification and validation for safety are vital parts of the development 
of products. Verification and validation requires forward planning and consequently, the PTCSP 
should identify the test planning at each stage of development and the levels of rigor applied 
                                                 
1 Leveson, Nancy G., ASafeware:  System Safety and Computers,@ Addison-Wesley Publishing 
Company, 1995. 
 
80 
during the testing process. FRA will use this information to assure that the adequacy and coverage 
of the tests are appropriate. 
 
Proposed paragraph (c)(5) requires the railroad to include in its PTCSP the training, qualification, 
and designation program for workers, whether or not railroad employees, who will perform 
inspection, testing, and maintenance tasks involving the product. FRA believes many benefits 
accrue from the investment in comprehensive training programs which, among other things, are 
fundamental to creating a safe workforce. Effective training programs can result in fewer instances 
of human casualties and defective equipment, leading to increased operating efficiencies, less 
troubleshooting, and decreased costs. FRA expects any training program to include employees, 
supervisors and contractors engaged in railroad operations, installation, repair, modification, 
testing, or maintenance of equipment and structures associated with the product. 
 
Paragraph (c)(6) requires the PTCSP to identify specific procedures and test equipment necessary 
to ensure the safe operation, installation, repair, modification and testing of the product. 
Requirements for operation of the system must be succinct in every respect. The procedures must 
be specific about the methodology to be employed for each test to be performed that is required for 
installation, repair, or modification including documenting the results thereof. FRA will review 
and compare the repair and test procedures for adequacy against existing similar requirements 
prescribed for signal and train control systems. FRA will use this information to ascertain whether 
the product will be properly installed, maintained, and tested. 
 
Proposed paragraph (c)(7) requires that each railroad develop a manual covering the requirements 
for the installation, periodic maintenance and testing, modification, and repair for its PTC system.  
The issue of warnings to ensure safety is addressed in the Operations and Maintenance Manual, 
which must describe warning labels placed on the equipment of each product as necessary. Such 
warnings include, but are not limited to, means to prevent unauthorized access to the system; 
warnings of electrical shock hazards; cautionary notices about improper usage, testing or 
operation; and configuration management of memory and databases. The PTCSP should provide 
an explanation justifying each such warning and an explanation of why there are no alternatives 
that would mitigate or eliminate the hazard for which the warning is placed. 
 
Proposed paragraph (c)(8) requires that the PTCSP identify the various configurable applications 
of the product, since this rule mandates use of the product only in the manner described in its 
PTCDP. Given the importance of proper configuration management in safety critical systems, 
FRA believes it is essential that railroads learn of and take appropriate configuration control of 
hardware and software. FRA believes that a requirement for configuration management control 
will enhance the safety of these systems and ultimately provide other benefits to the railroad as 
well. Under this section, railroads are responsible for all changes to configuration of their products 
in use, including both changes resulting from maintenance and engineering control changes, which 
result from manufacturer modifications to the product. Since not all railroads may experience the 
same software faults or hardware failures, the configuration management, and fault reporting 
tracking system play a crucial role in the ability of the railroad and the FRA to be able to 
determine and fully understand the risks and their implications. Without an effective configuration 
 
81 
management tracking system in place, it is difficult, if not impossible, to fairly evaluate risks 
associated with a product over the life of the product. 
 
Proposed paragraph (c)(9) requires the railroad to develop comprehensive plans and procedures for 
product implementation. Implementation (field validation or cutover) procedures must be prepared 
in detail and identify the processes necessary to verify the product is properly installed and 
documented, including measures to provide for the safety of train operations during installation. 
FRA will use this information to ascertain the product will be properly installed, maintained, and 
tested. FRA also believes configuration management should reduce disarrangement issues. 
Further, configuration management will reduce the cost of troubleshooting by reducing the number 
of variables and will be more effective in promoting safety. 
 
Proposed paragraph (c)(10) requires the railroad to provide a complete description of the 
particulars concerning measures required to assure products, once implemented, continue to 
provide the expected safety level without degradation or variation over their life cycles. The 
measures must be specific regarding prescribed intervals and criteria for testing; scheduled 
preventive maintenance requirements; procedures for configuration management; and procedures 
for modifications, repair, replacement and adjustment of equipment. FRA intends to use this 
information, among other data, to monitor the product to assure it continues to function as 
intended. 
 
Proposed paragraph (c)(11) provides a PTCSP requirement to include a description of each record 
concerning safe operation. Recordkeeping requirements for each product are discussed in ' 
236.1037. 
 
Proposed paragraph (c)(12) requires a safety analysis of unintended incursions into a work zone. 
Measuring incursion risks is a key safety risk assumption. Failing to identify incursion risk can 
have the effect of making a system seem safer on paper than it actually is. The requirements set 
forth in this paragraph attempt to mandate design consideration of incursion protection at an early 
stage in the product development process. The totality of the arrangements made to prevent 
unintended incursions or operation at higher than authorized speed within the work zone must be 
analyzed.  That is, the required actions for dispatchers, train crews and roadway workers in charge 
must be evaluated, in addition to the functions of the PTC system.  Whether or not previously 
approved or recognized, FRA will not accept a system that allows a single point human failure to 
defeat the essential protection intended by the Congress.  See NTSB Recommendations R-08-05, 
R-08-06.   FRA feels that exposure should be identified because increases in risk due to increased 
exposure could be easily distinguished from increases in risk due solely to implementation and use 
of the proposed product. 
 
In the past, little attention was given to formalizing incursion protection procedures. Also training 
for crews has not been uniform among organizations, and has frequently received inadequate 
attention.  As a result, a variety of procedures and techniques evolved based on what has been 
observed or what just seemed right at the time.  This lack of structure, standardization, and formal 
training is inconsistent with the goal of increasing the safety and efficiency. 
 
82 
 
Proposed paragraph (c)(13) calls for a more detailed description of any alternative arrangements 
provided under ' 236.1011(a)(10), pertaining to at grade rail-rail crossings. 
 
Proposed paragraph (c)(14) asks for a complete description of how the PTC system will enforce 
mandatory directives and signal indications, unless already addressed in the PTCDP.  FRA 
recognizes that all systems will enforce all signal indications; however, where the architecture of 
the system performs this function it must be described. 
 
Proposed paragraph (c)(15) refers to the requirement of ' 236.1019(e) that the PTCSP is aligned 
with the PTCIP, including any amendments. 
 
Under proposed ' 236.1029(b), FRA proposes to require certain limitations on PTC trains 
operating over 90 miles per hour.  Under ' 236.1029(c), FRA provides railroads with an 
opportunity to deviate from those limitations if the railroad describes and justifies the deviation in 
its PTCDP, PTCSP, or application for an Order of Particular Applicability, as applicable.  Section 
236.1015(c)(16) reminds railroads that this is one of the optional elements that may be included in 
a PTCSP. 
 
Railroads are required under ' 236.1005(c) to submit a complete description of its compliance 
regarding hazard detector integration and under '' 236.1005(g)-(k) to submit a temporary 
rerouting plan in the event of emergencies and planned maintenance.  Sections 235.1015(c)(17) 
and (c)(18) reminds railroads that such requirements must be fulfilled with the submission of the 
PTCSP.  Under paragraph (c)(18), FRA expects each temporary rerouting plan to explain the host 
railroad=s procedure relating to detouring the applicable traffic.  In other words, FRA expects that 
each temporary rerouting plan address how the host railroad will choose the track that traffic will 
be rerouted onto.  For instance, the plan should explain the factors that will be considered in 
determining whether and how the railroad should take advantage of temporary rerouting.  FRA 
remains concerned about the unnecessary commingling of PTC and non-PTC traffic on the same 
track and expects each temporary rerouting plan to address this possibility.  More specifically, 
each plan should describe how the railroad expects to make decisions to reroute non-PTC train 
traffic onto a PTC line, especially where another non-PTC line may be available. While FRA 
recognizes each railroad may seek to use the most cost effective route, FRA expects the railroad to 
also consider the level of risk associated with that route. 
 
In proposed paragraph (d), FRA proposes to state the criteria that FRA will refer to in evaluating 
the PTCSP, depending up on the underlying technical approach.  Whereas in subpart H the safety 
case is evaluated to determine whether is demonstrates with a high degree of confidence that 
relevant risk will be no greater under the new product than previously, the statutory mandate for 
PTC calls for a different approach.  In crafting the proposed approach, FRA has attempted to limit 
requirements for quantitative risk assessment to those situations where the technique is truly 
needed.  Regardless of the type of PTC system, the safety case for the system must demonstrate 
that it will reliably execute the all of the functions required by this subpart (particularly sections 
236.1005 and 236.1007).   With this foundation, the additional criteria that must be met depend 
 
83 
upon the type of PTC technology to be employed. 
 
It is FRA’s understanding that PTC systems may be categorized as one of the following four 
system types: non-vital overlay; vital overlay; standalone; and mixed. 
 
In general, PTC systems will have some features that are not fully fail-safe in nature, even if on-
board processing and certain wayside functions are fully failsafe.  Common causes include 
surveying errors of the track database, errors in consist weight or makeup from the railroad 
information technology systems, and the crew input errors of critical operational data.  To the 
extent computer-aided dispatching systems are the only check on potential dispatcher error in the 
creation or inappropriate cancellation of mandatory directives, some room for undetected wrong-
side failure will continue to exist in this function as well.  
 
Paragraph (d)(1) specifies the required behavior for non-vital overlay systems.  Based on previous 
experience with non-vital systems, FRA believes it is well within the technical capability of the 
railroads to reduce the level of risk on any particular track segment to a level of risk 80% lower 
than the level of risk prior to installation of PTC on that segment.  For subsequent PTC 
installations on the same line segment FRA recognizes that requiring an addition 80% 
improvement may not be technically or economically practical.  Therefore FRA is only requiring 
that an entity installing or a modifying an existing PTC system need only demonstrate that the 
level of safety that is equal to, and preferable greater than, the level of safety of the prior PTC 
system.  The risk that must be reduced is the risk against which the PTC functionalities are 
directed, assuming a high level of availability.  Note that the required functionalities themselves do 
not call for elimination of all risk of mishaps.  It is scope of risk reduction that the functionalities 
describe that becomes the 100% universe which is the basis of comparison.  Although it is 
understood that the system will endeavor to eliminate 100% of this risk,2 the analysts will need to 
account for cases where wrong side failure of the technology is coincident with a human failure 
(potentially induced by reliance on the technology).  Since, within an appropriate conservative 
engineering analysis, non-vital processing has the theoretical potential to result in more failures (in 
pro forma analysis) than will typically be experienced, a 20% margin is provided.  In preparing the 
PTCSP, the railroad will want to affirmatively address how training and oversight (including 
programs of operational testing under 49 CFR ' 217.9) will reduce the potential for inappropriate 
reliance by those charged with functioning in accordance with the underlying method of operation. 
 
                                                 
2 Meaning that if the system worked as intended every time and was always available, 100 of the 
target risk would be eliminated. 
The 80% reduction for PTC preventable accidents must be demonstrated by an appropriate risk 
analysis acceptable to the Associate Administrator for Safety and address all intended track 
segments that the system will be installed on.  Again, FRA does not expect, or require, that these 
types of systems will prevent all wrong side failures.  However FRA expects that the systems will 
be designed to be robust, all pertinent risk factors (including human factors) will be fully 
addressed, and that no corners will be cut to Atake advantage@ of the nominal allowance provided 
for non-vital approaches.  FRA also encourages those using non-vital approaches to preserve as 
much as possible the potential for a transition to vital processing. 
 
 
84 
Paragraph (d)(2) addresses vital overlays.  Unlike a non-vital system, the vital system must be 
designed to address, at a minimum, the factors delineated in Appendix C.  The railroad and their 
vendors are encouraged to carry out a more through design analysis addressing any other potential 
product specific hazards.  FRA cannot over emphasize that vital overlay system designs must be 
fully designed to address the Appendix C.  The associated risk analysis supporting this design 
analysis demonstrating compliance may be accomplished using any of the risk analysis approaches 
in subpart H, including abbreviated risk analysis. 
 
Paragraph (d)(3) addresses standalone PTC systems that are used to replace existing methods of 
operations.  The PTCSP design and risk analysis submitted to the Associate Administrator for 
Safety must show the not only does the system not introduce any new hazards that have not been 
acceptably mitigated, based upon all proposed changes in railroad operation.  The required 
analysis is much more comprehensive than that required for vital overlay systems, since it must 
provide sufficient information to the Associate Administrator for Safety to make a decision with a 
high degree of confidence.  FRA will consider each request for standalone operations uniquely, 
and will render decisions in the context of the proposed operation and the associated risks.  FRA 
recognizes that application of this standard to a new rail system for which there is no clear North 
American antecedent could present a conceptual challenge.  FRA invites comments regarding how 
best to frame the risk assessment showing for a standalone system applied to a new rail operation.  
 
Paragraph (d)(4) addresses mixed systems. Because of the inherent complexity of these systems, 
FRA will determine an appropriate approach to demonstrating compliance after consultation with 
the railroad.  Any approach will of course, require that the system perform the PTC requirements 
as described in '' 236.1005 and 236.1007. 
 
Paragraph (e) discusses factors that the Associate Administrator for Safety will consider in 
reviewing the PTCSP.   In general, PTC systems will have some features that are not failsafe in 
nature.  Examples include surveys of the track database, errors in consist data from the railroad 
such as weight and makeup, and crew input errors.  FRA participation in the design and testing of 
the PTC system product helps FRA to better understand the strengths and weaknesses of the 
product for which approval is requested, and facilitates the approval process. 
 
The railroad must establish through safety analysis that its assertions are true.  This standard places 
the burden on the railroad to demonstrate that the safety analysis is accurate and sufficiently 
supports certification of the PTC system. The FRA Associate Administrator for Safety will 
determine if the railroads case has been made.   As provided in subpart H, FRA believes that final 
agency determinations under this Subpart should be made at the technical level, rather than the 
policy level, due to the complex and sometimes esoteric subject matters associated with risk 
analysis and evaluation.  
 
When considering the PTC system=s compliance with recognized standards in product 
development, FRA will weight appropriate factors, including the use of recognized standards in 
system design and safety analyses, the acceptable methods in risk estimates, the proven safety 
records for proposed components, and the overall complexity and novelty of the product design. 
 
85 
FRA may reconsider approval of a petition for cause such for potential reasons as credible 
allegation of error or fraud, assumptions determined to be invalid as a result of in-service 
experience, or one or more unsafe events calling into question the safety analysis underlying the 
approval. 
 
In those cases where the submission lacks information the Associate Administrator deems 
necessary to make an informed safety decision, FRA will solicit the data from the railroad.  If the 
railroad does not provide the requested information, FRA may consider that a safety hazard exists. 
 Depending upon the amount and scope of the missing data, PTCSP approval, and the subsequent 
system certification, may be denied.    
 
While paragraph (e) summarizes how FRA intends to evaluate the risk analysis, paragraph (f) 
applies specifically to cases where a PTC system has already been installed and the railroad 
subsequent wants to put in a new PTC system.  Paragraph (f) re-emphasizes that FRA policy 
regarding the safety of PTC systems is not, and cannot expect to be, static.  Rather, FRA policy 
may evolve as railroad operations evolve, operating rules are refined, related hazards are addressed 
(e.g., broken rails), and other readily available options for risk reduction emerge and become more 
affordable.  FRA embraces the concept of progressive improvement and expects that when new 
systems are installed to replace existing systems that actual safety outcomes equal or exceed those 
for the existing systems. 
 
The costs and benefits associated with this section are included in the general analysis below. 
 
Section 236.1017  Independent Third Party Review of Verification and Validation 
 
As previously noted in ' 236.1009(e), FRA may require a railroad to engage in an independent 
assessment of its PTC system.  In the event an independent assessment is required, ' 236.1017 
proposes the applicable rules and procedures. 
 
Paragraph (a) establishes factors considered by FRA when requiring a third-party assessment.  
FRA will attempt to make a determination of what level of third party assessment is necessary as 
early in the approval process as possible.  However based on issues that may arise during the 
development and testing processes, or during the detailed technical reviews of the PTCDP and 
PTCSP,  FRA may deem it necessary to require a third party assessment after the initial 
determination was made. 
 
Paragraph (b) is intended to make it clear that it is FRA who will make the determination of the 
acceptability of the independence of the third party.  If a third party assessment is required, 
railroads are encouraged to identify in writing who they propose to utilize as their third party.  This 
is intended to avoid any potential issues downstream regarding the acceptability of the 
independence of the assessor.   Compliance with paragraph (b) is not mandatory.  However, the 
railroad must understand that if FRA determines that the railroads choice of a third party does not 
meet the independence requires of paragraph (c), then the railroad will be obligated to have the 
assessment repeated, at their expense, until it has been completed by a suitable third party. 
 
86 
 
Paragraph (c) defines the term ``independent third party'' as used in this section. It limits 
independent third parties to ones ``compensated by' the railroad or an association on behalf of one 
or more railroads that is independent of the supplier of the product. FRA believes that requiring the 
railroad to compensate a third party will heighten the railroad's interest in obtaining a quality 
analysis and will avoid ambiguous supplier/third-party relationships that could indicate possible 
conflicts of interest.  
 
Paragraph (d) explains that the minimum requirements of a third party audit are outlined in 
Appendix F and that FRA has discretion to the limit the extent of the third party assessment.  FRA 
intends to limits the scope of the assessment to areas of the safety validation and verification as 
much as possible, with in the bounds of FRA=s regulatory obligations.  This will allow reviewers to 
focus on areas of greatest safety concern and eliminate any unnecessary expense to the railroad. In 
order to limit the number of third-party assessments,   FRA first strives to inform the railroad as to 
what portions of a submittal could be amended to avoid the necessity and expense of a third-party 
assessment altogether.  However FRA wishes to make it clear that Appendix F represents 
minimum requirements, and that if circumstances warrant, FRA may expand upon the Appendix F 
requirements as necessary to enable FRA to render a decision that is in the public interest (i.e., if 
FRA is unable to certify the system without the additional information). 
 
The costs and benefits of this section are included in the general analysis below. 
 
Section 236.1019  Main Line Track Exceptions 
 
The RSIA08 provides some discretion to FRA regarding what constitutes mainline track for 
passenger and freight rail requiring the installation of PTC.  FRA is exercising its regulatory 
discretion and will consider requests for designation of track over which rail operations are 
conducted as Aother than main track@ for passenger and commuter railroads, or freight railroads 
operating jointly with passenger or commuter railroads. Such relief may be granted only after 
petition to FRA under a very specific set of circumstances and only after justification acceptable to 
the Associate Administrator for Safety by the requesting railroad or railroads.  FRA recognizes 
that their may be circumstances certain statutory PTC system implementation and operation 
requirements are not practical and provide no significant safety benefit.   
 
Paragraph (a) specifies who, when, and how a passenger or commuter railroad may request 
exemption from yard or terminal track being considered mainline.  FRA will consider requests for 
relief for individual passenger or commuter railroads on track over which they have conduct 
solitary operations or jointly where they have commingled operations.  FRA will also consider 
joint requests for exemption of yard and terminal tracks where freight or passenger railroads 
conduct joint operations.  FRA expects that in the case of joint operations that one such request 
will be submitted by the railroads that are conducting joint operations, and the request will be 
concurred in by all railroads affected.  These requests are to be submitted with each railroad=s 
PTCIP, and FRA is requiring that the track for which the exemption is requested be  clearly 
defined  in an appendix (the Main Track Exclusion Addendum or MTEA) to the PTCIP.  The 
 
87 
MTEA must clearly define the physical boundaries of trackage for which exclusion is requested, as 
well as its use and characterization.   This clearly segregates track for which exclusion is 
requested, makes it easier to easier to identify tracks over which joint operations are requested, and 
in the event the railroad requests additional track to be considered for exclusion, reduces the 
amount of paper work required to be submitted to FRA. 
 
In accordance with carefully considered recommendations from the RSAC, FRA proposes to make 
provision for railroads to request that certain track segments be exempted from definition as a 
mainline.  Such requests are filled with FRA in the MTEA.  FRA reviews a submitted MTEA and 
may concur in whole or part with the requested exemptions. 
 
Paragraph (b) more specifically addresses the conditions for relief for passenger and commuter 
railroads with respect to passenger-only terminal areas.  In addition to identifying the physical 
boundaries to FRA, the railroad when describing the tracks use and characterization must include 
copies of the track and signal charts.  If FRA grants relief, the conditions of (b)(1), b(2) and (b)(3) 
must be strictly adhered to.  These 3 conditions represent the minimum conditions FRA believes is 
necessary for safe operations.  FRA reserves the right to add more restrictive conditions if 
necessary to provide for the safety of the public and train crews. 
 
Paragraph (c) addresses the conditions under which joint limited passenger and freight operations 
may occur on defined track segments without the requirement for installation of PTC.  This 
paragraph describes three alternative paths to the mainline exception.  First, an exception is 
available where both the freight and passenger trains are limited to restricted speed.  Such 
operations are feasible only for short distances, and FRA would examine the circumstances 
involved.  Second, FRA will consider an exception where temporal separation of the freight and 
passenger operations can be ensured.  (A more complete definition of temporal separation is 
provided in paragraph (d)).  Third, FRA will consider commingled freight and passenger 
operations provided that a jointly agreed risk analysis is provided by the passenger and freight 
railroads, and the level of safety is the same as that which would be provided under one of the two 
prior options selected as the base case. 
 
The major passenger railroads requested an exception for tracks in passenger terminal areas 
because of the impracticability of installing PTC.  These are locations were signal systems govern 
movements over very complex special track work divided into short signal blocks.  Operating 
speeds are low (not to exceed 20 miles per hour), and locomotive engineers moving in this 
environment expect conflicting traffic and restrictive signals.  Although low-speed collisions do 
occasionally occur in these environments, the consequences are low; and the rate of occurrence is 
very low in relation to the exposure.  It is the nature of current-generation PTC systems that they 
work with averages in terms of stopping distance and use conservative braking algorithms.   
 
Applying this approach in congested terminals would add to congestion and frustrate efficient 
passenger service, in the judgment of those who operate these railroads.  The density of wayside 
infrastructure required to effect PTC functions in these terminal areas would also be exceptionally 
costly in relation to the benefits obtained.  FRA agrees that technical solutions to address these 
 
88 
concerns are not presently available.  FRA does believe that the appropriate role for PTC in this 
context is to enforce the maximum allowable speed (which is presently accomplished in cab signal 
territory through use of automatic speed control, a practice which could continue where already in 
place). 
 
Temporal separation of passenger and freight services has been used to reduce risk because of the 
lower mass of  passenger/commuter trains relative to freight trains, and the consequent likelihood 
of greater collision damage to the passenger train relative to the freight train should one collide 
with the other.  This approach is used under the joint FRA-Federal Transit Administration Joint 
Policy on Shared Use, which permits co-existence of light rail passenger services (during the day) 
and local freight service (during the evening).  Conventional rail technology and secure procedures 
are used to ensure that these services do not commingle.  Amtrak representatives in the Working 
Group were confident that more refined temporal separation strategies could be employed on 
smaller railroads that carry light freight volumes and few Amtrak trains (e.g., one train per day or 
one train per day in each direction).  The Passenger Task Force agreed. 
 
FRA recognizes that there may be situations where temporal separation may not be possible. In 
this situation FRA  may allow commingled operations provided the risk top the passenger is no 
greater than if the passenger and freight trains where operating  under temporal separation or with 
all trains limited to restricted speed.  FRA requires a jointly agreed risk analysis between the 
freight and passenger services.  This ensures that the risks and consequences to both parties have 
been fully analyzed, understood, and mitigated to the extent practical.   
 
Paragraph (d) provides the definition of temporal separation with respect to paragraph (c)(2). 
 
Paragraph (e) ensures that the railroad has made no unapproved changes in what is considered and 
implemented as excepted track without FRA approval.    FRA understands that as a railroad 
implements its PTC system in accordance with their PTCIP, changes to what is considered 
excepted track may occur.  Such changes will require FRA review.  In the case that such relief is 
required, and the PTCSP has not been approved, the railroad may include their request for relief as 
part of their submission of the PTCSP.  The change, however, must be fully justified to the 
Associate Administrator for Safety.  FRA wishes to make it clear that such requests may not be 
approved, even if the PTCSP is other wise acceptable   Changes made subsequent to FRA approval 
that involve removal or reduction in functionality of the PTC system are treated as material 
modifications.  In keeping with traditional signaling principles, such requests must be formally 
submitted for review and approval by FRA.  Prior to approval of the PTCSP, FRA is also requiring 
the railroad to certify that it has made no changes, or request relief as previously described.   
 
The costs and benefits of this section are included in the general analysis below.  The flexibility 
granted here is a key part of complying with the Regulatory Flexibility Act, and is discussed in the 
regulatory flexibility analysis below. 
 
 
89 
Section 236.1021  Discontinuances, material modifications, and amendments 
 
This section describes the required information associated with amendments to the PTCIP, 
PTCDP, and PTCSP before and after FRA approval of the PTCSP, as well as material 
modifications to, or discontinuances of PTC systems once they have installed in accordance with 
this subpart.  
 
FRA considers an amendment to be a formal or official change made to the PTCIP, PTCDP, and 
PTCSP.  Amendments can add, remove, or update parts of these documents.  They are often used 
when it is better to change the document than to write a new one.  Prior to any system receiving 
FRA anticipates that there may need to be changes to the document associated with the PTCIP, 
PTCDP, and PTCSP.  These changes can be done one of two ways.  The first, and least preferable, 
is to make a formal request by submission of the new document without prior FRA involvement.  
This leaves FRA in the position in trying to evaluate the impact of the changes on the safety of the 
public without a complete understanding of the system, how it works, and the proposed changes.  
Because of this lack of understanding it may take FRA an significantly longer time to render a 
decision, and may also lead FRA to requesting a third party audit. 
 
This approach also starts a formal process that FRA is required to follow.  Such a process is often 
much slower since any exchange of information between the railroad and the FRA when 
considering the change requests is done sequentially, and in writing. 
 
FRA believes it is more advantageous for FRA and entities requesting changes discuss the changes 
informally before formal submission of the change request.  This allows FRA and the railroad to 
discuss the details of the change, and facilitates FRA=s understanding of the change before the 
change request is formally submitted.   
 
FRA wants to emphasize only amendments to the PTCIP, PTCDP, and PTCSP that affect safety 
critical issues need to be submitted to FRA for approval 
 
Paragraph (a) discusses the amendment process prior to approval of the various documents.  In 
general, changes may be made to any of these documents at any time before they have been 
approved by FRA.  Once approved, and a PTCIP has been accepted, or a Type Approval has been 
assigned , or PTC System Certification has been issued by FRA, no safety critical changes may be 
made to the installed system, or supporting documentation, may be made without FRA approval. 
 
FRA recognizes that there are legitimate reasons for making changes in the system design, and the 
locations where the system is installed.  Paragraph (b) and paragraph (c) provides a mechanism for 
requesting such change.  Paragraph (b) requires that railroads instituting changes to the PTCIP, 
PTCDP, and PTCSP with no changes to the existing signal and train control system file a request 
for amendment (RFA).   
 
In paragraph (c) FRA also recognizes that the railroad may wish to remove existing train control 
systems based on the installation of an appropriate PTC system.  To facilitate this process, and 
 
90 
reduce the number of filings, requests for materials modifications and discontinuances normally 
processed under part 235 may be integrated with the PTCIP, PTCDP or PTCSP.  This allows 
change requests to the existing signal system to be made concurrent with the submission of the 
PTCIP, PTCDP, or PTCSP or as an amendment to these documents. 
 
Change to any PTCIP, PTCDP, or PTCSP or removal or discontinuance of any signal system 
under the provisions of this section may not take effect until after FRA has approved the 
corresponding PTCIP, PTCDP, or PTCSP.  FRA may approve the removal with or without 
conditions, or may disapprove of that part of a PTCIP, PTCDP, or PTCSP associated with changes 
to existing signal and train control systems while still approving possibly approving the remainder 
of the PTCIP, PTCDP, or PTCSP.  Until FRA has granted appropriate relief or approval, the 
railroad may not make the change, and once a requested change has been made, the railroad must 
comply with requested change. 
 
Paragraph (d) provides the minimum information required to be submitted to FRA when 
submitting a request for amendment. In the case where a discontinuance or material modification 
for an existing signal system is being requested concurrently with or part of the PTCIP, PTCDP, or 
PTCSP, the PTCIP, PTCDP, or PTCSP must contain the information required in 235.10 and any 
additional information that might be requested  by FRA.  This information may include data as 
specified in 235.12. 
 
When any change for a PTCIP, PTCDP, or PTCSP is requested, regardless if a concurrent filing 
for a discontinuance or material modification is proposed, the proposed change must identify the 
proposed modification, reason for modification, the changes, and the modifications effect on 
system safety.  
 
FRA classifies changes to the PTCIP, PTCDP, or PTCSP in one of two categories- planned and 
unplanned.  Planned changes are changes that the system developer and the railroad have included 
in the safety analysis associated with the product, but have not yet been implemented.  These 
changes provide enhanced functionality to the system, and FRA strongly encourages railroads to 
include product improvements that further increase safety.  Planned changes only require FRA 
approved regression testing to demonstrate that their implementation has not had an adverse affect 
on the system they are augmenting.  Planned changes must be clearly identified as part of the 
PTCSP, and the PTCSP safety analysis must show the affect that their implementation will have 
on safety, as well as the level of safety associated with the change not having been installed. 
 
Unplanned changes are changes not foreseen by the railroad or developer that are necessary to 
ensure the safety of the system, or are functional enhancements from the original core system.  
Depending upon what phase of the development cycle these changes are introduced will determine 
the scope of the additional work necessary to ensure safety.  If the PTCDP has not yet been 
submitted to FRA, no FRA involvement is required.  However if the PTCDP has been submitted to 
FRA, or if the change impacts the safety functionality of the system once a Type Approval has 
been issued , and a PTCSP not yet submitted , the change must be documented in the PTCDP, and 
the new PTCDP submitted for FRA approval.  The subsequent PTCSP must account for the 
 
91 
change in its analysis. 
 
If the change is made after approval of the PTCSP and the system has been certified by the FRA, a 
new PTCDP as well as a new PTCSP with the change must be submitted to FRA for approval.  
Because this requires significant effort on the part of the railroad, as well as FRA, FRA expects 
that every effort will be made to eliminate the need for unplanned changes.  If the railroad and the 
vendor submit a large number of unplanned safety related changes (the term large is relative to the 
complexity of the product involved), FRA may revoke any approvals previously granted and 
disallow the use of the product until such time the railroad demonstrates the product is sufficiently 
mature. 
 
Paragraph (e) clarifies that even if a request for material modification or discontinuance is 
submitted with a PTCIP, PTCDP, and PTCSP that the material modification will be posted in the 
Federal Register and public comment solicited before FRA action is taken. 
 
Paragraph (f) simply makes it clear that FRA will consider all impacts on the public safety prior to 
approval or disapproval of any request for discontinuance, modification, or amendment of a PTC 
system and any associated changes in the existing signal system that may have been concurrently 
submitted.   While the economic impact to the affected parties may be considered by the FRA, the 
primary and final deciding factor on any FRA decision is safety.  FRA will consider not only how 
safety is affected by installation of the system, but how safety is impacted by the failure modes of 
the system. 
 
The purpose of paragraph (g) is to emphasize the right of FRA to unilaterally issue a new type 
approval, with what ever conditions are necessary to ensure safety, based on the impact of the 
proposed changes. 
 
In paragraph (h) FRA wants to make it perfectly clear that  FRA considers any installed PTC 
system to be a safety device, and once installed, the removal  modification, or change of the 
system  is not authorized without prior FRA approval.   
 
That said FRA recognizes there are a limited number of situations where changes of the PTC 
system may not have an adverse impact upon public safety.  These specific situations where prior 
FRA approval is not required are spelled out in paragraph (h)((1)  through (h)(3).  FRA notes that 
only temporary removal of the PTC system without prior FRA approval is allowed to support 
highway rail separation construction or damage to the PTC system by catastrophic events.  In both 
cases, the PTC system must be restored to operation no later than 6 months after completion of the 
event. 
 
This provision does not add any new costs or benefits, as it reflects current burdens for 
discontinuance or modification of existing signal systems. 
 
 
92 
Section 236.1023  Errors and Malfunctions 
 
Because PTC systems are approved, in part, based on certain assumptions regarding expected 
failure modes and frequencies, reporting and recording of errors and malfunctions takes on critical 
importance.  If the number of errors and malfunctions exceeds those originally anticipated in the 
design, or errors and malfunctions that were not predicted are observed to occur, the validity of the 
risk analysis is suspect.   
 
Since not all railroads may experience the same software faults or hardware failures, the 
developer's development, configuration management, and fault reporting tracking system play a 
crucial role in the ability of the railroad and the FRA to be able to determine and fully understand 
the risks and their implications. Without an effective configuration management tracking system in 
place it is difficult, if not impossible, to fairly evaluate risks associated with a product over the life 
of the product. 
 
Inherent in this paragraph is the obligation that in the event of the failure of a component essential 
to the safety of a system to perform as intended, the cause be identified and corrective action taken 
without undue delay. Until repair is completed, the railroad and vendors are required to take 
appropriate measures to assure the safety of train movements, roadway workers, and  on-track 
equipment. This requirement mirrors current requirement 49 C.F.R. ' 236.11, which applies to all 
signal system components.   
 
FRA recognizes that there be situations where reducing the severity of such hazards will suffice 
for an equivalent reduction in risk. For example, reducing operating speed may not reduce the 
frequency of certain hazards involving safety-critical products, but it would in most cases reduce 
the severity of such hazards 
 
Paragraph (a) places a direct obligation on suppliers to report safety-relevant failures, which would 
include ``wrong-side'' failures and failures significantly impacting on availability where the 
PTCSP indicates availability to be a material issue in the safety performance of the larger railroad 
system.   The supplier is expected to identify the problem, the corrective actions, recommended 
risk mitigations, and the estimated time to correct the action.  FRA is to be informed to ensure 
public safety in any case where a commercial dispute (e.g., over liability) might disrupt 
communication between a railroad and supplier. 
 
Paragraph (b) places a similar responsibility on the part of the railroad to report safety relevant 
failures to the supplier and the FRA, and to keep the vendor and FRA apprised of any subsequent 
failures.  
 
To aid not only the FRA in understanding the scope of a problem on a railroad , and to aid the 
railroad in communicating any PTC system failures to the appropriate vendor, paragraph (c) 
requires each railroad to keep a currently updated list identifying each supplier of PTC equipment 
on their railroad. 
 
 
93 
Paragraph (d) adds the requirement that each railroad identify the procedures for action upon 
notification of a safety critical upgrade, patch, or revision.  FRA expects that when issues with are 
discovered that may adversely affect the safe operation of the system, regardless if the railroad has 
experienced the problem, the railroad will take correct action without undue delay.  FRA believes 
this is necessary to ensure that any component changes that, if left uncorrected would increase risk 
or interfere with the safety of train operations, are promptly addressed and that a common safety 
baseline is maintained.  If the action were to take a significant time, FRA proposes to require the 
railroad to provide periodic progress reports to FRA 
 
Paragraph (e) provides time limits for reporting failures and malfunction and the minimum 
reporting requirements.  FRA has no specific format for the reports, and will accept any format 
provided it contains at least the information of this part.  FRA will accept delivery of these reports 
by courier, fax, and email.  
 
Paragraph (f) levies a requirement, in the event that a product is found to be unsafe, upon the 
vendor to provide, if requested by FRA, a detailed explanation of the problem, the corrective 
action, and the mitigation.  While the railroad may be able to report symptoms of a problem, it is 
the vendor who is in the best position to determine the underlying root cause FRA may require this 
information to determine the full impact of the problem, and to determine if any additional 
restrictions or limitations on the use of the product may be necessary to ensure the safety of the 
general public and the railroad personnel. 
 
Paragraph (g) is intended to limit unnecessary reporting.  If the failure was the result of improper 
operation of the product outside the design parameters or non compliance with the operating 
instructions, FRA believes that remedial training by the railroad in the proper operation of the 
product is required.  Similarly, once a problem has been identified to all stakeholders, formal re-
reporting of the problem is not necessary.  In either situation, however, FRA expects that they will 
be proactively notified in a timely manner of the misuse of the equipment, and the railroads 
corrective actions taken, or the recurrence of the failure.  Such reports, however, do not have to be 
made within 7 days of occurrence, but in a reasonable time appropriate to the nature, ands extent 
of the problem. 
 
Paragraph (h) is intended to make it clear that the reporting requirements of part 233 are not a 
substitute for the reporting requirements of this subpart.  Both requirements apply.  In the case of a 
false proceed signal indication, FRA would not expect the railroad to wait for the frequency of 
such occurrences to exceed the threshold reporting level assigned in the hazard log of the PTCSP.  
Rather, current section 233.7 requires all such instances to be reported. 
 
This provision is a key part of any performance standard, and parallels current requirements under 
subpart H.  The costs and benefits of this section are included in the general analysis below. 
 
 
94 
Section 236.1027  Exclusions. 
 
FRA recognizes that there may be bona-fide exemptions from compliance with the requirements of 
subpart I.  Railroads employ numerous safety-critical products in their existing signal and train 
control systems. These existing systems have proven to provide a very high level of safety, 
reliability, and functionality. FRA believes it would be a tremendous burden on the rail industry to 
apply this subpart to all existing systems, which have to date proven safe.  Provided the equipment 
is compliant with the requirements of 49 CFR 236.1031, then they may be exempt from full 
compliance with the requirements of this Subpart.  Such exemptions, however, do not relieve the 
railroad from requesting system certification. 
 
Paragraph (a) addresses the issue of exclusion of office systems technology.  Currently, some 
railroads employ these dispatch systems as part of their existing signal and train control systems. 
These existing systems have been implemented voluntarily to enhance productivity and have 
proven to provide a reasonably high level of safety, reliability, and functionality.  It would be a 
tremendous burden on the rail industry to apply subpart I entirely to this technology and, in the 
case of smaller railroads, might discourage its use.   Therefore FRA is limiting the application of 
subpart I to those subsystems or components of an office system that perform safety-critical 
functions or affect the safety performance of a PTC system.   The level, and extent, of safety 
analysis and review of the office systems will, however, vary depending upon the type of PTC 
system with which the office system interfaces.  FRA expects, for example, that railroads relying 
on the office system conflict resolution functionality to ensure overlapping authorities are not 
issued will provide credible evidence that demonstrates that checkers have been developed as 
safety critical (although not necessarily vital) hardware and software, and tie risks associated with 
their operations have been identified and properly mitigated in the PTCDP and PTCSP included in 
the risk analysis. Particularly where mandatory directives and work authorities are evaluated for 
use in a PTC system without separate oral transmission from the dispatcher to the train crew or 
employee in charge, with the opportunity receiving personnel to evaluate and confirm the integrity 
of the directive or authority received and the potential for others overhearing the transmission to 
note conflicting actions by the dispatching center, FRA will insist on explanations sufficient to 
provide reasonable confidence that additional errors will not be introduced.    
 
Paragraph (b) establishes requirements for modifications of excluded products. At some point 
changes to excluded products are significant enough to require the safety assurance processes of 
subpart I to be followed.  This point exists when a change results in degradation of safety or in a 
material increase in safety-critical functionality. FRA believes that all modifications caused by 
implementation details will not necessarily cause the product to become subject to subpart I. These 
types of implementation modifications will be minor in nature and be the result of site specific 
physical constraints.  FRA expects that implementation modifications that will result in a 
degradation of safety or a material increase in safety-critical functionality, like a change in 
executive software, will cause the product to be subject to subpart I and its requirements.  FRA is 
concerned, however, that a series of incremental changes, while each individually not meeting the 
threshold for compliance with this subpart, may when aggregated result in a product which differs 
sufficiently as to be considered a new product. FRA therefore reserves the right to require products 
 
95 
that have been incrementally changed in this manner to comply with the requirements of this 
subpart.  Prior to FRA making such a determination, the affected railroad will be allowed to 
present detailed technical evidence why such a determination should not be made. 
 
Paragraph (c) addresses the integration of train control systems with other locomotive electronic 
control systems.  The earliest train control systems were electro-mechanical systems that were 
independent of the discrete pneumatic and mechanical control systems used by the locomotive 
engineer for normal throttle and braking functions. Examples of these train control systems 
included cab signals and ACS/ATC appliances. These systems included a separate antenna for 
interfacing with the track circuit or inductive devices on the wayside.  Their power supply and 
control logic were separate from other locomotive functions, and the cab signals were displayed 
from a separate special-purpose unit. Penalty brake applications by the train control system 
bypassed the locomotive pneumatic and mechanical control systems to directly operate a valve that 
accomplished a service reduction of brake pipe pressure and application of the brakes as well as 
reduction in locomotive tractive power. In keeping with this physical and functional separation, 
train control equipment onboard a locomotive came under part 236, rather than the locomotive 
inspection requirements of part 229.  
 
Advances in technology have presented the capability for allowing original equipment 
manufacturers (OEMs) of the various components making up the locomotive and the train control 
systems began individually repackaging the individual components using  the enhanced 
microprocessor capabilities and eliminating parts and  system function control points access. 
Access to control functions became increasingly restricted to the processor interfaces using 
proprietary software. While this resulted in significant simplification of the previously complex 
discrete pneumatic and mechanical control train and locomotive control systems into fewer, more 
compact and reliable devices,  
 
FRA encourages such enhancements, and believes, if properly done, can result in significant 
safety, as well as operational, improvements.  Locomotive manufacturers can certainly provide 
secure locomotive and train controls, and it is important that they do so if locomotives are to 
function safely in their normal service environment. FRA highly encourages the long-term goal of 
common platform integration. However when such an integration occurs, it must not be done at the 
expense of decreasing the safe, and reliable operation of the train control system.   
 
Accordingly FRA expects that the complete integrated system will be shown to have been 
designed to fail safe principles, and then demonstrated that the system operates in a fail safe mode. 
 Any commingled system must have a manual failsafe fall back up that allows the engineer to be 
brought to be a safe stop in the event of an electronic system failure. This analysis must be 
provided to FRA for approval in the PTCDP and PTCSP as appropriate.  
 
Finally paragraph (d) clarifies the application of subparts A through H to products excluded from 
compliance with subpart I.  These products are excluded from the requirements of subpart I, but 
FRA expects that the developing activity demonstrates compliance of products with subparts A 
through H.  FRA believes that railroads not mandated to implement PTC, or are implementing 
 
96 
other non PTC related processor based products ought to be given the option to have products 
which are made subject to subpart H by submitting a PSP and otherwise complying with subpart H 
or voluntarily complying with subpart I. 
 
This section adds considerable flexibility, and does not add to costs, nor does it reduce any 
benefits.  The costs outlined below are calculated assuming the existence of this section. 
 
Section 236.1029  PTC system use. 
 
This section establishes minimum requirements, in addition to those found in the PTCDP PTCSP, 
for PTC system use after approval.  Railroads are allowed, and encouraged, to adopt more 
restrictive rules that increase safety. 
 
Paragraph (a) requires that, in the event of the failure of a component essential to the safety of a 
PTC system to perform as intended, the cause be identified and corrective action taken without 
undue delay. The paragraph also requires that until repair is completed, the railroad is required at a 
minimum, to take the measures specified in the PRCSP as well as any other appropriate measures 
to assure the safety of train movements, roadway workers, and on-track equipment. This 
requirement mirrors current requirement ' 236.11, which applies to all signal system components. 
 
Paragraph (b) requires that the railroad operate the PTC within the design parameters specified in 
the PTCDP and PTCSP.  Railroads will not exceed maximum volumes, speeds, or any other 
parameter limit provided for in the PTCDP or PTCSP. On the other hand, a PTCDP or PTCSP 
could be based upon speed/volume parameters that are broader than the intended initial 
application.  So long as the full range of sensitivity analyses are included in the supporting risk 
assessment. FRA feels this requirement will help ensure that comprehensive product risk 
assessments are performed before products are implemented.  
 
Paragraph (c) sets forth the requirement that any testing of the PTC system must not interfere with 
its normal functioning.  An exception to this may be obtained under 49 CFR 236.9035, where 
special conditions have been established to protect for the safety of the public and the train crew.  
Otherwise, Paragraph (c) requires that each railroad ensure the integrity of  the PTC  system not be 
compromised, by prohibiting the normal functioning of such system to be interfered with by 
testing or otherwise without first taking measures to provide for the safety of train movements, 
roadway workers, and on-track equipment that depend on the normal functioning of the system. 
This provision parallels current ' 236.4, which applies to all devices. By requiring this paragraph, 
FRA merely intends to clarify that the standard in current ' 236.4 applies to subpart I products. 
 
Paragraph (d) establishes requirement that the operating crew has appropriate access to the 
information and functions necessary to perform their jobs safely when products are implemented 
and used in revenue service.  Where two-person crews are employed, availability of a screen and 
any needed function keys will enable the second crew person to carry out PTC onboard computer-
related activities with out distracting the engineering from maintaining situational awareness of 
activities outside the locomotive cab.   FRA=s existing regulations for train control requires that the 
 
97 
cab signal display be clearly visible to each member of the crew.  FRA believes the decision to 
operate with one PTC screen, only accessible to the engineer, can only be made after careful 
analysis of the human factor implications, the associated risks, and the sensitivity of the safety 
analysis that is used to potentially justify the decision to operate with single screens that are not 
accessible to the entire crew in the cab.  FRA notes that the principles of crew resource 
management and current crew briefing practices in the railroad industry require that all members 
of a functioning team (e.g., engineer, conductor, dispatcher, roadway worker in charge) have all 
relevant information available to facilitate constructive interactions and permit incipient errors to 
be caught and corrected.  Retaining and reinforcing this level of cooperation will be particularly 
crucial during the early implementation of PTC as errors in train consist information, errors 
generated in on-board processing, delays in delivery of safety warnings due to radio frequency 
congestion, and occasional errors in dispatching challenge the integrity of PTC systems even as the 
normal reliability of day-to-day functioning supports reductions in vigilance.  Loss of crew 
cooperation could easily spill over to other functions, including switching operations and 
management of emergency situations.   
 
This is a subject that was the subject of significant disagreement within the Working Group, and 
FRA appreciates the views of those who suggest that the cost of additional displays is not 
warranted and the argument that, where there is an additional crew member assigned, so value 
might be added by isolating the second crew member from potentially corrupted information 
displayed on the PTC display.  However, FRA believes that there is a strong likelihood that 
railroads will seek to deliver all mandatory directives on board electronically, obviating the need 
for oral transmission, within a relatively short time.  Given current technology and experience, 
FRA believes that when this occurs having a second crew member involved in receipt and 
confirmation of the authority will be useful to verify situational appropriateness and avoid 
overload of the locomotive engineer. 
 
The costs of a second screen where required are included in the costs calculated below.  FRA does 
not believe that it can meet the intent of Congress without providing the means to comply with 
core functions to every required crewmember.  The costs and benefits of this section are included 
in the general analysis below. 
 
Section 236.1031  Previously approved PTC systems. 
 
FRA recognizes that substantial effort has been voluntarily undertaken by the railroads  to develop, 
test, and deploy Positive Train Control Systems prior to the passage of the RSIA of 2008, and that 
some of the PTC systems have accumulated a significant history of safe and reliable operations.  In 
order to facilitate the ability of the railroads to leverage the results of PTC design, development, 
and implementation efforts  that have been previously been approved or recognized by FRA prior 
to the adoption of this subpart, FRA is providing the expedited approval process of this section.   
 
Positive Train Control Systems previously approved by FRA under Subpart H, as well as PTC 
systems installed under either a FRA waiver (such the Incremental Train Control System) or FRA 
order (such as the Advanced Civil Speed Enforcement System) are eligible to request type 
 
98 
approval as well as system certification under this section.   Products that have not received 
approval under the subpart H, or have that have not been previously recognized by FRA, are 
ineligible. 
 
FRA encourages railroads, to the maximum extent possible, to use proven service history data to 
support their requests for Type Approval and PTC System Certification.  While proven service 
history cannot be considered as a complete replacement for an engineering analysis of the risks 
and mitigations associated with a PTC product, it provides great credibility for the accuracy of the 
engineering analysis.  Testing and operation can only show the absence or mitigation of a 
particular failure mode, and FRA believes that there will always be some failure modes that may 
only be determined through analysis.  Because of this inherent limitation associated with testing 
and operation, FRA also strongly encourages the railroads to also submit any available analytical 
analysis or information.  
 
Nothing in this abbreviated process should be construed as implying the automatic granting of a 
type approval or system certification by FRA.  Requests for type approval and system certification 
still must be submitted by the railroad under this abbreviated process must still demonstrate the 
system reliably enforces positive train separation, over-speed protection, roadway worker 
protection, and movement through a misaligned switch. 
 
The PTC product for which type approval and certification is sought may differ in terms of 
functionality or implementation from the PTC product previously approved or recognized by FRA. 
  In such cases the service history and analysis may not align directly with the new variant of the 
product.  In a similar vein, the available service history and analysis associated with a PTC product 
may be inconclusive about the reliability of a particular function.  It is because of these possible 
situations that FRA can not unequivocally say that all requests for type approval and system 
certification submitted by a railroad under this part will be automatically granted be approval.  
 
FRA, will however, apply the available service history and analytical data as credible evidence to 
the maximum extent possible.  FRA believes that this still greatly simplifies the railroads task in 
making their safety case, since the additional testing and analysis required need only address those 
areas for which credible evidence is insufficient. 
 
FRA also encourages the sharing of a system=s service history and the results of any analytical 
analysis between different railroads for the same reason.  This sharing of information, even in the 
case where the information being shared does not fully support a particular railroad=s safety 
analysis, should reduce overall the level of effort, both in terms of time and money, to obtain 
sufficient credible evidence to support the claims being made for the safety performance of the 
product. 
 
FRA was unable to fashion an outright grandfathering of equipment previously used in transit and 
Foreign Service. FRA does not have the same degree of direct access to the service history of these 
systems. Transit systemsCexcept those that are connected to the general railroad systemCare not 
 
99 
directly regulated by FRA.  FRA's experience with eliciting safety documentation from foreign 
authorities has not been good, particularly given the influence of national industrial policies. 
 
However, FRA does believe that the potential exists for simplification of the subpart I process 
(rather than an exclusion from the process) under which the railroad and supplier could establish 
safety performance at the highest level of analysis for the particular product, relying in part on 
experience in the other service environments and showing why similar performance should be 
expected in the U.S. environment. International signal suppliers should be in a good position to 
marshal service histories for these products and present them as part of the PTCSP.  The 
applicant(s) should address additional issues such as the following: 
 
1. Detailed description of the change, the associated affected components, functional data 
flow changes, and any changes associated with safety capabilities of the product. 
2. The analysis used to verify that the change did not introduce any new safety risks, or if 
potential risks were added, the risks and their mitigation. 
3. The tests plan and associated results used to verify and validate the correct functionality of 
all modes of the safety-related capabilities of the product with the component refreshed. 
4. Identification of any changes in training, test equipment, or maintenance required for the 
continued safe operation of the product. 
 
The costs and benefits associated with the requirements of this section are included in the general 
analysis below. 
 
Section 236.1033 Communications and security requirements. 
 
Subpart I establishes specific communications security requirements for PTC system messages.  In 
data communications, Acleartext@ is a message or data in a form that is immediately 
comprehensible to a human being without additional processing.  In particular, it implies that this 
message is transferred or stored without cryptographic protection.  It is related to, but not entirely 
equivalent to, the term Aplaintext.@  Formally, plaintext is information that is fed as an input to a 
cryptographic process, while Aciphertext@ is what comes out of that process. Plaintext might be 
compressed, encrypted, or otherwise manipulated before the cryptographic process is applied, so it 
is quite common to find plaintext that is not cleartext.  Cleartext material is sometimes in plain text 
form, meaning a sequence of characters without formatting, but this is not strictly required as the 
sense is Ano protection from snooping.@ 
 
The subject proposal originated from a Security Task Force within the PTC Working Group.  The 
objectives of the proposal are to ensure data integrity and authentication. 
 
 
100 
The security requirements set forth are consistent with Department of Homeland Security (DHS) 
guidance for SCADA systems1 and National Institute of Standards and Technology guidance.  
FRA has coordinated this proposal with DHS. 
 
FRA does not believe that a system which does not have secure communications meets the intent 
of Congress in RSIA08.  The costs and benefits of this section are included in the general analysis 
below. 
 
' 236.1035 Field testing requirements. 
 
Initial field or subsequent regression testing of a PTC product on the general rail system is often 
required before the product has been certified in order to obtain data to support the safety case 
presented in the PTCSP.  To ensure the safety of the public and train crews, prior FRA approval is 
required to conduct test operations on the general rail system.  This paragraph provides an 
alternative to the waiver process when only part 236 regulations are involved. When regulations 
concerning track safety grade crossing safety or when operational rules are involved, however, this 
process would not be available. Such testing may also implicate other safety issues, including 
adequacy of warning at highway-rail crossings (including part 234 compliance), qualification of 
passenger equipment (part 238), sufficiency of the track structure to support higher speeds or 
unbalance, and a variety of other safety issues, not all of which can be anticipated in any special 
approval procedure. Approval under this part for testing does not grant relief from other parts of 
these and the railroads must still apply for relief the non-236 regulations under the discrete special 
approval sections of those regulations, under provisions of part 211 related to waivers, or both. 
 
The information required for this filing is described in paragraphs 236.1035(a)(1)B(a)(7).     This 
information is necessary in order for FRA to make informed decisions regarding the safety of 
testing operations.  FRA would prefer that the informational filings to test under this part be 
accompanied by any requests for relief from non 236 regulations so that they may be considered as 
a whole. 
 
Paragraph (b) provides notification that FRA may, based on the results of the review of the 
information provided in (a), impose special conditions on the execution of the testing, up to, and 
including the appointment of an FRA test monitor to provide additional oversight to ensure the 
safety of rail operations.  When a test monitor is appointed, they have the authority to stop testing 
if the testing is unsafe, require additional tests as necessary to demonstrate the safe operation of the 
system, or have tests rerun when the results are in question. 
 
                                                 
1 Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition systems govern industrial processes, such as 
management of a power grid, control of a water treatment plant, etc.  PTC systems are a subset 
of SCADA systems. 
Paragraph (c) reemphasizes the earlier discussion that either temporary or permanent requests for 
relief for other than requirements of part 236 must be submitted in accordance with the processes 
specified by part 211. 
 
 
101 
The costs and benefits associated with this section are included in the general analysis below. 
 
Section 236.1037  Records retention 
 
Retention of PTC related records provides documentary proof that the system is performing as 
intended, and that the appropriate training has occurred. Accordingly under (a) FRA is requiring 
each railroad, and each vendor if appropriate, a repository of records documenting actions taken by 
the railroads   The location of this repository is at the discretion at the railroad,  and my be either 
distributed or centralized as long as FRA or FRA designated state inspectors have access during 
normal business hours. All documents and records must be available for FRA inspection and 
copying. 
 
FRA appreciates the expense associated with the creation, transmission, and storage of documents, 
and therefore is willing to accept either paper copies, or electronic copies maintained in 
accordance with a plan approved under ' 236.110, which authorizes electronic recordkeeping 
under part 236 generally.  FRA would expect to make conforming amendments to ' 236.110 
paralleling paragraph (c) of that section, which currently govern recordkeeping under subpart H.  
Comment is requested on the extent to which these provisions have proved successful or require 
revision.  The minimum sets of documents that must be maintained are: 
 
A. Any type approval, its associated PTDP if appropriate, variances from the PTCDP if 
approved, and the PTCSP that the railroad holds. 
B. Adequate documentation that to demonstrate the PTCDP and PTCSP meets the safety 
requirements of this subpart including the risk assessment.  The risk assessment must 
contain all initial assumptions for the system that are listed in paragraph (i) of Appendix 
BCRisk Assessment Criteria.  
C. The current (master) operations and maintenance manual as described in 236.1039 
D. The training and testing records which designate persons who are qualified 
E. All implementation, maintenance, inspection, and testing and regression testing records as 
described in Paragraph (2) is intended to make it clear that the requirements not only apply 
to the railroads, but also to the railroads vendors.  
 
The retention period for these records begins when the railroad places the PTC system in service. 
After the product is placed in service, paragraph (b) requires the railroad to maintain a database of 
safety-relevant hazards which occur or are discovered on the product. This database information 
shall be available for inspection and replication by FRA and FRA certified state inspectors, during 
normal business hours. Paragraph (b) also provides the procedure which must be followed if the 
frequency of occurrence for a safety relevant hazard exceeds the threshold value provided in its 
PTCDP /PTCPP. This procedure involves taking immediate steps to reduce the frequency of the 
hazard and report the hazard occurrence to FRA. FRA realizes the scope and impact could vary 
dramatically. In some cases, an adequate response could be completed within days. In other cases 
the total response could take years, even with prompt, deliberate action. If either case, prompt 
notification to FRA of the problem is required (b)(1).  The reports may be made to FRA by mail, 
 
102 
facsimile, e-mail, or hand delivery. 
 
These reporting requirements are not intended to replace, or excuse from compliance, FRA 
reporting requirements under part 233.   In the case of a false proceed signal indication; FRA 
would not expect the railroad to wait for the frequency of such occurrences to exceed the threshold 
reporting level assigned in the hazard log. Rather, current ' 233.7 requires all such instances to be 
reported. 
 
FRA believes the 15 day reporting period especially in light of electronic means of delivery, is 
adequate.  FRA currently allows faxing, emailing, or hand delivery.  Documents that are hand 
delivered to FRA must not be enclosed in an envelope, as all envelopes are required to be routed 
through the DOT mail room. 
 
FRA believes that the records required in this section are a key to complying with a performance 
standard.  Were FRA to impose a specification standard it could dispense with some of the 
recordkeeping requirements, but the burden of such a specification standard would far exceed the 
burden of recordkeeping.  The costs and benefits of this section are included in the general analysis 
below. 
 
Section 236.1039  Operations and Maintenance manual 
 
This section, which is modeled on the analogous section of subpart H, requires that each railroad 
develop a manual covering the requirements for the installation, periodic maintenance and testing, 
modification, and repair for its PTC systems.  FRA encourages the use of an electronic format as 
an appropriate medium for such a manual.  Electronic copies of the manual should be maintained 
in the same manner as other electronic records, and the manual should be included in the railroad=s 
configuration management plan (with the master copy and dated amendments carefully maintained 
so that the status of instructions to the field as of any given date can be readily determined). 
 
All specified documentation contained in the PTCDP and PTCSP that are necessary for the 
installation, repair, modification and testing of a product must be placed in an Operations and 
Maintenance Manual for that product and be made available to both persons required to perform 
such tasks and to FRA. 
 
Paragraph (b) requires that plans necessary for proper maintenance and testing of products be 
correct, legible, and available where such systems are deployed or maintained. The paragraph also 
requires that plans identify the current version of software installed, revisions, and revision dates. 
 
Paragraph (c) requires that the hardware, firmware, and software versions be recorded in the 
Operations and Maintenance manual in accordance with the configuration management 
requirements specified in the PTCDP and PTCSP. 
 
 
103 
Paragraph (d) requires that safety critical components contained in PTC systems, including spare 
equipment, be identified, replaced, handled, and repaired in accordance with the configuration 
management requirements specified in the PTCSP. 
 
Finally, paragraph (e) requires that a railroad officer be appointed to be responsible for 
coordination of the restoration plan required under 236.1033(f) for communications outages.  
 
FRA believes that the manuals required in this section are a key to complying with a 
performance standard.  Were FRA to impose a specification standard it could dispense with 
some of the manual requirements, but the burden of the operations and maintenance required by 
such a specification standard would likely exceed the burden of those under the manuals.  The 
costs and benefits of this section are included in the general analysis below. 
 
Section 236.1041  Training and Qualification Program (General) 
 
The training provisions of this proposal closely track the analogous sections of subpart H.  This 
general section sets forth the general requirements of an employer=s training and qualification 
programs related to PTC systems. This section requires the PTCP to provide a description of the 
specific training necessary to ensure the safe installation, implementation, operation, 
maintenance, repair, inspection, testing, and modification of the product. This section does not 
restrict the employer from adopting additional or more stringent training requirements. The 
training program takes on particular importance with respect to PTC systems, because the 
railroad industry=s workforce generally does not have thorough knowledge of the operation of 
such equipment and appropriate practices for its operation and maintenance. FRA believes 
employee training and qualification on how to properly and safely perform assigned duties are 
crucial to maintaining safe railroad equipment and a safe workplace. 
 
FRA believes that many benefits will be gained from the railroads= investment in a 
comprehensive training program. The quality of inspections will improve, which will result in 
fewer instances of defective equipment in revenue service and increased operational safety. 
Under an effective training program equipment conditions that require maintenance attention are 
more likely to be discovered and repairs can be completed safely and efficiently before 
catastrophic failure, trouble-shooting will more likely take less time; and maintenance will more 
likely be completed correctly the first time, resulting in increased safety and decreased costs. 
 
The program will provide training for persons whose duties include inspecting, testing, 
maintaining or repairing elements of the PTC system including central office, wayside, or 
onboard subsystems. In addition, it will include training required for personnel dispatching and 
operating trains in territory where PTC is in use and for roadway workers whose duties require 
knowledge and understanding of operating rules. Finally, it will include supervisors of the 
foregoing persons. 
 
Paragraph (a) establishes the general requirement for when a training program is necessary and 
who must be trained. Training programs must meet the minimum requirements listed in '' 
 
104 
236.1043 through 236.1049 as appropriate, and any more stringent requirements in the PTCSP 
for the product. FRA wants to clarify the intent of this section.  Railroads are responsible for 
training their own employees. Contractors, including suppliers whose employees are performing 
the duties described in this section, are also responsible for training their own employees. FRA is 
not requiring that railroads provide training for contractor employees.  FRA wishes to make it 
very clear employers are responsible for having their employees who perform work covered by 
this section trained and qualified. If FRA finds untrained contractors performing work that 
requires training, both the contractor and railroad may potentially be subject to civil penalty 
enforcement activity. Railroads should be seeking assurance that contractors have training 
programs that comply with this section and that the contractors are utilizing trained and qualified 
personnel to perform work on the PTC system. 
 
If the railroad has placed a clear contractual responsibility on the provider of services to train 
personnel and maintain appropriate records, FRA would normally proceed first against the 
contractor.  In any event, FRA would expect to see prompt corrective action. 
 
Paragraph (b) establishes the general requirement that the persons cited in paragraph (a) must be 
trained to the appropriate degree to ensure that they have the necessary knowledge and skills to 
effectively complete their duties related to operation and maintenance of the PTC system.  
 
No railroad could adopt PTC without sufficient training.  The costs and benefits of this section 
are included in the general analysis below. 
 
Section 236.1043  Task Analysis and Basic Requirements 
 
This section sets forth specific parameters for training railroad employees and contractor 
employees to assure they have the necessary knowledge and skills to effectively complete their 
duties as related to the safe operation and maintenance of PTC systems.  Employers, whether 
railroads or contractors, are responsible for complying with this section. This section explains 
that the functions performed by an individual will dictate what type of training that person 
should receive related to the PTC system. For example, a person that operates a train would not 
require training on how to inspect, test, and maintain the system equipment unless the person 
were also assigned to perform those tasks. 
 
The intent of this section is to ensure that employees, who work with products covered by this 
rule, including contractors, know how to keep them operating safely. The rule grants the 
employer flexibility to focus and provide training that is needed in order to complete a specific 
task. However, the rule is designed to prevent the employer from using under-trained and 
unqualified people to perform safety critical maintenance on a PTC system. 
 
This section describes that the training and qualification programs specified in '236.1041 must 
include a minimum group of identified requirements. These minimum requirements will be 
described in the PTCSP. This required training is for railroad employees and contractor 
employees to assure they have the necessary knowledge and skills to effectively complete their 
 
105 
duties related to the PTC system,  
 
Paragraphs (a)(2) and (a)(3) provide that the employer will identify inspection, testing, 
maintenance, repairing, dispatching, and operating tasks for the PTC system and develop written 
procedures for performance of those tasks. Paragraph (a)(4) requires that the employer identify 
additional knowledge and skills above those required for basic job performance necessary to 
perform each task. The point here is that work situations often present unexpected challenges, 
and employees who understand the context within which the job is to be done will be better able 
to respond with actions that preserve safety. Further, the specific requirements of the job will be 
better understood; and requirements that are better understood are more likely to be adhered to. 
An example is the so-called >>gap training== for employees who are expected to work on the 
electronics of the PTC system. Employees need to understand in at least a general way how their 
duties fit into the larger program for maintaining safety on a railroad. If they lack a basic 
understanding of the functioning of the systems they are working on, they are more likely to 
make a mistake in a situation where instructions are ambiguous and where the unusual nature of 
the problem prompts discovery of a void in the instruction set. Well informed employees will be 
less likely to free-lance trouble shooting; and, incidentally, they should also be of greater value 
in assisting with trouble shooting (an economic benefit which should, by itself, offset the some 
of the cost of this requirement). 
 
Paragraph (a)(5) requires that the employer develop a training curriculum which includes either 
classroom, hands-on, or other formally-structured training designed to impart the knowledge and 
skills necessary to perform each task. The training curriculum may be designed by the railroad in 
consultation with the manufacturer of the product, utilizing training materials and manuals 
prepared by the vendor. 
 
Paragraph (a)(6) establishes the requirement that all persons subject to training requirements and 
their direct supervisors must successfully complete the training curriculum and pass an 
examination for the tasks for which they are responsible. For example, a person who operates a 
train would not require training on how to inspect, test, or maintain the equipment unless the 
person were assigned to also perform those tasks. Generally, appropriate training must be given 
to each of these employees prior to task assignment; however, an employee may be allowed to 
perform a task for which that person has not received the appropriate training only if the 
employees do so under the direct, on-site supervision of a qualified person.  The Adirect 
supervisor@ is intended to mean the immediate, first level supervisor to whom the employee 
reports. 
 
The training of direct supervisors would depend upon an analysis of the supervisor=s job, 
including his or her specific tasks, and not merely position on the organizational chart. The 
identification of training goals and the task analysis required in paragraphs (a)(1) and (2) 
includes management goals and tasks. Managers and supervisors must be trained to carry out the 
functions their duties require. If a direct supervisor is in a position where he or she may have to 
fulfill the responsibilities or duties of a subordinate, he or she must have the requisite knowledge 
and training to do so. If, however, a manager or supervisor will likely never need to fulfill the 
 
106 
duties of a subordinate, and that person is not expected to provide technical oversight for certain 
functions, he or she may not need to be trained on those functions. This requirement is designed 
to ensure that supervisors have the requisite knowledge, training, and familiarity with the duties 
of their subordinates such that they can competently supervise the workforce. 
 
Paragraph (a)(7) requires that periodic refresher training be conducted at intervals specified in 
the PTCSP. This periodic training must include either classroom, hands-on, computer-based 
training, or other formally-structured training in order that railroad employees and contractor 
employees maintain the knowledge and skills necessary to safely perform their assigned tasks. 
 
Paragraph (a)(8) establishes a requirement to compare actual and desired success rates for the 
examination. The objective of this requirement is twofold. The first is to determine if the training 
program materials and curriculum are imparting the specific skills, knowledge, and abilities to 
accomplish the stated goals of the training program. The second is to determine if the stated 
goals of the training program reflect the correct, and current, products and operations. 
 
Over time, changes in railroad products and operations may result in differences between the 
original defined goals and tasks from the original PTCDP and PTCSP.  Similarly, over time the 
effectiveness of the training process may change as a result of instructional methods and student 
skill levels.  Changes in training may be necessary as a result. Ongoing, regular verification of 
the results of the training process is required to ensure that the training program materials and 
curriculum are relevant, the learning objectives are being met, and the necessary skills, 
knowledge and ability are actually being imparted. Without regular feedback, verification and 
validation (and if necessary, adjustments, to ensure the necessary relevancy and effectiveness) 
cannot occur.   
 
Paragraph (b) provides that the employers must maintain records which designate persons who 
are qualified under this section. These records must be kept until new designations are recorded 
or for at least one year after such person(s) leave applicable service, and must be available for 
FRA inspection and copying.  A railroad=s contractor must maintain records on contractor 
employees who perform work covered by this section. FRA expects to have access to the 
training records of contractor employees whose work functions are covered by the training 
requirements of this section.  If FRA cannot get access to such records, the railroad and 
contractor or supplier may be subject to civil penalty enforcement activity. 
 
No training program is likely to achieve its goals without analyzing the tasks for which training 
is needed, and then training on those tasks.  Most proposed PTC systems are vulnerable to 
overreliance by crewmembers compromising the additional safety provided, so this is a key part 
of any performance standard.   
 
The costs and benefits of this section are included in the general analysis below. 
 
 
107 
Section 236.1045  Training Specific to Control Office Personnel 
 
This section explains the training that must be provided to employees responsible for issuing or 
communicating mandatory directives. This training must include instructions concerning the 
interface between computer-aided dispatching systems and the PTC system as applicable to the 
safe movement of trains and other on-track equipment. In addition, the training must include 
operating rules that pertain to the train control system, including the provision for moving 
unequipped trains and trains on which the train control system has failed or been cut out en 
route. 
This section sets forth the requirements for instructions on control of trains and other on-track 
equipment when a train control system fails. It also includes periodic practical exercises or 
simulations and operational testing under part 217 to assure that personnel are capable of 
providing for safe operations under alternative operation methods. 
 
The costs and benefits of this section are included in the general analysis below. 
 
Section  236.1047  Training Specific to Locomotive Engineers and Other Operating 
Personnel 
 
This section specifies minimum training requirements for locomotive engineers, conductors, and 
other operating personnel who interact with PTC systems. >>Other operating personnel== is 
intended to refer to onboard train and engine crew members other than the engineer or 
conductor. Paragraph (a) requires that the training contain familiarization with the PTC 
equipment and the functioning of that equipment along with its relationship to other onboard 
systems under that person=s control.  The training program must cover all notifications by the 
system (i.e. onboard displays) and actions or responses to such notifications required by onboard 
personnel, as well as how each action or response ensures proper operation of the system and 
safe operation of the train. 
 
Paragraph (b) states that with respect to certified locomotive engineers, the training requirements 
of this section must be integrated into the training requirements of 49 CFR part 240. 
 
Paragraph (c) addresses requirements for use of PTC system to effect full automatic operation.  
FRA acknowledges that this rule is not designed to address all of the various safety issues which 
accompany full automatic operation (although it by no means discourages their development and 
implementation); however, insofar as skills maintenance of the operator is concerned, the rule 
offers the standards in this paragraph. 
 
Paragraph (c)(1) establishes the requirement that the PTCDP and PTCSP must identify all safety 
hazards to be mitigated by the locomotive engineer.  Paragraph (c)(2) concerns required areas of 
skills maintenance training. Paragraph (d) requires similar training for conductors as provided 
for engineers. 
 
 
108 
FRA believes that there is no one curriculum across the board that will generally satisfy the 
locomotive engineer and conductor training requirements. As with the general training 
requirements, the requisite task analysis will be specific to the functions of the system or systems 
of each railroad. Accordingly, the resulting training curriculum will correspond with the tasks or 
functions necessary for that particular system. 
 
The costs and benefits of this section are included in the general analysis below. 
 
Section 236.1049  Training Specific to Roadway Workers 
 
This section requires the railroad to incorporate appropriate training in the program of instruction 
required under part 214, subpart C, Roadway Worker Protection. This training is designed to 
provide instruction for workers who obtain protection for roadway work groups or themselves 
and will specifically include instruction to ensure an understanding of the role of a processor-
based train control system in establishing protection for workers and their equipment, whether at 
a work zone or while moving on track between work locations. Also, this section requires that 
training include recognition of PTC control equipment on the wayside and how to avoid 
interference with its proper functioning. 
 
The required task analysis will tailor each program to the needs of the particular system to which 
it applies. FRA assumes that a good task analysis would include procedures and training on 
procedures for system failures. Roadway workers are uniquely situated out on the right-of-way 
are at risk of being struck by trains and on-track equipment. Given the potential for exposure to 
extreme peril, FRA believes specifying training and periodic drills on that training is worthwhile. 
 
The costs and benefits of this section are included in the general analysis below. 
 
Appendix B to Part 236 B Risk Assessment Criteria 
 
FRA is modifying Appendix B to part 236 to enhance the language for risk assessment criteria in 
a light of experience gained during the initial stage of PTC system implementation under subpart 
H and to accommodate the requirements of subpart I regulating the use of mandatory PTC 
systems required by RSIA08. As modified, the Appendix B will incorporate new language in 
paragraphs from (a) through (h), as well as modifying some of the associated headings. 
 
Paragraph (a) reflects the change in the required length of time over which the [system] risk must 
be computed.  FRA replaces the requirement to assess risk for the system Aover the life-cycle of 
25 years or greater@ with the requirement to assess risk Aover the designed life-cycle of the 
product.@ FRA believes that the new wording of this requirement puts it in correspondence with 
the final rule language that does not specify the length of a system life-cycle, and with the 
subpart H preamble language that leaves room for the new processor-based systems to have a 
shorter than 25 years life-cycle. 
 
 
109 
Paragraph (b) is reworded to clarify the intent of this requirement. 
 
Paragraph (c) is modified and the heading of this paragraph is changed to better identify the main 
purpose of this requirement and to put it in correspondence with the associated requirements of 
sections 236.909 (c) and (d). The previous text of this paragraph and its title does not fully 
support or clarify the main intent of subpart H  to require that the total cost of hazardous events 
should be the risk measure for a full risk assessment and the MTTHE calculations for all 
hazardous events  the risk measure for the abbreviated risk assessment.    
 
The existing subpart H text asks for both the base case and the proposed case to be expressed in 
the same metrics.  Paragraph (c) of this appendix, as currently written, does not fully reflect 
FRA's intent that the same risk metric is  to be used in the risk assessment for both the previous 
and current conditions (see 236.913 (g) (2) (vii).  FRA believes that the revised title of this 
paragraph poses the right question and that the new formulation of this paragraph provides better 
guidance on how to perform risk assessment for previous and current conditions. 
 
The text and the title of paragraph (d) have been modified to create a comprehensive and detailed 
list of system characteristics that must be included in the risk assessment for the proposed PTC 
systems subject to requirements of [both] subpart H and subpart I. FRA believes that the 
extended description of system characteristics better suits the requirements of Subpart H and 
especially subpart I related to risk assessment. For example, the new text makes it clear that the 
risk assessment must account not only for the total volume of traffic, but also for the type of 
transported fright materials (TIH, PIH), as well as for speeds for freight and passenger trains if 
part 236 places additional requirements for certain types of train control systems to be used at 
such speeds.  
 
Paragraph (e) is also modified to clarify its intent and reflect industry=s experience in risk 
assessment techniques gained during initial stage of PTC system implementation under subpart 
H. In the revised text of this paragraph FRA gives more specific guidance on how to derive the 
main risk characteristics, MTTHE, and what role reliability and availability parameters, such as 
MTTF or MTBF for different system components can play while assessing risk for vital and non-
vital hardware/software components of the system.  FRA emphasizes it is critical, that railroads 
and their vendor(s) include the software failure rates into risk assessments for the system. FRA 
also finds it  necessary to advise railroads and their vendors to include reliability and availability 
characteristics, such as MTTF or MTBF into risk assessment in order to account for potential 
system exposure to hazards during system failures or malfunctioning, when the system operates 
in its fall back mode.  FRA believes that the new version of this paragraph more accurately 
addresses the industry=s need for clarity in interpretation and execution of final rule requirements 
related to risk assessment.   
 
Paragraph (f)(2) is modified to reflect FRA=s Aunderstanding@- that software failure analysis may 
not necessarily be based on MTTHE "validation and verification@ processes and that MTTHE 
characteristic=s cannot be easily obtained for the system software components. Therefore item (2) 
of this paragraph is revised to outline the significance of detailed software fault/ failure analysis 
 
110 
and software testing to demonstrate repeatable predictive results that all software defects are 
identified and corrected. 
 
Paragraph (g) is revised minimally to clarify that (1) that MTTHE calculations should account 
for the restoration time after system or component failure, and clarify in (2) that the system 
design must be assessed for adequacy through verification and validation process.  
  
Paragraph (h) is modified to emphasize the need to document all assumptions made during the 
risk assessment process. FRA believes that the assumptions should be documented while 
deriving the total cost of potential accident consequences for full risk assessment or MTTHE 
values for abbreviated risk assessment, rather than only documenting assumptions for her 
intermediate parameters, such as MTTF and MTTR, as asked in the previous text of this 
paragraph. These later two parameters may or may not be relevant for the risk assessment.  
 
FRA believes that the changes to Appendix B do not change industry practice, but make both 
subparts H and I easier to comply with, and therefore the changes do not add any costs or 
benefits. 
 
Appendix C to Part 236 B Safety Assurance Criteria and Processes 
 
FRA is modifying Appendix C to part 236 to enhance the language of this appendix, to re-
organize the existing list of safe system design principles in accordance with the well established 
models of system safety engineering, and to augment the list of safe system design principles 
with the principles related to safe system software design.   As modified, the Appendix C will 
incorporate new language and the language from current Appendix C in the same number of 
paragraphs from (a) through (c) with paragraph (b) being significantly restructured.   A safe state 
is a system configuration that the system defaults to in the event of a fault or failure or when 
unacceptable or dangerous conditions are detected.  The safe state is a state of the process 
operation where the hazardous event cannot occur.  
 
Paragraph (a) is revised to reflect the main purpose of this appendix in clear, accurate, and 
consistent language that will be repeatedly used throughout the appendix. It also outlines that the 
requirements of this appendix will be applicable to railroads= PTCIP as well as PTCSP required 
by subpart I.  
 
Paragraph (b) is modified and restructured to present in a consistent language a complete list of 
safety assurance principles properly classified or Acategorized@ in accordance with well 
established system safety engineering principles that need to be followed by the designer of the 
system to assure that all system components performs safely under normal operating conditions 
and under failures, accounting for human factor impacts, external influencing, and procedures 
and policies related to maintenance, repair, and modification of the system. The title of this 
paragraph is changed to outline the mentioned above purpose of this paragraph. FRA also added 
that these principles must be applicable to PTC systems designed and implemented under 
requirements of subpart I.    
 
111 
 
The title of Subparagraph (1) of Paragraph (b) is changed to better suit the chosen base of 
classification for all safety principles under paragraph (b).  
 
Subparagraph (2), (3) and (4) of Paragraph (b) are combined under the changed title of 
Subparagraph (2) gathering all safety principles to be followed to assure safe state of the systems 
under different types of failures. The texts of previous subparagraphs (2), (3), (4) remained 
unchanged with the exception of PTCSP reference in (ii) applicable to subpart I. 
 
Closed Loop Principle under new Subparagraph (3) is revised to reflect the industry accepted 
definition of Closed Loop Principle given in AREMA Manual.  The previous definition of 
Closed Loop Principle was too general and did not reflect the essence of the most significant 
principles of safe signaling system design. 
 
Under the new Subparagraph (4) FRA added a list of Safety Assurance Concepts that the 
designer may consider for implementation to assure sail-safe system design and operation. These 
principles are predominantly applicable for the safe system software design and quoted from the 
IEEE-1483 standard. 
 
The previous Subparagraphs (5) through (8) are renumbered to follow the chosen scheme for the 
proper classification and sequence of safety principles discussed above.  
 
New Subparagraph (5) presents the unchanged language of previous subparagraph (9) outlining 
Human Factor Engineering safety principle. 
 
New Subparagraph (6) presents the unchanged language of previous subparagraph (5) outlining 
safety principles for system operation under external influences.  
 
New Subparagraph (7) combines the text of previous subparagraph (6) and the new text added to 
accentuate the requirements for proper regression testing after system modifications. 
 
The previous Subparagraph (9) is eliminated due to redundancy. The requirements of this 
subparagraph are included in Subparagraph (1). 
 
Paragraph (c) is revised to reflect changes in recommended standards. The standard EN50126: 
1999, Railway Applications: Specification and Demonstration of Reliability, Availability, 
Maintainability and Safety (RAMS) is superseded by the standard IEC62278: 2002 under the 
same title. The standard EN50128 (May 2001), Railway Applications: Software for Railway 
Control and Protection Systems is superseded by the Standard IEC62279: 2002 under the same 
title. 
 
Under Subparagraph (i) of Paragraph (c) FRA references additional IEEE standards that became 
available and will support the designs of PTC systems that are widely using communication as 
their main component. In addition to existing reference under (A) for IEEE-1483 Standard, the 
 
112 
following standards are added to Subparagraph (i): (B) IEEE 1474.2-2003, Standard for user 
interface requirements in communications based train control (CBTC) systems; and (C) IEEE 
1474.1-2004, Standard for Communications-Based Train Control (CBTC) Performance and 
Functional Requirements.  
 
After analysis of current applicability of ATCS Specification 130 and 140, FRA removes these 
standards from the list of referenced standards due to their being not used, but adds the ATCS 
200, Data Communication standard that remains relevant for communication segment of PTC 
system designs. 
 
FRA also considers necessary referencing several additional sections of current AAR-AREMA 
2009 Communications and Signal Manual of Recommended Practices. In addition to Section 17 
of this manual referenced in a previous version of Appendix C, FRA adds to the list of references 
(A) Section 16 Vital Circuit and Software Design; (C) Section 21 Data Transmission; (D) 
Section 23 Communication-Based Signaling. 
 
FRA believes that the changes to Appendix C reflect current industry practice and do not add to 
societal benefits or costs. 
GENERAL COSTS OF PTC 
 
The costs anticipated to accrue from adopting this proposed rule would include:  (1) costs 
associated with developing implementation plans and administrative functions related to the 
implementation and operation of PTC systems, including the information technology and 
communication systems that make up the central office; (2) hardware costs for onboard 
locomotive system components, including installation; (3) hardware costs for wayside system 
components, including installation; and (4) maintenance costs for all system components. The 
two largest components of initial PTC system acquisition costs are the costs associated with 
installation of PTC units onboard locomotives, including multiple unit (MU) locomotives and 
cab cars used in passenger service3, and along the wayside.  All commuter operations connected 
to the general railroad system of transportation, which include all current commuter rail 
                                                 
3.  Most commuter railroads generally operate one or both of two types of passenger train 
service: MU locomotive and push-pull. An MU locomotive is a self-propelled rail vehicle that is 
designed to transport and be occupied by passengers. MU locomotives typically operate semi-
permanently coupled together as a pair or triplet with a control cab at each end. During peak 
commuting hours, multiple pairs or triplets of MU locomotives, or a combination of both, are 
typically operated together as a single passenger train in MU service. In contrast, push-pull 
service is passenger train service typically operated with a conventional locomotive in the rear of 
the train “pushing” the consist with a cab car in the lead position of the train, and with the 
conventional locomotive in the lead position of the train “pulling” the consist with the cab car in 
the rear of the train. 
 
 
 
113 
operations, would be subject to the proposed rule.  Note that PATH is not physically connected 
to the general freight system yet is considered a commuter railroad for all purposes.  PATH 
formerly was part of the general freight system and remains under FRA safety jurisdiction. 
Rapid transit systems, such as the Washington Metro Area Transit Authority (WMATA) and 
New York City Transit Authority (NYCTA), would not be impacted. 
 
As with other major system installations, the cost of PTC system installation on locomotives will 
depend on whether it is a retrofit installation or one that is done during manufacture.  Most 
locomotives built in the past 15 years have electronic systems incorporated that would facilitate 
installation of PTC.  Older locomotives might be slightly more expensive to retrofit, and as a 
consequence they might be retired earlier than planned.  Discussions with railroads and 
manufacturers of PTC systems yielded a wide range of opinions with respect to locomotive cost 
implications, however, most members of the RSAC PTC Working Group seemed to think that it 
would not cost much more to retrofit older equipment.  Nevertheless, a fixed investment of some 
amount, for example the $55,000 per unit of V-TMS used in estimates here, is a larger portion of 
the total value of a used locomotive than a new one.  If a locomotive has a market value of 
$75,000 it is much harder to retain that locomotive if it needs a $55,000 PTC system than it is to 
add the $55,000 to a new locomotive costing $2,000,000.  To the extent that installation of PTC 
components on locomotives results in replacement of some locomotives with new ones, there 
will be some efficiency gains.  Newer locomotives are more fuel efficient, produce fewer 
emissions, are more easily maintained, and may have other cost savings features that are likely 
offset the cost of replacement.  This effect might even benefit some small railroads that would 
not be required to install PTC, as it would reduce their acquisition cost.  
 
Class I railroad locomotive counts were derived from AThe Official 2009 Edition, Locomotive 
Rosters and News,@ by totaling the locomotive counts for each of the seven Class I railroads.   
 
In the Initial Regulatory Flexibility Analysis section below, FRA analyzes the impact on small 
railroads, and estimates that 240 Class III railroad locomotives would need to be equipped, 
because they operate on other railroad lines that will be equipped with PTC.  Some Class II 
railroad locomotives may also need to be equipped.  However, the number of locomotives that 
Class II and III railroads would have to equip is roughly the same as the small number of 
locomotives that Class I railroads may not have to equip.  Therefore, the total number of Class I 
locomotives is a good surrogate for the total number of all freight locomotives that would have 
to be equipped. 
 
Table 1 presents the locomotive related costs.  A detailed breakdown of commuter railroad 
equipment was needed to determine the most likely type of PTC systems that will be 
implemented on each type of equipment based on the need for interoperability with existing or 
planned systems.  American Public Transportation Association (APTA) member railroad 
locomotive counts are grouped together by anticipated type of PTC system to the extent 
practical.  
 
Two railroads, Alaska Railroad (ARR) and PATH, are expected to use unique systems, with 
 
114 
little interoperability, so their costs are not presented in Table 1.  Costs for Amtrak are listed 
separately in Table 3 and costs for PATH will be incurred voluntarily, so they are not included.  
Future passenger operations are not included, although the unit costs would be similar to those 
on existing systems.  FRA would have to speculate on the likelihood of plans coming to fruition, 
as well as the likelihood that startup operations would have had PTC systems in the absence of a 
mandatory requirement.  It is fairly likely that PTC systems would be voluntarily included in 
future high-speed operations.  High speed operations around the world rely on advanced train 
control systems and an order of particular applicability requires ACSES on portions of the 
Northeast Corridor.  FRA requests comments regarding the likelihood of voluntary application 
on new high speed operations as well as the types of systems that might be used.  
 
As noted above, the costs presented below do not include implementation costs for PATH 
because it is already adopting a system similar to the Communications Based Train Control 
(CBTC) system used by the New York City Transit Authority on the Canarsie line in order to 
increase capacity, or the ARR, whose costs are presented separately in Table 3 because the ARR 
is installing its own version of PTC and its systems does not need to be interoperable with any 
other system since the ARR does not connect with other railroads except through barge service.  
The costs included in this analysis for the ARR are for more extensive switch monitoring and 
track integrity circuits.  ARR has and would continue to incur other PTC implementation costs in 
absence of this rule and RSIA08.  
 
In developing cost estimates, FRA assumed that railroads connecting with the Northeast 
Corridor would use ACSES compatible technology.  ACSES technology can have higher unit 
costs, in part because the onboard units must pick up transponder signals from beneath the train, 
as well as data transmitted by radio.  Both require additional equipment.  Further, ACSES 
equipment may be more expensive because it has to respond to data on a shorter cycle.  It is this 
shorter cycle, with shorter response time, which makes ACSES relatively a better choice for the 
higher density operations of the Northeast Corridor.  FRA is in no way mandating that any 
railroad adopt any particular technology, but is estimating costs based on what FRA thinks are 
the most logical ways to meet the mandate.  Of course, if a railroad were to disagree with this 
analysis, it could install another system with corresponding different costs and benefits.  FRA 
notes that, in order to be fully functional, ACSES must be combined with cab signals and 
automatic train control.  As the NRPM was prepared, FRA lacked detailed information regarding 
whether or to what extent railroads in the northeast might find it necessary to install cab signal 
equipment on additional rail lines in order to take advantage of ACSES.  FRA is aware that New 
Jersey Transit has already made these investments and that both of the Metropolitan Transit 
Authority commuter railroads have non-signaled lines for which “main line” exceptions will 
apparently be requested.  Comment is requested regarding these additional potential costs. 
 
115 
 
 Table 1 
 Onboard Equipment Costs  
 
Number of commuter RR units, excluding PATH All units Unit cost Total cost 2-cab
APTA locomotives 492  
APTA, single cab, cab car/MU, 1 level 2,186  
APTA, single cab, cab car/MU, 2 level 637  
APTA, double cab, MU, 1 level 98  98
APTA, double cab, MU, 2 level 0  0
APTA, double cab, MU,1 level, articulated 4  4
Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority 83  
Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority cab cars 84  
New Mexico Railrunner locomotives 5  
New Mexico Railrunner cab cars 5  
New Jersey Transit locomotives 155  
New Jersey Transit EMUs 230  
New Jersey Transit assumed cab cars, single cab 155  
Total commuter units 4,134  102
 
Commuter units excluded  
Alaska RR cab cars 4  4
Alaska RR locomotives 58  
Total Alaska RR 62  4
 
Total commuter units, excluding ARR and PATH 4,072  98
 
Additional costs for equipping second cabs $15,000 $1,470,000 
 
Units to be equipped with ACSES only  
Amtrak locomotives 0  
Connecticut DOT cab cars 14  
Connecticut DOT locomotives 8  
Long Island Railroad (LIRR)cab cars 1,025  
LIRR locomotives 69  
Metro North cab cars 896  
Metro North locomotives 46  
Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority 382  71
Southeastern Pennsylvania Transportation Authority 8  
Total equipped with ACSES only 2,448 $80,000 $195,840,000 71
 
Units to be equipped with ACSES and V-TMS  
Amtrak locomotives 20  
Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority 83  
Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority cab cars 84  
MARC Train cab cars 27  
MARC Train locomotives 36  
Freight locomotives 100  
Total equipped with ACSES and V-TMS 247 $125,000 $30,875,000 
 
116 
 
Units to be equipped V-TMS only  
Commuter units 1497  
Amtrak locomotives 366  
Freight locomotives 27,598  
 
Total equipped with V-TMS only 29,461 $55,000 $1,620,355,000 
 
 
Total Onboard costs $1,848,540,000 
 
Wayside installation costs are estimated based on assumptions made above regarding application 
of either VTMS or ACSES and cost estimates from the 1999 Report, updated to current dollars.  
These are presented in Table 2.  Again, costs for Alaska Railroad and PATH are not included.  
The two railroads are expected to adopt PTC systems that are different from those adopted by the 
rest of the industry.  The Alaska Railroad system costs are presented in Table 3 and are treated as 
a single purchase including all system components, while the already planned PATH system is 
assumed to be funded as a voluntary transit improvement, as it is intended to boost capacity.  
 
 Table 2. 
Wayside Equipment Costs
ACSES miles Unit cost
   1998 cost & mileage (1999 Report)    198 $20,250,000
Implied unit cost, 1998 $102,273
Inflation factor 1.1803
Estimated current unit cost $120,713
Miles to be equipped with ACSES
LIRR 308
Metro North 271.6
New Jersey Transit 313.6
Southeastern Penn Transp Authority 94.2
Total 987.4 $120,713 $119,191,523
New Cab Signals Required
LIRR ABS 136 $20,000 $2,720,000
Metro North Dark Territory 58.7 $60,000 $3,522,000
Metro North TCS 51.06 $20,000 $1,021,200
Total 245.76 $7,263,200
Miles to be equipped with V-TMS 68700 $50,000 $3,435,000,000
Total Wayside costs $3,561,454,723
 
 
117 
Railroads will also incur costs associated with developing implementation plans and 
administrative functions related to the implementation and operation of PTC systems, including 
the information technology and communication systems that make up the central office.  It is 
tempting to look at costs of consumer electronics, which have been dropping since 1998, and ask 
if PTC systems would be less expensive now, as well.  Unfortunately, much of the cost 
associated with PTC systems is for system development, which must be performed under 
rigorous conditions in order to avoid costly unintended consequences.  Central office costs, if 
anything, have increased since 1998, with inflation, although some software development tools 
may have reduced the time needed to perform some functions.   
 
Table 3 presents total PTC system costs.  PTC cost estimates used in this analysis are based on 
discussions with RSAC participants and others over the course of more than a decade of 
experience in estimating PTC costs.  FRA is aware of lower estimates, which typically did not 
include installation costs, and much higher estimates, which often involved what FRA believes 
are unreasonable expectations of difficulties in retrofitting older equipment.  The estimates from 
individuals who have actually installed, or been involved in the bid process for installations, are 
more consistent with the estimates used in this analysis.  FRA believes that its onboard 
equipment cost estimates are likely in the upper bound, however actual equipment costs may 
vary for one or more systems.  It would not be unreasonable for actual locomotive equipment 
costs to total as low as 60% of this estimate or as high as 125% of the estimate.  FRA believes 
that its wayside costs may be in the lower bound.  Wayside costs are not likely to be less than 
80% of that, however, costs could be twice as high if more wayside units are required than we 
expect.  FRA believes that its central office and development costs are likely in the upper bound. 
 Cooperation and collaboration among industry participants could significantly reduce 
development costs.  FRA believes that central office and development costs could be as low as 
40% of its estimates, but no more than 50% higher than its estimates.  FRA has taken the high 
and low estimates for each cost category, and derived total system cost range of from 71% to 
176% of FRA’s best estimates for total system acquisition costs. 
 
 
118 
 Table 3   
 Units Unit cost Total Cost low cost High cost
Onboard Equipment see Table 1 $1,848,540,000 $1,109,124,000 $2,310,675,000
  
Wayside Equipment see Table 2 $3,561,454,723 $2,849,163,778 $7,122,909,445
  
Central Office Equipment 20 $15,000,000 $300,000,000 $120,000,000 $450,000,000
  
Alaska Railroad $30,000,000 $30,000,000 $30,000,000
  
Total system acquisition costs $5,739,994,723 $4,108,287,778 $9,913,584,445
 
 
 
Railroads have until December 31, 2015 to implement PTC systems.  Not all components will be 
phased in at the same rate.  FRA has made some assumptions about the phase-in by component 
type.  FRA assumes that development and central office acquisition will occur first, in roughly 
equal increments of 20% of total installed costs over five years, starting in 2009.  FRA assumes 
that wayside systems acquisition will start in 2011 and with a smaller portion in the first year, 
building up to a much larger portion in the final year of acquisition, 2015; specifically, 5% in the 
first year, 10% in the second year, 15% in the third year, 30% in the fourth year, and 40% in the 
fifth and final year.  FRA assumes that onboard system acquisition will occur in roughly equal 
increments of 20% of total installed costs over five years, starting in 2011.   
 
Further, a life cycle cost is calculated, over a service life of 20 years.  Annual maintenance costs 
are assumed to be 15% of installed system costs at the end of the previous year.  Electronic 
systems may even have a greater annual maintenance cost if the components must be replaced 
frequently, because the components are no longer manufactured as technology brings chips and 
other electronic equipment with greater capabilities to the general market.  It is unlikely that a 
chip maker will maintain production of an obsolete chip just to serve the railroad market, which 
is very small relative to the total market for processors.  Discounted life-cycle costs are 
calculated using both 3% and 7% annual discount factors.  The maintenance costs exceed the 
initial procurement costs over the thirty year period, as shown in Tables 4a through 4f. 
 
Expected PTC costs are detailed in Tables 4a and 4b, which present annual breakdowns, Tables 
4c and 4d present high cost scenarios.  Tables 4e and 4f present low cost scenarios.  Tables 4a, 
4c, and 4e present costs in current dollars using a 7% discount rate, while Tables 4b, 4d, and 4f 
present current costs based on a 3% discount rate.  Tables 4a through 4f also present expected 
railroad accident reduction benefits, which are discussed in the following section of this analysis. 
 
Because the circumstances of the ARR cost accruals are distinct from other railroads included in 
this analysis, they are presented separately in Tables 4g and 4h.   
 
This analysis discusses the total cost of each PTC system component.  However, each 
component has a paperwork requirement, whether for configuration management, training, 
 
119 
maintenance, hazard log or something else.  All such costs are included in aggregate form, and 
there is no separate paperwork estimate in this regulatory impact statement.  Some paperwork 
requirements may already reflect current industry practices, and would not as a result be a new 
burden of the proposed rule, even if they qualify as a paperwork burdens for the analysis 
required under the Paperwork Reduction Act. 
 
IMPACTS OF EXTENDING THE IMPLEMENTATION SCHEDULE 
 
RSIA08 requires the railroads to have all mandatory PTC systems operational on or before 
December 31, 2015.  Members of the PTC Working Group, especially railroad and supplier 
representatives, said that the timeframe was very tight, and that the scheduled implementation 
dates would be difficult to meet.  In general, the faster a government agency requires a regulated 
entity to adopt new equipment of procedures, the more expensive compliance becomes.  In part, 
this is due to supply elasticity being less over shorter time periods.   
 
FRA is unable to estimate the potential savings if Congress provided a longer implementation 
schedule or provided incentives, rather than mandates, for PTC system installation.  In order to 
estimate the likely reduction in costs in such situations, FRA would need to develop some other 
schedule for implementation.  The element least sensitive to an implementations schedule 
appears to be onboard costs.  Each PTC system’s onboard equipment seems similar and is not 
very different from existing onboard systems.  Further, the 2015 deadline is not so restrictive that 
it would cause railroads to pull locomotives out of service just to install on board PTC 
equipment.  Locomotives must be inspected thoroughly every 90 and more extensively every 
360 days.  The inspections can last from one to several days.  Railroads usually bring 
locomotives into their shops to perform these inspections, during which time a skilled and 
experienced team could install the on board equipment for PTC.   System development is much 
less certain, and more time would enable vendors to develop, test, and implement the software at 
a more reasonable cost. Wayside costs are also sensitive to the installation timetable, as the 
wayside must be mapped and measured, and then the railroads must install wayside interface 
units (WIUs).  Wayside mapping and measurement takes a highly skilled workforce.  A larger 
workforce is necessary to timely implement the required PTC systems in a shorter amount of 
time.  WIU installation is likely similar to existing signal or communication systems installation, 
and is likely to involve use of existing railroad skilled workers.  The shorter the installation time 
period, the more work will be done at overtime rates, which are, of course, higher. 
 
FRA believes that lower costs could result from a longer installation period, but FRA also 
believes that the differences in costs would be within the range of the low costs provided in the 
main analysis of the proposed rule.  The 2004 report included some lower cost estimates, but in 
light of current discussions with railroads, the cost estimates in the 1998 report seem more 
accurate.  The lower estimates FRA received in preparing the 2004 report were both overly 
optimistic, and excluded installation costs, as well as higher costs which stem from meeting the 
performance standards. 
 
 
120 
Table 4a 
 
Phase In 
analysis                     
Discount Rate   Expected Case                 
7%         Total      Discounted   Discounted 
Year Discount Development & Wayside Onboard Installed Maintenance Annual Annual Annual Annual 
  Factor Central Office Costs Costs Costs Cost Cost Cost Benefit Benefit 
2009 1.00 $ 60,000,000 $ 0 $ 0 $ 60,000,000 $ 0 $ 60,000,000 $ 60,000,000 $ 0 $ 0 
2010 0.93 $ 60,000,000 $ 0 $ 0 $ 120,000,000 $ 9,000,000 $ 69,000,000 $ 64,485,981 $ 0 $ 0 
2011 0.87 $ 60,000,000 $ 178,072,736 $ 369,708,000 $ 727,780,736 $ 18,000,000 $ 625,780,736 $ 546,581,130 $ 2,700,000 $ 2,358,285 
2012 0.82 $ 60,000,000 $ 356,145,472 $ 369,708,000 $ 1,513,634,208 $ 109,167,110 $ 895,020,583 $ 730,603,401 $ 9,000,000 $ 7,346,681 
2013 0.76 $ 60,000,000 $ 534,218,208 $ 369,708,000 $ 2,477,560,417 $ 227,045,131 $ 1,190,971,340 $ 908,586,333 $ 18,000,000 $ 13,732,114 
2014 0.71 $ 0 $ 1,068,436,417 $ 369,708,000 $ 3,915,704,834 $ 371,634,063 $ 1,809,778,479 $ 1,290,347,044 $ 45,000,000 $ 32,084,378 
2015 0.67 $ 0 $ 1,424,581,889 $ 369,708,000 $ 5,709,994,723 $ 587,355,725 $ 2,381,645,614 $ 1,586,991,035 $ 76,500,000 $ 50,975,180 
2016 0.62 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 5,709,994,723 $ 856,499,208 $ 856,499,208 $ 533,384,661 $ 90,000,000 $ 56,047,477 
2017 0.58 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 5,709,994,723 $ 856,499,208 $ 856,499,208 $ 498,490,337 $ 90,000,000 $ 52,380,819 
2018 0.54 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 5,709,994,723 $ 856,499,208 $ 856,499,208 $ 465,878,820 $ 90,000,000 $ 48,954,037 
2019 0.51 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 5,709,994,723 $ 856,499,208 $ 856,499,208 $ 435,400,766 $ 90,000,000 $ 45,751,436 
2020 0.48 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 5,709,994,723 $ 856,499,208 $ 856,499,208 $ 406,916,604 $ 90,000,000 $ 42,758,352 
2021 0.44 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 5,709,994,723 $ 856,499,208 $ 856,499,208 $ 380,295,892 $ 90,000,000 $ 39,961,076 
2022 0.41 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 5,709,994,723 $ 856,499,208 $ 856,499,208 $ 355,416,721 $ 90,000,000 $ 37,346,800 
2023 0.39 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 5,709,994,723 $ 856,499,208 $ 856,499,208 $ 332,165,160 $ 90,000,000 $ 34,903,552 
2024 0.36 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 5,709,994,723 $ 856,499,208 $ 856,499,208 $ 310,434,729 $ 90,000,000 $ 32,620,142 
2025 0.34 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 5,709,994,723 $ 856,499,208 $ 856,499,208 $ 290,125,915 $ 90,000,000 $ 30,486,114 
2026 0.32 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 5,709,994,723 $ 856,499,208 $ 856,499,208 $ 271,145,715 $ 90,000,000 $ 28,491,695 
2027 0.30 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 5,709,994,723 $ 856,499,208 $ 856,499,208 $ 253,407,210 $ 90,000,000 $ 26,627,752 
2028 0.28 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 5,709,994,723 $ 856,499,208 $ 856,499,208 $ 236,829,168 $ 90,000,000 $ 24,885,750 
Total 11.33559524             $ 9,957,486,622   $ 607,711,640 
                      
Annualized Cost    $ 939,916,295 
 (excludes 
ARR)               
Annualized Benefit $ 57,363,680                 
 
 
121 
Table 4b 
 
Phase In analysis                   
Discount Rate Expected Case   Table 3b             
3.00%         Total      Discounted   Discounted 
Year Discount Development & Wayside Onboard Installed Maintenance Annual Annual Annual Annual 
  Factor Central Office Costs Costs Costs Cost Cost Cost Benefit Benefit 
2009 1.00 $ 60,000,000 $ 0 $ 0 $ 60,000,000 $ 0 $ 60,000,000 $ 60,000,000 $ 0 $ 0 
2010 0.97 $ 60,000,000 $ 0 $ 0 $ 120,000,000 $ 9,000,000 $ 69,000,000 $ 66,990,291 $ 0 $ 0 
2011 0.94 $ 60,000,000 $ 178,072,736 $ 369,708,000 $ 727,780,736 $ 18,000,000 $ 625,780,736 $ 589,858,362 $ 2,700,000 $ 2,545,009 
2012 0.92 $ 60,000,000 $ 356,145,472 $ 369,708,000 $ 1,513,634,208 $ 109,167,110 $ 895,020,583 $ 819,070,621 $ 9,000,000 $ 8,236,275 
2013 0.89 $ 60,000,000 $ 534,218,208 $ 369,708,000 $ 2,477,560,417 $ 227,045,131 $ 1,190,971,340 $ 1,058,162,610 $ 18,000,000 $ 15,992,767 
2014 0.86 $ 0 $ 1,068,436,417 $ 369,708,000 $ 3,915,704,834 $ 371,634,063 $ 1,809,778,479 $ 1,561,130,814 $ 45,000,000 $ 38,817,395 
2015 0.84 $ 0 $ 1,424,581,889 $ 369,708,000 $ 5,709,994,723 $ 587,355,725 $ 2,381,645,614 $ 1,994,590,707 $ 76,500,000 $ 64,067,546 
2016 0.81 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 5,709,994,723 $ 856,499,208 $ 856,499,208 $ 696,412,236 $ 90,000,000 $ 73,178,236 
2017 0.79 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 5,709,994,723 $ 856,499,208 $ 856,499,208 $ 676,128,384 $ 90,000,000 $ 71,046,831 
2018 0.77 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 5,709,994,723 $ 856,499,208 $ 856,499,208 $ 656,435,325 $ 90,000,000 $ 68,977,506 
2019 0.74 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 5,709,994,723 $ 856,499,208 $ 856,499,208 $ 637,315,849 $ 90,000,000 $ 66,968,452 
2020 0.72 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 5,709,994,723 $ 856,499,208 $ 856,499,208 $ 618,753,252 $ 90,000,000 $ 65,017,915 
2021 0.70 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 5,709,994,723 $ 856,499,208 $ 856,499,208 $ 600,731,312 $ 90,000,000 $ 63,124,189 
2022 0.68 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 5,709,994,723 $ 856,499,208 $ 856,499,208 $ 583,234,284 $ 90,000,000 $ 61,285,621 
2023 0.66 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 5,709,994,723 $ 856,499,208 $ 856,499,208 $ 566,246,877 $ 90,000,000 $ 59,500,603 
2024 0.64 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 5,709,994,723 $ 856,499,208 $ 856,499,208 $ 549,754,250 $ 90,000,000 $ 57,767,575 
2025 0.62 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 5,709,994,723 $ 856,499,208 $ 856,499,208 $ 533,741,990 $ 90,000,000 $ 56,085,025 
2026 0.61 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 5,709,994,723 $ 856,499,208 $ 856,499,208 $ 518,196,107 $ 90,000,000 $ 54,451,480 
2027 0.59 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 5,709,994,723 $ 856,499,208 $ 856,499,208 $ 503,103,016 $ 90,000,000 $ 52,865,515 
2028 0.57 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 5,709,994,723 $ 856,499,208 $ 856,499,208 $ 488,449,531 $ 90,000,000 $ 51,325,742 
                $ 13,778,305,817   $ 931,253,681 
                      
                      
Annualized Cost $ 926,118,575 
 (Excludes 
ARR)               
Annualized 
Benefit $ 62,594,875                 
 
122 
Table 4c 
 
Phase In analysis                   
Discount Rate High Cost Case   Table 3c             
7%         Total      Discounted   Discounted 
Year Discount Development & Wayside Onboard Installed Maintenance Annual Annual Annual Annual 
  Factor Central Office Costs Costs Costs Cost Cost Cost Benefit Benefit 
2009 1.00 $ 90,000,000 $ 0 $ 0 $ 90,000,000 $ 0 $ 90,000,000 $ 90,000,000 $ 0 $ 0 
2010 0.93 $ 90,000,000 $ 0 $ 0 $ 180,000,000 $ 13,500,000 $ 103,500,000 $ 96,728,972 $ 0 $ 0 
2011 0.87 $ 90,000,000 $ 356,145,472 $ 462,135,000 $ 1,088,280,472 $ 27,000,000 $ 935,280,472 $ 816,910,186 $ 2,700,000 $ 2,358,285 
2012 0.82 $ 90,000,000 $ 712,290,945 $ 462,135,000 $ 2,352,706,417 $ 163,242,071 $ 1,427,668,015 $ 1,165,402,370 $ 9,000,000 $ 7,346,681 
2013 0.76 $ 90,000,000 $ 1,068,436,417 $ 462,135,000 $ 3,973,277,834 $ 352,905,963 $ 1,973,477,379 $ 1,505,556,444 $ 18,000,000 $ 13,732,114 
2014 0.71 $ 0 $ 2,136,872,834 $ 462,135,000 $ 6,572,285,667 $ 595,991,675 $ 3,194,999,509 $ 2,277,990,493 $ 45,000,000 $ 32,084,378 
2015 0.67 $ 0 $ 2,849,163,778 $ 462,135,000 $ 9,883,584,445 $ 985,842,850 $ 4,297,141,628 $ 2,863,366,908 $ 76,500,000 $ 50,975,180 
2016 0.62 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 9,883,584,445 $ 1,482,537,667 $ 1,482,537,667 $ 923,249,949 $ 90,000,000 $ 56,047,477 
2017 0.58 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 9,883,584,445 $ 1,482,537,667 $ 1,482,537,667 $ 862,850,420 $ 90,000,000 $ 52,380,819 
2018 0.54 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 9,883,584,445 $ 1,482,537,667 $ 1,482,537,667 $ 806,402,262 $ 90,000,000 $ 48,954,037 
2019 0.51 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 9,883,584,445 $ 1,482,537,667 $ 1,482,537,667 $ 753,646,973 $ 90,000,000 $ 45,751,436 
2020 0.48 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 9,883,584,445 $ 1,482,537,667 $ 1,482,537,667 $ 704,342,966 $ 90,000,000 $ 42,758,352 
2021 0.44 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 9,883,584,445 $ 1,482,537,667 $ 1,482,537,667 $ 658,264,454 $ 90,000,000 $ 39,961,076 
2022 0.41 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 9,883,584,445 $ 1,482,537,667 $ 1,482,537,667 $ 615,200,424 $ 90,000,000 $ 37,346,800 
2023 0.39 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 9,883,584,445 $ 1,482,537,667 $ 1,482,537,667 $ 574,953,668 $ 90,000,000 $ 34,903,552 
2024 0.36 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 9,883,584,445 $ 1,482,537,667 $ 1,482,537,667 $ 537,339,876 $ 90,000,000 $ 32,620,142 
2025 0.34 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 9,883,584,445 $ 1,482,537,667 $ 1,482,537,667 $ 502,186,800 $ 90,000,000 $ 30,486,114 
2026 0.32 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 9,883,584,445 $ 1,482,537,667 $ 1,482,537,667 $ 469,333,458 $ 90,000,000 $ 28,491,695 
2027 0.30 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 9,883,584,445 $ 1,482,537,667 $ 1,482,537,667 $ 438,629,400 $ 90,000,000 $ 26,627,752 
2028 0.28 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 9,883,584,445 $ 1,482,537,667 $ 1,482,537,667 $ 409,934,019 $ 90,000,000 $ 24,885,750 
Total               $ 17,072,290,043   $ 607,711,640 
 
 
 
123 
 
Table 4d 
 
Phase In analysis                 
Discount Rate High Cost Case   Table 3d             
3%         Total      Discounted   Discounted 
Year Discount Development & Wayside Onboard Installed Maintenance Annual Annual Annual Annual 
  Factor Central Office Costs Costs Costs Cost Cost Cost Benefit Benefit 
200
9 1.00 $ 90,000,000 $ 0 $ 0 $ 90,000,000 $ 0 $ 90,000,000 $ 90,000,000 $ 0 $ 0 
201
0 0.97 $ 90,000,000 $ 0 $ 0 $ 180,000,000 $ 13,500,000 $ 103,500,000 $ 100,485,437 $ 0 $ 0 
201
1 0.94 $ 90,000,000 $ 356,145,472 $ 462,135,000 $ 1,088,280,472 $ 27,000,000 $ 935,280,472 $ 881,591,547 $ 2,700,000 $ 2,545,009 
201
2 0.92 $ 90,000,000 $ 712,290,945 $ 462,135,000 $ 2,352,706,417 $ 163,242,071 $ 1,427,668,015 $ 1,306,518,477 $ 9,000,000 $ 8,236,275 
201
3 0.89 $ 90,000,000 $ 1,068,436,417 $ 462,135,000 $ 3,973,277,834 $ 352,905,963 $ 1,973,477,379 $ 1,753,409,091 $ 18,000,000 $ 15,992,767 
201
4 0.86 $ 0 $ 2,136,872,834 $ 462,135,000 $ 6,572,285,667 $ 595,991,675 $ 3,194,999,509 $ 2,756,034,642 $ 45,000,000 $ 38,817,395 
201
5 0.84 $ 0 $ 2,849,163,778 $ 462,135,000 $ 9,883,584,445 $ 985,842,850 $ 4,297,141,628 $ 3,598,788,462 $ 76,500,000 $ 64,067,546 
201
6 0.81 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 9,883,584,445 $ 1,482,537,667 $ 1,482,537,667 $ 1,205,438,792 $ 90,000,000 $ 73,178,236 
201
7 0.79 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 9,883,584,445 $ 1,482,537,667 $ 1,482,537,667 $ 1,170,328,924 $ 90,000,000 $ 71,046,831 
201
8 0.77 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 9,883,584,445 $ 1,482,537,667 $ 1,482,537,667 $ 1,136,241,674 $ 90,000,000 $ 68,977,506 
201
9 0.74 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 9,883,584,445 $ 1,482,537,667 $ 1,482,537,667 $ 1,103,147,256 $ 90,000,000 $ 66,968,452 
202
0 0.72 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 9,883,584,445 $ 1,482,537,667 $ 1,482,537,667 $ 1,071,016,754 $ 90,000,000 $ 65,017,915 
202
1 0.70 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 9,883,584,445 $ 1,482,537,667 $ 1,482,537,667 $ 1,039,822,091 $ 90,000,000 $ 63,124,189 
202
2 0.68 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 9,883,584,445 $ 1,482,537,667 $ 1,482,537,667 $ 1,009,536,011 $ 90,000,000 $ 61,285,621 
202
3 0.66 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 9,883,584,445 $ 1,482,537,667 $ 1,482,537,667 $ 980,132,049 $ 90,000,000 $ 59,500,603 
202
4 0.64 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 9,883,584,445 $ 1,482,537,667 $ 1,482,537,667 $ 951,584,514 $ 90,000,000 $ 57,767,575 
202
5 0.62 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 9,883,584,445 $ 1,482,537,667 $ 1,482,537,667 $ 923,868,460 $ 90,000,000 $ 56,085,025 
202 0.61 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 9,883,584,445 $ 1,482,537,667 $ 1,482,537,667 $ 896,959,670 $ 90,000,000 $ 54,451,480 
 
124 
6 
202
7 0.59 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 9,883,584,445 $ 1,482,537,667 $ 1,482,537,667 $ 870,834,631 $ 90,000,000 $ 52,865,515 
202
8 0.57 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 9,883,584,445 $ 1,482,537,667 $ 1,482,537,667 $ 845,470,516 $ 90,000,000 $ 51,325,742 
                $ 23,691,208,998   $ 931,253,681 
 
125 
Table 4e 
 
Phase In analysis                   
Discount Rate Low Cost Case   Table 3e             
7%         Total      Discounted   Discounted 
Year Discount Development & Wayside Onboard Installed Maintenance Annual Annual Annual Annual 
  Factor Central Office Costs Costs Costs Cost Cost Cost Benefit Benefit 
200
9 1.00 $ 24,000,000 $ 0 $ 0 $ 24,000,000 $ 0 $ 24,000,000 $ 24,000,000 $ 0 $ 0 
201
0 0.93 $ 24,000,000 $ 0 $ 0 $ 48,000,000 $ 3,600,000 $ 27,600,000 $ 25,794,393 $ 0 $ 0 
201
1 0.87 $ 24,000,000 $ 142,458,189 $ 221,824,800 $ 436,282,989 $ 7,200,000 $ 395,482,989 $ 345,430,159 $ 2,700,000 $ 2,358,285 
201
2 0.82 $ 24,000,000 $ 284,916,378 $ 221,824,800 $ 967,024,167 $ 65,442,448 $ 596,183,626 $ 486,663,428 $ 9,000,000 $ 7,346,681 
201
3 0.76 $ 24,000,000 $ 427,374,567 $ 221,824,800 $ 1,640,223,533 $ 145,053,625 $ 818,252,992 $ 624,241,290 $ 18,000,000 $ 13,732,114 
201
4 0.71 $ 0 $ 854,749,133 $ 221,824,800 $ 2,716,797,467 $ 246,033,530 $ 1,322,607,463 $ 943,000,842 $ 45,000,000 $ 32,084,378 
201
5 0.67 $ 0 $ 1,139,665,511 $ 221,824,800 $ 4,078,287,778 $ 407,519,620 $ 1,769,009,931 $ 1,178,766,012 $ 76,500,000 $ 50,975,180 
201
6 0.62 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 4,078,287,778 $ 611,743,167 $ 611,743,167 $ 380,962,899 $ 90,000,000 $ 56,047,477 
201
7 0.58 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 4,078,287,778 $ 611,743,167 $ 611,743,167 $ 356,040,093 $ 90,000,000 $ 52,380,819 
201
8 0.54 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 4,078,287,778 $ 611,743,167 $ 611,743,167 $ 332,747,750 $ 90,000,000 $ 48,954,037 
201
9 0.51 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 4,078,287,778 $ 611,743,167 $ 611,743,167 $ 310,979,206 $ 90,000,000 $ 45,751,436 
202
0 0.48 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 4,078,287,778 $ 611,743,167 $ 611,743,167 $ 290,634,772 $ 90,000,000 $ 42,758,352 
202
1 0.44 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 4,078,287,778 $ 611,743,167 $ 611,743,167 $ 271,621,282 $ 90,000,000 $ 39,961,076 
202
2 0.41 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 4,078,287,778 $ 611,743,167 $ 611,743,167 $ 253,851,665 $ 90,000,000 $ 37,346,800 
202
3 0.39 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 4,078,287,778 $ 611,743,167 $ 611,743,167 $ 237,244,547 $ 90,000,000 $ 34,903,552 
202
4 0.36 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 4,078,287,778 $ 611,743,167 $ 611,743,167 $ 221,723,876 $ 90,000,000 $ 32,620,142 
202
5 0.34 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 4,078,287,778 $ 611,743,167 $ 611,743,167 $ 207,218,576 $ 90,000,000 $ 30,486,114 
202
6 0.32 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 4,078,287,778 $ 611,743,167 $ 611,743,167 $ 193,662,220 $ 90,000,000 $ 28,491,695 
 
126 
202
7 0.30 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 4,078,287,778 $ 611,743,167 $ 611,743,167 $ 180,992,729 $ 90,000,000 $ 26,627,752 
202
8 0.28 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 4,078,287,778 $ 611,743,167 $ 611,743,167 $ 169,152,083 $ 90,000,000 $ 24,885,750 
                $ 7,034,727,821   $ 607,711,640 
 
127 
Table 4f 
 
Phase In analysis                   
Discount Rate Low Cost Case   Table 3e             
7%         Total      Discounted   Discounted 
Year Discount Development & Wayside Onboard Installed Maintenance Annual Annual Annual Annual 
  Factor Central Office Costs Costs Costs Cost Cost Cost Benefit Benefit 
200
9 1.00 $ 24,000,000 $ 0 $ 0 $ 24,000,000 $ 0 $ 24,000,000 $ 24,000,000 $ 0 $ 0 
201
0 0.93 $ 24,000,000 $ 0 $ 0 $ 48,000,000 $ 3,600,000 $ 27,600,000 $ 25,794,393 $ 0 $ 0 
201
1 0.87 $ 24,000,000 $ 142,458,189 $ 221,824,800 $ 436,282,989 $ 7,200,000 $ 395,482,989 $ 345,430,159 $ 2,700,000 $ 2,358,285 
201
2 0.82 $ 24,000,000 $ 284,916,378 $ 221,824,800 $ 967,024,167 $ 65,442,448 $ 596,183,626 $ 486,663,428 $ 9,000,000 $ 7,346,681 
201
3 0.76 $ 24,000,000 $ 427,374,567 $ 221,824,800 $ 1,640,223,533 $ 145,053,625 $ 818,252,992 $ 624,241,290 $ 18,000,000 $ 13,732,114 
201
4 0.71 $ 0 $ 854,749,133 $ 221,824,800 $ 2,716,797,467 $ 246,033,530 $ 1,322,607,463 $ 943,000,842 $ 45,000,000 $ 32,084,378 
201
5 0.67 $ 0 $ 1,139,665,511 $ 221,824,800 $ 4,078,287,778 $ 407,519,620 $ 1,769,009,931 $ 1,178,766,012 $ 76,500,000 $ 50,975,180 
201
6 0.62 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 4,078,287,778 $ 611,743,167 $ 611,743,167 $ 380,962,899 $ 90,000,000 $ 56,047,477 
201
7 0.58 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 4,078,287,778 $ 611,743,167 $ 611,743,167 $ 356,040,093 $ 90,000,000 $ 52,380,819 
201
8 0.54 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 4,078,287,778 $ 611,743,167 $ 611,743,167 $ 332,747,750 $ 90,000,000 $ 48,954,037 
201
9 0.51 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 4,078,287,778 $ 611,743,167 $ 611,743,167 $ 310,979,206 $ 90,000,000 $ 45,751,436 
202
0 0.48 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 4,078,287,778 $ 611,743,167 $ 611,743,167 $ 290,634,772 $ 90,000,000 $ 42,758,352 
202
1 0.44 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 4,078,287,778 $ 611,743,167 $ 611,743,167 $ 271,621,282 $ 90,000,000 $ 39,961,076 
202
2 0.41 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 4,078,287,778 $ 611,743,167 $ 611,743,167 $ 253,851,665 $ 90,000,000 $ 37,346,800 
202
3 0.39 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 4,078,287,778 $ 611,743,167 $ 611,743,167 $ 237,244,547 $ 90,000,000 $ 34,903,552 
202
4 0.36 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 4,078,287,778 $ 611,743,167 $ 611,743,167 $ 221,723,876 $ 90,000,000 $ 32,620,142 
202
5 0.34 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 4,078,287,778 $ 611,743,167 $ 611,743,167 $ 207,218,576 $ 90,000,000 $ 30,486,114 
202
6 0.32 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 4,078,287,778 $ 611,743,167 $ 611,743,167 $ 193,662,220 $ 90,000,000 $ 28,491,695 
 
128 
202
7 0.30 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 4,078,287,778 $ 611,743,167 $ 611,743,167 $ 180,992,729 $ 90,000,000 $ 26,627,752 
202
8 0.28 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 4,078,287,778 $ 611,743,167 $ 611,743,167 $ 169,152,083 $ 90,000,000 $ 24,885,750 
                $ 7,034,727,821   $ 607,711,640 
 
 
 
129 
Table 4G 
 
Phase In analysis               
Discount Rate               
7%     Alaska Total      Discounted 
Year Discount   Railroad Installed Maintenance Annual Annual 
  Factor   Costs Costs Cost Cost Cost 
2009 1.00   $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 
2010 0.93   $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 
2011 0.87   $ 1,500,000 $ 1,500,000 $ 0 $ 1,500,000 $ 1,310,158 
2012 0.82   $ 3,000,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 225,000 $ 3,225,000 $ 2,632,561 
2013 0.76   $ 4,500,000 $ 9,000,000 $ 675,000 $ 5,175,000 $ 3,947,983 
2014 0.71   $ 9,000,000 $ 18,000,000 $ 1,350,000 $ 10,350,000 $ 7,379,407 
2015 0.67   $ 12,000,000 $ 30,000,000 $ 2,700,000 $ 14,700,000 $ 9,795,231 
2016 0.62   $ 0 $ 30,000,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 2,802,374 
2017 0.58   $ 0 $ 30,000,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 2,619,041 
2018 0.54   $ 0 $ 30,000,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 2,447,702 
2019 0.51   $ 0 $ 30,000,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 2,287,572 
2020 0.48   $ 0 $ 30,000,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 2,137,918 
2021 0.44   $ 0 $ 30,000,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 1,998,054 
2022 0.41   $ 0 $ 30,000,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 1,867,340 
2023 0.39   $ 0 $ 30,000,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 1,745,178 
2024 0.36   $ 0 $ 30,000,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 1,631,007 
2025 0.34   $ 0 $ 30,000,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 1,524,306 
2026 0.32   $ 0 $ 30,000,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 1,424,585 
2027 0.30   $ 0 $ 30,000,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 1,331,388 
2028 0.28   $ 0 $ 30,000,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 1,244,287 
              $ 50,126,089 
Annualized ARR Cost $ 4,731,548           
All Railroads     Expected High Low     
Total annualized cost   $ 944,647,844 $ 1,611,503,406 $ 664,028,541     
Total discounted cost   $ 10,007,612,712 $ 17,122,416,132 $ 7,084,853,910     
 
130 
Table 4h 
 
 
Phase In analysis             
Discount Rate             
3%     Alaska Total      Discounted 
Year Discount   Railroad Installed Maintenance Annual Annual 
  Factor   Costs Costs Cost Cost Cost 
200
9 1.00   $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 
201
0 0.97   $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 
201
1 0.94   $ 1,500,000 $ 1,500,000 $ 0 $ 1,500,000 $ 1,413,894 
201
2 0.92   $ 3,000,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 225,000 $ 3,225,000 $ 2,951,332 
201
3 0.89   $ 4,500,000 $ 9,000,000 $ 675,000 $ 5,175,000 $ 4,597,920 
201
4 0.86   $ 9,000,000 $ 18,000,000 $ 1,350,000 $ 10,350,000 $ 8,928,001 
201
5 0.84   $ 12,000,000 $ 30,000,000 $ 2,700,000 $ 14,700,000 $ 12,311,019 
201
6 0.81   $ 0 $ 30,000,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 3,658,912 
201
7 0.79   $ 0 $ 30,000,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 3,552,342 
201
8 0.77   $ 0 $ 30,000,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 3,448,875 
201
9 0.74   $ 0 $ 30,000,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 3,348,423 
202
0 0.72   $ 0 $ 30,000,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 3,250,896 
202
1 0.70   $ 0 $ 30,000,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 3,156,209 
202
2 0.68   $ 0 $ 30,000,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 3,064,281 
202
3 0.66   $ 0 $ 30,000,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 2,975,030 
202
4 0.64   $ 0 $ 30,000,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 2,888,379 
202
5 0.62   $ 0 $ 30,000,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 2,804,251 
202 0.61   $ 0 $ 30,000,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 2,722,574 
 
131 
6 
202
7 0.59   $ 0 $ 30,000,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 2,643,276 
202
8 0.57   $ 0 $ 30,000,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 2,566,287 
              $ 70,281,900 
Annualized Cost   $ 4,724,048         
All Railroads   Expected High Low     
Total annualized cost $ 930,842,623 $ 1,597,145,424 $ 661,229,515     
Total discounted cost $ 13,848,587,717 $ 23,761,490,898 $ 9,837,425,482     
 
132 
PTC BENEFITS 
 
The primary benefit of PTC implementation is the safety benefits or savings expected to accrue 
from the reduction in the number and severity of casualties arising train accidents that would 
occur on lines equipped with PTC systems.  In addition, benefits related to accident preventions 
would accrue from a decrease in damages to property such as locomotives, railroad cars, and 
track; environmental damage; track closures; road closures; and evacuations.  Benefits more 
difficult to monetize--such as the avoidance of hazmat accident related costs incurred by Federal, 
state, and local governments and impacts to local businesses--will also result.  FRA also expects 
that once PTC systems are refined there will be substantial additional business benefits resulting 
from more efficient transportation service; however such benefits are not included in the total 
benefits.  
 
ACCIDENT REDUCTION BENEFITS 
 
In 2005, as part of the ongoing effort to study the effectiveness of PTC at preventing accidents, 
the Volpe Center estimated its rail safety benefits for the period 1988 – 2001, a span of 14 years.  
The estimate was based on a pool of 728 PTC-preventable accidents (PPA) identified by a joint 
FRA and industry working group and accident cost factors from the 1999 report.  This analysis 
showed that implementation of PTC systems with essentially the same characteristics as systems 
that would meet the proposed requirements would have resulted in accident cost savings totaling 
$827,743,610.96, an average annual cost of $59,124,543.64, and an average accident cost of 
$1,137,010.45.  Accident costs included costs associated with casualties as well as various other 
factors discussed in detail below.  Since these cost estimates were developed, the Department of 
Transportation has increased its estimate of the willingness to pay to avoid a fatality from $2.7 
million to $6 million, by a factor of 2.222.  On the other hand, changes in GDP 
(http://cost.jsc.nasa.gov/inflateGDP.html), indicate that prices rose by a factor of 1.5143 from 
1988 (the first year of the study) to 2008, and 1.1158 from 2001 (the last year of the study) to 
2008.  Using the GDP deflator value for 1995 to 2008, which would be the midpoint GDP 
deflator value for the period of study, yields a price increase of 1.238 from the midpoint of the 
study period to 2008.   
 
Using an inflator value slightly greater than 1.7 (the average of 2.222 and 1.238) to update costs 
from the Volpe study yields annual PPA costs of approximately $105,000,000 in current dollars.  
 
PPA Cost Factors from the 1999 Report 
 
The cost factors discussed below are the basis for the PPA estimates presented above.  They were 
derived by consensus of the Economics Team of the PTC Working Group and were published in 
the 1999 report.  All costs were measured in 1998 constant dollars. 
 
 
 
133 
Equipment Damage 
 
The Economics Team could not discern a difference between the costs of damage to passenger 
equipment reported to FRA and the societal cost of the damage.  The Team agreed that the best 
estimator of passenger equipment damage is the reported damage.  Passenger equipment is often 
insured for replacement value, so sometimes equipment damage is reported as the cost of 
replacement equipment, which is likely an overestimate.  Other times the equipment is reported as 
the depreciated value of the equipment.  There does not seem to be a pattern that would produce a 
scaling factor. 
 
Track and Right-of-Way Damage 
 
It appears that actual damage reported for track and right-of-way damage is fairly accurate, and 
reflects societal costs.  It may be underestimated in some cases as the full extent of the repair 
costs may not be captured, but in other cases it may be overestimated as older track and right-of-
way may be repaired to better than pre-accident condition.  This appeared to the Economics Team 
to balance out over time, and not to be correlated with any reported characteristics.  For purposes 
of the study the Economics Team agreed to use the reported damage to track and wayside. 
 
Damage Off the Right-of-Way 
 
Some damage may occur to property not on the right-of-way, for example when an overspeed 
train derails, damaging a building owned by someone other than the railroad.  The Economics 
Team estimated average damage at $2,000 per PTC-preventable accident2.  Such damage is rare, 
and cannot easily be attributed to an accident based on any characteristics reported   
 
Hazardous Materials Cleanup 
 
If an accident involves a release of hazardous materials, there may be a cost to clean up the 
hazardous material and remediate (restore) the environment.  Based on data from actual 
settlements and judgments in such cases, the Economics Team estimated the cost of cleanup and 
remediation at $250,000 per hazardous material car releasing.  The Team considered using a 
single cost per incident in which hazardous material was released, but thought that it would be at 
least as good to base the estimated cost on cars releasing to provide some measure of the severity 
of the accident.  This measure is still far from perfect, as some accidents involving single car 
releases may have resulted in far more costly clean-ups than some multi-car releases, yet it is the 
best measure the Team could agree upon. 
 
Evacuations 
 
                                                 
2  Yard and highway-rail grade crossing accidents are excluded from any definition of PTC 
preventable accident considered here. 
 
134 
Accidents may lead to evacuations, either because of real or perceived threats to safety from 
hazardous materials.  The Team estimated the societal cost of an evacuation from data on 77 
evacuations for which it had data on the duration of the evacuation.  These accidents were not 
necessarily PTC preventable (most were not) and occurred between 1993 and 1997.  The Team 
estimated the value of time at $11.70 per hour per person, plus 30%, or $15.21 per hour.  It added 
30% to reflect the involuntary and unplanned nature of the costs imposed.  Unfortunately, one 
accident, at Weyauwega, Wisconsin, on March 4, 1996, dominated the costs.  The Weyauwega 
evacuation lasted 426 hours, while the next longest evacuation lasted 43 hours.  The average cost 
per evacuation was $986 with the Weyauwega evacuation, and $267 without.  The Weyauwega 
evacuation was clearly an outlier, but nevertheless relevant, so the Economics Team 
compromised on an estimate of $500 per evacuation.   
 
Loss of Lading 
 
If there is an accident involving a loaded freight car, there may be a loss to society as a result of 
loss or damage to lading.  In this case railroad payments to shippers are probably very close to the 
societal cost of lading loss and damage, which based on data from the American Association of 
Railroads is roughly $6,500 per loaded freight car derailed, a figure the Team agreed upon. 
 
Wreck Clearing 
 
Locomotives or cars that are derailed or destroyed need to be removed from the right of way.  
Railroads costs for this include the cost of mobilizing a crane or rerailing equipment to the 
accident site and the cost of employing that equipment.  The Team estimated that the cost of 
mobilizing equipment to an accident site is $2,500 per incident where cars or locomotives are 
derailed.  Once the equipment is there, the Team estimated that it would cost $750 to rerail, wreck 
or transport a freight locomotive that had derailed, and $300 to rerail, wreck or transport a 
derailed freight car.    
 
Rerailing passenger equipment can be far more costly.  The equipment is more expensive, and 
may be less robust than freight equipment.  It needs to be handled with more care.  The sites of 
passenger accidents are more likely to be in urban areas where the right of way is constrained, as 
in tunnels and sunken routes under streets.  Further, the National Transportation Safety Board is 
far more likely to investigate a passenger train accident, so there may be significant costs while 
the rerailing/wrecking equipment sits near the accident site, awaiting NTSB=s permission to clear 
the accident.  Four commuter railroads= data suggests that the cost per incident of clearing 
equipment is roughly $75,000 per accident in which passenger cars or locomotives are derailed.  
The Team agreed with this estimate. 
 
Train Delays 
 
If a train is derailed it will block the track it is on, and may block adjacent tracks too.  The Team 
estimated that the average blockage would last two hours.  If affected trains arrive randomly, the 
 
135 
average train delay would be one hour, for freight trains and fifteen minutes for passenger trains, 
which are likely to be switched around a delay.  The Team estimated the average cost per hour of 
freight train delay at $250 per hour.   Thus the estimated cost of a delay would be freight trains 
per day divided by twelve (the expected number of trains in two hours), times one (the average 
expected delay) times the cost per hour of a delay ($250). 
 
The Team estimated the cost of passenger train delays, based on 285 passengers per train (a 
national average), an average duration of blockage of 2 hours (which implies passenger trains per 
day/12 are affected), an average per train delay of 15 minutes, and an average value of passenger 
time of $25 per hour.  This relatively high per hour value of time is related to the income of train 
passengers.   Many commuter lines have average passenger household incomes in excess of 
$75,000 per year.   
 
Multiplying 285 passengers per train, $25 per passenger hour, and 1/4 hour yields a cost of 
$1781.25 per train.  The Team estimated the number of passenger trains affected as trains per day 
divided by 12, to reflect 24 hours per day divided by two hours duration of blockage.  To get the 
average cost of passenger train delay, $1781.25 is divided by twelve to get $148.44, which must 
then be multiplied by the number of passenger trains per day. 
 
HEADLINE ACCIDENTS 
 
Notable accidents are always investigated, and as a consequence the cause code is commonly 
recorded as “under investigation.”  Therefore, they were generally not captured by data queries 
used to establish the PPA database.  This database may also under-represent such accidents 
because they are so infrequent they did not occur in the time period.  For example, an accident 
that occurred on February 16, 1996, in Silver Spring, Maryland, resulted in 11 fatalities, but is not 
in the PPA database.  An article in the online version of the International Herald Tribune, dated 
September 14, 2008, lists fourteen train accidents, starting with one in 1910.  Four of these 
accidents were PTC preventable accidents that occurred between 1972 and 2005.  Included in this 
group were the Graniteville, South Carolina accident and the three listed below.  The recent 
accident at Chatsworth, California that had just occurred was not listed.  Including the Chatsworth 
accident, five headline PPAs occurred between 1969 and 2008, killing 106 people.  These 
accidents are very rare, unique in circumstance, and very hard to predict or avoid.  Nevertheless 
after each accident, FRA took steps to avoid such accidents and to mitigate the outcome of those 
that might occur.  Some of the safety initiatives included the issuance of regulations addressing  
training, operating rules for calling of signals, drug testing,  crashworthiness of cars and 
locomotives, hazardous materials routing (FRA assisted PHMSA in this developing this rule) , 
and passenger train emergency preparedness.  While this analysis extensively discusses the 
accidents that occurred at Graniteville, South Carolina and Chatsworth, California, this analysis 
also includes fatalities resulting from the following three accidents included in the 2008 Herald 
Tribune article: 
 
 Feb. 16, 1996: Amtrak's locomotive-led Capitol Limited sideswiped a cab car-led 
Maryland commuter train at a crossover switch in Silver Spring, Maryland.  All three crew 
 
136 
members and eight passengers on the commuter train died. 
 Jan. 4, 1987: An engineer drove three linked Conrail engines through a closed track 
switch and into the path of Amtrak train near Chase, Md., killing 16 and injuring 175. 
 Oct. 30, 1972: Two Illinois Central commuter trains collided during morning rush hour in 
Chicago, killing 45 and injuring more than 200. 
 
FRA has studied quite extensively of the consequences of the January 6, 2005 accident in 
Graniteville, South Carolina and estimates the total cost of the accident as $189,154,845 based on 
the following information.  
 
The Graniteville accident resulted in 9 fatalities and more than 550 injuries. It was the deadliest 
train accident involving a hazardous material in nearly three decades.  At 2:39 a.m. on January 6, 
2005, a train crashed into a locomotive and two cars on a siding in Graniteville, South Carolina.  
A tank car containing chlorine was punctured in the shell by the coupler of another car and 
released chlorine.  The release affected commercial and residential areas of the city.  
Approximately 5,400 residents were evacuated from a 1-mile radius around the accident site.  
About 554 people complaining of respiratory difficulties were taken to local hospitals.  Of those, 
75 were admitted for treatment.  Nine people died from exposure to chlorine gas.  Fifteen people 
were placed on ventilators in intensive care units.  Twenty-five people were hospitalized for more 
than 3 days.  Twenty-six people were hospitalized for 1 to 2 days.  There were 68 repeat visits to 
the emergency department, 58 people with significant symptoms and 98 with moderate 
symptoms.  Forty-one people who visited the emergency department were released and 13 people 
were treated at a physician=s office. 
 
The monetary impact of the injuries sustained as a result of the Graniteville accident is estimated 
using the Abbreviated Injury Scale (AIS).  One criterion for a reportable injury is that the injury 
requires medical treatment.  Because one criterion of an AIS 2 injury is that it almost always 
requires treatment, it can be assumed that all injuries reported are at least AIS 2. Of the 554 
people taken to the hospital, it was reported that 75 were admitted for treatment.  It was further 
reported that 9 died, 15 people were placed on ventilators, 25 people were hospitalized for more 
than 3 days, and 26 people were hospitalized for 1 or 3 days. In the interest of being conservative, 
and without more specific information, an AIS 2 - moderate will be assessed for 479 persons and 
the remaining 75 persons admitted will be assessed as AIS 3 - severe.  
 
Authorities evacuated homes and businesses within a mile of the crash, affecting about 5,400 
people.  Some were away from their homes for more than a week.  On January 14, 2005, 
approximately 1,500 Graniteville residents were allowed to return to their homes.  By January 17, 
2005, an estimated 4,500 people had returned home, including the 1,500 individuals who had 
previously returned home on January 14.  On January 19, 2005, residents remained displaced 
from an estimated 75 homes in the immediate area of the derailment.  
 
The Graniteville incident caused some local businesses to have a dramatic drop in business 
 
137 
immediately after the accident.  Part of the reason for this drop was because parts U.S. Highway 1 
were closed due to the deadly chlorine cloud.  After four days the highway was opened but it had 
signs that noted that it was open only to local traffic. 
 
 Table 5 
 
Graniteville Accident Cost 
  
Rail Hazardous Material Incident Summary   
People   Pecuniary 
Negative Impact Involved    Value
Fatalities 9   $54,000,000
Injuries - AIS  1 0   $0
Injuries - AIS  2 479   $44,547,000
Injuries - AIS 3 75   $25,875,000
Injuries - AIS 4 0   $0
Injuries - AIS 5 0   $0
  
Evacuation ($200 / day / person) 5,400 52,350 days  $10,470,000
  
Property Damage   $6,900,000
  
Environmental Cleanup ( Diesel Fuel Only) 1   $162,845
Environmental Cleanup  - Other   
Track Out of Service $2 Mill/day 23 days            $46,000,000
Road Closure $300,000/day 4 days              $1,200,000
Total Value:   $189,154,845
 
 
Evacuation $200 Per Day Per Person 52,350 total 
 
 
FRA has also developed a preliminary estimate of the Chatsworth, California accident cost.  The 
accident resulted in 25 fatalities and a total of $382,856,856 in monetized accident costs. 
 
  
 
138 
Table 6 
Chatsworth Accident Cost 
 
Casualties 
 Number Cost Per Total (Million $)
Fatalities (AIS 6) 25 $  6,000,000 $  150,000,000
AIS 1 (minor)* 23.75 $  12,000 $  285,000
AIS 2 (moderate)* 23.75 $  93,000 $  2,208,750
AIS 3 (serious)* 23.75 $  345,000 $  8,193,750
AIS 4 (severe)* 23.75 $  1,125,000 $  26,718,750
AIS 5 (critical) 40 $  4,575,000 $  183,000,000
Total $  370,406,250
 
According to FRA 39i -- 84 
 
 
Train Delay 
 
Passengers - Day 1 immediate Number Pass Number Cost / Hour Hours
Pass - Day 1 later 225 4 $  43.51 3
Passengers - Subsequent days 225 30 $  43.51 1.5
 225 40 $  43.51 1
 
UP Number Hours
Freight  - local 1 $  420 21
Freight  - other 4 $  420 279
Total       $126,000
 
Rolling Stock Equipment 
 
Metrolink Number Cost Per Total Notes
Locomotive 1 $  3,000,000 $  3,000,000 Completely 
Coach 1 $  2,000,000 $  2,000,000 Completely 
Coach damage 2 $  500,000 $  1,000,000
UP 
Lead locomotive 1 $  500,000 $  500,000
Trailing locomotive 1 $  150,000 $  150,000
Cars 7 $  100,000 $  700,000
Lading damage 7 $  300,000 $  2,100,000
Total $  9,450,000
 
 
Emergency Response 
 Number Cost Per Hour Hours Total 
Fire * 270 $  50 36 $  486,000
LAPD / Sheriffs* 210 $  50 36 $  378,000
Others (Highway Patrol, 15 $  50 36 $  27,000
Total $  891,000
 
139 
 
Equipment Clean Up 
 Number Hourly Rate Hours Total
Labor 28 $  50 35 $  49,000
Heavy Equipment Used 7 $  3,000 35 $  735,000
Biohazard remediation 5 $  100 16 $  8,000
Total $  784,000
 
Equipment Derailed: 1 Metrolink 
 
 
Track Damage 
  Cost Per Total
1,000 feet 1000 $  250 $  250,000
Total $  250,000
 
 
 
Chatsworth Incident Cost  
Casualties $  370,406,250
Train Delay $  1,075,606
Damaged Rolling Stock $  9,450,000
Emergency Response $  891,000
Equipment Clean Up $  784,000
Track Damage $  250,000
Total $  382,856,856
 
Between the Graniteville and Chatsworth accidents, there were a total of 34 fatalities and 
$572,011,701 total costs including fatality costs, or an average of $16,823,874 in total damages 
per fatality.  If that ratio had been the same at all the other headline PPA=s then the total cost of 
those accidents, involving 106 fatalities, would have been $1,783,330,597 over 40 years, with an 
expected annual cost of $44,583,265, or roughly $45,000,000. 
 
The table below breaks down these benefits by fatalities and other accident costs, including non-
fatal injuries.  
 
 
140 
# fatalities $ fatalities
$ Injuries and Other 
damages
Chatsworth 25 150,000,000$         232,856,856$              
Graniteville 9 54,000,000$           135,154,845$              
Total 34 204,000,000$         368,011,701$              
Average per fatality 1 6,000,000$            10,823,874$                
Chatsworth 25 150,000,000$         270,596,839$              
Graniteville 9 54,000,000$           97,414,862$                
Silver Spring 11 66,000,000$           119,062,609$              
Chase, MD 1987 16 96,000,000$           173,181,977$              
Chicago 1972 45 270,000,000$         487,074,310$              
Total 106 636,000,000$         1,147,330,597$           
Average per incident 21.2 127,200,000$        229,466,119$              
Yearly (divide by 40) 2.65 15,900,000$          28,683,265$                
Headline Accidents (40 years)
 
 
 
TOTAL RAILROAD SAFETY BENEFITS FROM PTC PREVENTABLE ACCIDENTS 
 
Total railroad safety benefits are the sum of “baseline” PPA costs of about $105 million per year 
and “headline” PPA costs of about $45 million per year, which total $150 million per year.  FRA 
estimates that approximately one third of these benefits would be attributable to fatality 
avoidance.  Virtually all PPA=s occurred on the very broad PTC system required by RSIA08, and 
defined in the proposed rule.  The remaining portion of the system tends to have lower speeds and 
densities, reducing both the likelihood of PPAs and the potential severity of those accidents.  
Such accidents would have a negligible impact on this analysis, thus there is no need to reduce 
the estimated benefit to account for PPAs unaffected by the proposed systems.   
 
As mentioned above, FRA has instituted many countermeasures that might have helped mitigate 
or avoid these accidents.  For purposes of this analysis, FRA assumes that 25% of the annual PPA 
costs would be reduced through countermeasures already instituted.  FRA does not believe that 
PTC will be 100 percent effective in reducing the remaining PPAs, although FRA believes it will 
be very effective.  For purposes of this analysis, FRA assumes that PTC will be 80% effective.  
Applying an 80% effectiveness rate to the 75% of PPA costs not already addressed by 
countermeasures yields a potential 60% cost reduction.  Thus, FRA is estimating that 60% of all 
PPA costs will be eliminated once PTC is fully implemented.   The expected annual savings 
would then be $90 million (60% of $150 million) once PTC is fully implemented.   
 
FRA believes these benefits will be phased in as PTC systems are installed and are thus applied in 
greater proportion as the system is completed.  Even the early installations will result in some 
portion of the total potential benefit.  For instance, a locomotive equipped with PTC will not let 
its crew exceed limits of authority nor will it let it over-speed.  Further, at least in signaled 
territory the onboard PTC system will warn of an unequipped train exceeding the limits of its 
 
141 
authority, helping the crew of an equipped train avoid an accident that would have been caused by 
an error aboard the unequipped train.  FRA=s estimate of this phase-in schedule of benefits is 
shown in Table 7.  Note that these factors were used in Tables 4a-4f to calculate 20-year life cycle 
benefits. 
 
  Table 7 
Benefit Phase In 
Year Percent
2011 3.00%
2012 10.00%
2013 20.00%
2014 50.00%
2015 85.00%
2016 100.00%
 
 
BUSINESS BENEFITS 
 
FRA conducted a sensitivity analysis that takes into account potential business benefits from 
realizing service efficiencies and related additional societal benefits from environmental 
attainment and an overall reduction in transportation risk from modal diversion.  Note that 
business benefits are not included for the ARR. 
 
FRA analyzed business benefits associated with PTC system implementation and presented its 
findings in a letter report to Congress in 2004.  Due to the aggressive implementation schedule for 
PTC, FRA has not formally updated this study.  Economic and technical feasibility of the 
necessary system refinements and modifications to yield the potential business benefits has not 
yet been demonstrated.  Nevertheless, FRA believes that there is opportunity for significant 
business benefits to accrue several years after implementation, once the systems have been 
refined to the degree necessary.  The 2004 report included business benefits from improved or 
enhanced locomotive diagnostics, fuel savings attributable to train pacing, precision dispatch, and 
capacity enhancement.  The improvements in dispatch and capacity have further implications.  
With those improvements railroads could increase the reliability of shipment arrival time, and 
thus dramatically increase the value of rail transportation to shippers, who in turn would divert 
certain shipments from highway to rail.   
 
At the time, railroads argued that FRA=s estimates of business benefits to the railroads were 
exaggerated. However, shortly after the report was published several railroads announced to 
investors and other industry insiders that the railroads were proceeding with PTC systems, and 
that those systems would bring significant profit to the railroads. 
 
The two biggest components of business benefits identified in the 2004 analysis came from 
increased capacity, and precision dispatching, which offered the greatest opportunity for benefits. 
 
142 
 At present, the PTC systems contemplated by the railroads, with the possible exception of PATH, 
would not increase capacity, at least not for some time.  If the braking algorithms need to be made 
more conservative in order to ensure that trains do not exceed the limits of their authority, PTC 
may actually decrease capacity in the early years.  As noted earlier, PATH is apparently 
considering the system used by the New York City Transit Authority on the Canarsie line.  This 
system, which is known as Communication-Based Train Control, is not similar in concept to any 
of the other PTC systems (including the CSX CBTC, with which its name might easily be 
confused), and would not be suitable, as FRA understands the system, except on a railroad with 
operating characteristics similar to a heavy rail mass transit system, which PATH has.  FRA 
believes that even in absence of this rule and RSIA08 PATH would adopt PTC for business 
reasons, and just as in the case where FRA requires a railroad to adopt a current business practice, 
FRA is neither claiming benefits nor costs associated with implementation of PTC on PATH in 
this analysis. 
 
The main business benefit of PTC would be derived from precision dispatch, which decreases the 
variance of arrival times of delivered freight.  Over time, if shippers realize that they could count 
on a more accurate arrival time of freight, then they could reduce the stock that they keep in 
inventory as a precaution against running out of stock.  It costs shippers approximately 25% of 
the value of inventory, regardless of the material being stored, to store that inventory for a year.  
This estimate accounts for shrinkage, borrowing costs, and storage costs.  Freight with more value 
per unit of mass or volume tends to have greater storage costs per unit.  At present, no such 
precision dispatch system exists.  Accurate train data is a necessary, but not a sufficient condition, 
for precision dispatch.  At least two of the Class I railroads have attempted to develop precision 
dispatch systems but have not been successful.  The mandatory installation of PTC is likely to 
divert any resources that might have been devoted to precision dispatch, so these benefits are 
unlikely during the first ten years of this rule. 
 
In the years since the 2004 report, developing technology and rising fuel costs have caused the 
rail supply industry and the railroads to focus on additional means of conserving diesel fuel while 
minimizing in-train forces that can lead to derailments and delays from train separations (usually 
broken coupler knuckles).  Software programs exist that can translate information concerning 
throttle position and brake use, together with consist information and route characteristics, to 
produce advice for prospective manipulation of the locomotive controls to limit in-train forces.  
Programs are also being conceived that project arrival at meet points and other locations on the 
railroad.  These types of tools can be consolidated into programs that either coach the locomotive 
engineer regarding how to handle the train or even take over the controls of the locomotive under 
the engineer’s supervision.  The ultimate purpose of integrating this technology is to conserve 
fuel use while handling the train properly and arriving at a designated location “just in time” (e.g., 
to meet or pass a train or enter a terminal area in sequence ahead of or behind other traffic).  
Further integrating this technology with PTC communications platforms and traffic planning 
capability could permit transmittal of “train pacing” information to the locomotive cab in order to 
conserve fuel.  Like the communications backbone, survey data concerning route characteristics 
can be shared by both systems. 
 
 
143 
The diesel fuel use for road operations to the Class I railroads is approximately 3.5 billion gallons 
annually, which is $8.75 billion at $2.50 per gallon.  If PTC helps to potentiate the growth and 
effective use of train pacing, fuel savings of 5% ($437,500,000 annually) or greater could very 
likely be achieved. Clearly, if the railroads are able to conserve use of fuel, they will also reduce 
emissions and contribute to environmental attainment, even before modal diversion occurs. 
 
ADDITIONAL SOCIETAL BENEFITS 
 
Clearly, if the railroads are able to conserve use of fuel, they will also reduce emissions and 
contribute to environmental attainment, even before the modal diversion discussed below.  There 
are also potential additional societal benefits that could result downstream once the systems are 
refined and efficiencies allow rail to compete more effectively in certain markets and divert 
certain traffic from highways to rail. 
 
To assess the potential for highway to rail diversion in its 2004 report, FRA employed the 
Department of Transportation’s Intermodal Transportation and Inventory Cost (ITIC) model, 
which measures shipper logistics cost for both highway and rail. Business that rail can capture 
from highway results in shipper logistics cost savings.  Many of the benefits estimated to accrue 
in 2010 were based on implementation by 2010.  Note that given the current state of 
implementation, they are more likely to accrue several years after PTC is implemented.  
 
Applying current factors to the analysis used in the 2004 report to Congress, indicates that 
diversion could result in annual highway safety benefits of $744 million by 2022, and $1,148 
million by 2032.  Of course, these benefits require that the productivity enhancing systems be 
added to PTC, and are heavily dependent on the underlying assumptions of the 2004 model. 
 
Modal diversion would also yield environmental benefits.  The 2004 report implied reduced air 
pollution costs would have been between $68 million and $132 million in 2010 (assuming PTC 
would be implemented by 2010), and between $103 million and $198 million in 2020. This 
benefit would have accrued to the general public.   FRA has not broken out the pollution cost 
benefit of the current rule, but offers the estimates from the 2004 report as a guide to the order of 
magnitude of such benefits. 
 
Modal diversion is highly sensitive to service quality. It may be true that problems with terminal 
congestion and lengthy dwell times might overwhelm the benefits of PTC; or it may be that the 
other initiatives which the railroads have been pursing (reconfiguration of yards, pre-blocking of 
trains, shared power arrangements, car scheduling, AEI, etc.) might actually work in synergy with 
PTC. 
  
It should be noted that, in the years since the 2004 Report was developed, the Class I railroads 
have shown an increased ability to retain operating revenue as profit, rather than surrendering it in 
the form of reduced rates.  This was particularly true during the period prior to the current 
recession, when strained highway capacity favored the growth of rail traffic.  Accordingly, the 
precise partition of business and societal benefits cannot be estimated with any certainty. 
 
144 
 
The sensitivity analysis performed by FRA indicates that realization of business benefits could 
yield benefits sufficient to close the gap between PTC implementation costs and rail accident 
reduction benefits within the first 20 years of the rule applying a 3% discount rate and by year 25 
of the rule, applying a discount rate of 7%.  Appendix A of this document presents the findings of 
this analysis in detail. 
 
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN BENEFITS AND COSTS, AND TIMING OF 
IMPLEMENTATION 
 
Once PTC is fully implemented, annual maintenance costs will be approximately $860 million, 
and the annual railroad accident prevention benefits will be approximately $90 million.  
Obviously a system which costs $5.75 billion initially, and then costs another $860 million per 
year to maintain does not make a lot of sense financially if the returns are limited to $90 million 
per year.  Safety benefits include: 
 
 
 145 
 Casualties (Value of a Statistical Life = $6 Million)   
 Equipment Damage 
 Track & Right-of-Way 
 Damage Off Right-of-Way 
 Hazardous Material Cleanup 
 Evacuation (e.g., Hazmat) 
 Loss of Lading 
 Wreck Clearing 
 Train Delays 
 
For purposes of its primary analysis FRA has not assumed any business benefits, beyond those 
from railroad accident prevention.  Several railroads affected by RSIA08 are already developing 
PTC and would very likely be proceeding absent this rulemaking or the statutory requirement.  
These railroads have in the past claimed that there were no additional business benefits to be 
gained by implementing PTC, beyond safety benefits.  Their behavior, in adopting PTC, however, 
would appear to contradict their statements to FRA that they expect no additional business 
benefits.  FRA=s letter report to Congress on the Benefits and Costs of PTC projected that railroads 
would generate significant business benefits from PTC, but would retain a very small portion of 
total societal benefits.  As noted above, there has been more recent evidence that railroads are able 
to retain revenues generated through efficiencies (much of which has been reinvested to renew 
infrastructure or expand capacity).   
 
According to the 2004 study railroads could gain between $675,000,000 and $1,318,000,000 per 
year in business benefits through use of PTC.  If railroads are voluntarily adopting PTC, then their 
revealed preferences strongly suggest that they believe the benefits are likely to be at least as great 
as those projected in the letter report to Congress.  FRA believes that the opportunity for such 
business benefits will not occur for several years, but that when those opportunities do present 
themselves the railroads will take advantage of them. 
 
FRA=s analysis (see Tables 4a-4h) presents a 20-year analysis of the costs and benefits associated 
with FRA=s proposed rule, using both 7 percent and 3 percent discount rates, including net present 
value (PV) and annualized value, which is the annuity required at the discount rate to yield the 
total over the analysis period.  It also presents sensitivity analyses associated with varying cost 
assumptions used for estimating PTC implementation costs.  The 20-year total cost estimates are 
$10,008 million (PV, 7%) and $13,849 million (PV, 3%).  Annualized costs are $945 million (PV, 
7%) and $931 million (PV, 3%).  Using high-cost assumptions, the 20-year total cost estimates 
would be $17,122 million (PV, 7%) and $23,761 million (PV, 3%).  Using low-cost assumptions, 
the 20-year cost estimates would be $7,085 million (PV, 7%) and $9,837 million (PV, 3%).   
Twenty-year railroad safety (railroad accident reduction) benefit estimates associated with 
implementation of the proposed rule are $608 million (PV, 7%) and $931 million (PV, 3%).  
Annualized benefits are $57 million (PV, 7%), and $63 million (PV, 3%).   
 
   Table 7, Summary of Costs and benefits 
 
 146 
Twenty Year Discounted Values     
      
Discount Rate 3.00% 7.00% 
Costs     
Central Office and Development  $283,025,904 $263,232,675 
Wayside Equipment $3,109,098,494 $2,586,453,456 
On-Board Equipment $1,643,839,209 $1,416,706,349 
Maintenance $8,812,624,111 $5,741,220,231 
Total $13,848,587,717 $10,007,612,712 
      
Railroad Safety Benefits $931,253,681 $607,711,640 
 
 
Sensitivity analysis performed by FRA indicates that realization of business benefits could yield 
benefits sufficient to close the gap between PTC implementation costs and rail accident reduction 
benefits within the first 20 years of the rule applying a 3% discount rate and by year 25 of the rule, 
applying a discount rate of 7%.  The precise partition of business and societal benefits cannot be 
estimated with any certainty. 
 
FRA recognizes that the likelihood of business benefits is uncertain and that the cost-to-benefit 
comparison of this rule, excluding any business benefits, is not favorable.  However, FRA has 
taken measures to minimize the rule’s adverse impacts and to provide as much flexibility as FRA 
is authorized to grant under RSIA08. 
 
As far as timing of the investment and its returns, in the first years while the systems are being 
implemented, the safety benefits will probably be gained more than in proportion to the degree of 
implementation.  If half the rolling stock is equipped, then at least those units will avoid the 
collisions that could have been caused by a crew error in those units, while on PTC territory, and 
probably those units will also avoid collisions with unequipped units when the onboard PTC 
system warns the PTC equipped crew of other trains outside the limits of the other train=s 
authority. Assuming that right of way is equipped with higher risk segments assigned higher 
priority, and that the railroads make some effort to use equipped locomotives in the lead, it is 
likely that the greater risk on more heavily traveled corridors will make the use of equipped units 
on that territory relatively more beneficial.   
 
FRA invites comments on all portions of this RIA. 
A- 1
APPENDIX A – BUSINESS BENEFITS 
 
In analyzing the benefits and costs of the proposed rule, FRA alludes to potential business 
benefits, which raises an obvious question.  Could the business benefits cited in the 2004 report 
offset the costs of PTC, or even create a net benefit?  The 2004 report found that net benefits in 
excess of a billion dollars a year, measured in 2003 dollars, were possible.  Of course, the 2004 
report relied on assumptions that certain technologies could be developed, and that those 
technologies would be used to optimize business benefits.  The 2004 report acknowledged 
significant technical and economic barriers to implementation of the necessary “Add-On” 
technologies.  There may be institutional barriers to overcome as well.  In this appendix, FRA 
explains how it integrated the 2004 report and the analysis of the proposed rule to examine 
potential business benefits in light of the RSIA08 mandate for PTC and the proposed rule. 
 
First FRA updated 2003 dollar values used in the 2004 report.  FRA used the GDP deflator 
calculator at http://cost.jsc.nasa.gov/inflateGDP.html, which shows that a 2003 dollar is equivalent 
to 1.1007 current 2009 dollars, to update the values of direct and indirect shipper benefits.  FRA 
also updated the cost of highway accidents, doubling it from 0.13 per diverted mile to 0.26 per 
diverted mile, because DOT has doubled the Value of a Statistical Life (VSL) used for analytical 
purposes since the 2004 report.   
 
Second, for this Add-On analysis FRA chose to focus on only one of the two types of PTC systems 
included in the 2004 report—the one most comparable to the PTC systems that will be installed in 
response to RSIA08.  FRA believes that a productivity system can be added to the currently 
proposed V-TMS types of systems that will generate benefits comparable to those that would be 
generated by PTC B in the 2004 study.  FRA further decided to use single-point estimates for costs 
and benefits for ease of analysis. To arrive at such estimates, FRA took arithmetic averages of the 
high and low cost and benefit estimates from the 2004 report. 
 
The third adjustment FRA made was to address potential fuel savings.  FRA believes that the 
business benefits of PTC may include significant fuel savings.  Test runs at several railroads 
indicate that the difference in fuel consumption between the best and worst locomotive engineers 
is approximately 30%.  Railroads have shown that training can narrow that gap.  FRA believes that 
with PTC and a productivity enhancing system using the PTC data, that fuel savings of 5% are 
very likely attainable.  Translating that into monetary terms is not a simple since, in recent years, 
fuel consumption and prices have varied from year to year.  For the past several years, Class I 
railroads have been consuming slightly over four billion gallons each year by Class I railroads and 
per gallon costs have risen.  Based on information available, FRA believes a price of $2.50 per 
gallon is reasonable for use in this analysis.  Since not all railroad fuel consumption is for road use 
and the actual percentage for road use varies from railroad to railroad, FRA is conservatively 
estimating that 12.5%, or one eighth, of total fuel consumption is for yard use and 87.5%, or at 
least 3.5 billion gallons, is for road use.  Applying a savings rate of 5% to the 3.5 billion gallons at 
a cost of $2.50 per gallon, yields annual savings of $437.5 million.  This is an increase from the 
$130 million low and $391 million high, estimates of potential fuel savings from the original 2004 
report. 
 
The fourth and most complex modification was to the approach taken in the 2004 report to address 
A- 2
modal diversion.  The 2004 report estimated benefits derived from diversion from highway to rail. 
 These benefits resulted from changes in shipper behavior in response to productivity increases 
experienced by shippers when using rail.  The 2004 report estimated the productivity benefits to 
shippers under PTC B, which is most similar to the currently proposed PTC systems.  The 
productivity benefit estimates were kept constant in the 2004 study and FRA has kept that 
assumption here, although it is reasonable, but less conservative, to assume that the productivity 
benefits will increase over time as shippers have time to modify their physical plants to take 
greater advantage of productivity enhancements on the railroads.  The indirect business and safety 
benefits presented in the 2004 report increased over time, due to increased costs of congestion on 
the highway systems resulting increased modal diversion in terms of volume and value per ton 
mile over time. 
 
The 2004 report estimated diversion for two different years, 2010, and 2020.  The earlier year was 
to have been around the time the full PTC system could have been deployed, under the most 
optimistic assumptions.  The report presented high and low benefits estimates.  For the current 
analysis, FRA assumes that the indirect benefits to society (?) were a result of productivity 
benefits to shippers and that these indirect benefits would be in proportion to shipper productivity 
benefits.  Similarly, the ratio of indirect benefits to shipper cost impacts would remain constant 
over time.  According to the 2004 report, the 2010 ratio of indirect benefits to shipper productivity 
was 1.02 for the low benefit estimate, and 0.86 for the high benefit estimate.  FRA averaged these 
two numbers to arrive at an estimate of 0.94.  The 2020 ratio of indirect benefits to shipper 
productivity was 1.57 for the low benefit estimate, and 1.32 for the high benefit estimate.  FRA 
averaged these two numbers to arrive at an estimate of 1.45.  FRA then estimated the average 
annual growth rate that would be needed to grow from .94 in 2010 to 1.45 in 2020 (the tenth root 
of 1.45/0.94), and used that rate to estimate the diversion impact relative to shipper costs in every 
year of the analysis period.  See Table A-1 
 
Table A-1 
 
Indirect Benefit Phase In 
    
Year Percent 
2009 90.01% 
2010 94.00% 
2011 98.16% 
2012 102.51% 
2013 107.05% 
2014 111.80% 
2015 116.75% 
2016 121.92% 
2017 127.32% 
2018 132.96% 
2019 138.85% 
2020 145.00% 
A- 3
2021 151.42% 
2022 158.13% 
2023 165.14% 
2024 172.45% 
2025 180.09% 
2026 188.07% 
2027 196.40% 
2028 205.10% 
 
 
The 2004 report did not consider how PTC would be funded.  The benefits were analyzed as if the 
system had been donated to the railroads.  Based on the current environment and the focus of this 
analysis on business benefits to Class I railroads, this analysis is based on the assumption that the 
railroads will purchase PTC systems.  If the railroads pass on savings from their productivity 
savings to shippers, then that implies that there is a price elasticity that will enable the railroads to 
pass on costs as well.  If FRA is going to say that an increase in benefit to shippers will induce 
them to ship more by rail, then a cost increase to shippers will induce them to ship less by rail.  
FRA estimates the diversion caused by the portion of total railroad costs passed on to shippers, as 
a cost, as well as the diversion caused by shipper benefits, as a benefit.  FRA estimates that 80% of 
railroad benefits or costs are passed on to shippers.  The annual costs of PTC are derived from 
Tables 4a and 4b in the primary analysis above.  FRA did not estimate business benefits for the 
high and low cost cases, only the expected cost case.  See Tables A-3 and A-4. 
 
The last major adjustment FRA made to the values in the 2004 report was to eliminate any benefit 
attributable to locomotive diagnostics, as FRA now believes those benefits have already been 
captured by other technologies in the absence of PTC. 
 
The PTC systems that railroads are planning for purposes of complying with RSIA08 and the 
proposed rule do not have features built in to enhance productivity, but such features could be 
added without facing the large economic hurdle that existed prior to RSIA08, when the railroads 
contemplating whether to install PTC and productivity enhancing systems would have had to 
develop business cases for spending the entire cost of PTC, estimated in the main analysis at $5.7 
billion, plus the added productivity system cost.  If PTC costs are sunk costs4, then the railroads 
only need to consider the marginal costs above PTC of adding productivity systems.  These 
systems include fuel management systems that have onboard and central office components and 
precision dispatching systems that take advantage of train location data generated by the PTC 
system.  A large railroad procured an entire dispatch system for roughly $50 million less than ten 
years ago.  It is reasonable to believe that all seven Class I railroads could procure productivity 
enhancing systems for around $150 million today, since the systems would be add-ons to existing 
dispatch and onboard systems.  For purposes of this analysis, FRA assumes that productivity 
systems would cost $150 million.  Over the twenty year analysis period, at the discount rate of 3%, 
the Net Present Value (NPV) of the maintenance costs would be $148 million, for a total NPV 
over the analysis period of $298 million, which is far less than the $13.8 billion NPV of business 
                                                 
4   Costs that have already been incurred and cannot be reversed.   
A- 4
benefits.  Clearly, the investment would be justified.  The gap between the costs and benefits is so 
large that even a large variance in costs would not affect the positive outcome of the analysis. 
 
In Tables A-3 and A-4, Costs to Shippers (the portion of PTC implementation costs passed on by 
railroads) are derived by multiplying annual costs from Tables 4a and 4b by 80%.  Annual indirect 
costs to society are derived by multiplying Costs to Shippers presented in Tables A-3 and A-4 by 
the percentages from Table A-1 (the multipliers used to translate increases/decreases in shipper 
productivity to increases/decreases in societal benefits from modal diversion).  Productivity or 
Add-On system costs are based on a cost estimate of $150 million and an annual phase in of 20%, 
starting in 2016.  The Installed Productivity System represents the part of the productivity system 
that has been installed through the end of the previous year.  Productivity Maintenance Costs are 
the annual maintenance cost, which are 15% of the Installed Productivity System cost already 
incurred.  The Productivity Benefit is the steady state annual productivity benefit, derived from the 
2004 report, $1,265,805,000, multiplied by a business benefit phase-in factor assumed by FRA.  
See Table A-2, below.  FRA derived the $1,265,805,000 productivity benefit by averaging PTC B 
shipper direct benefits from the 2004 report ($900 million and $1.4 billion for low and high 
estimates, respectively) to get $1.15 Billion, and then multiplying that number by the GDP 
deflator, 1.1007. 
 
FRA followed a similar process to derive Other Direct Benefits, in Tables A3 – A4.  FRA 
averaged inflated low and high Direct Benefits from the 2004 report, using the GDP deflator5, and 
is using the average, $2,746,022,666, as the estimate of total direct benefits.  Total direct benefits 
included shipper direct benefits, so to calculate Other Direct Benefits, FRA subtracted the 
$1,265,805,000 of Shipper Direct Benefits from $2,746,022,666 and arrived at an Other Direct 
Benefits estimate of $1,481,022,666 per year.  These benefits were also phased in using the values 
in Table A-2. 
 
Table A-2 
 
Business Benefit 
Phase In 
    
Year Percent 
2017 10.00% 
2018 20.00% 
2019 40.00% 
2020 60.00% 
2021 85.00% 
2022 100.00% 
 
As discussed above, FRA believes that favorable diversion impacts will increase over time relative 
to shipper impacts because the value of alleviating highway congestion will increase per ton mile 
                                                 
5   Low and high benefits of $1,933,310,740 and $3,057,925,253 were inflated by a factor of 1.1007 to arrive at low 
and high benefits of $2,127,797,005 and $3,366,858,326 in current dollars.  The average of these two values is 
$1,265,805,000.  
A- 5
as highways get more congested. FRA calculated the Indirect Benefit by multiplying the 
Productivity Benefit by the annual factors from Table A-1. 
 
FRA next calculated the Annual Business Net impact, which is the difference between the sum of 
the Productivity Benefit, the Other Direct Benefit, and the Indirect Benefit, and the sum of the 
Indirect Costs, the Productivity System Costs, and the Productivity Maintenance Costs.  Note that 
Costs to Shippers is a transfer payment to railroads, and is not included in business costs.  This 
cost is used to derive other costs, which are included.  Negative values represent net societal costs 
and positive values net societal benefits. 
 
Tables A3 – A4 also present Discounted Annual Business Net impact as well as total 20-year 
Discounted Business Net impact.  Net benefits total $ 6,129,794,313 discounted at 7%, and 
$13,820,044,963, discounted at 3%.  Discounted at 3% the net business-related benefit is large 
enough, that coupled with the safety benefits from Table 4b, the benefits would exceed the costs of 
PTC implementation with productivity enhancing add-ons.  Discounted at 7%, the net business-
related benefits would not be large enough to offset the costs.  However, extending the analysis to 
twenty five years allows the Discounted Net Business Impact to reach $10,687,250,077 (NPV 7%) 
and the Discounted Railroad Safety Benefit to reach $709,748,128, which together would exceed 
Discounted PTC System Total Costs, which would grow to $10,983,760,885.  Thus, over a 25-
year period using a 7% discount factor, net discounted benefits would exceed the net discounted 
costs. 
 
The 2004 report notes that reductions in highway accident costs comprise 81.1188% of indirect 
benefits.  FRA derived the Net Highway Accident Impact associated with the PTC productivity 
add-on implementation in this analysis by subtracting Indirect Costs from Indirect Benefits, and 
multiplying the result by 81.1188%.  FRA also calculated Discounted Net Highway Accident 
Impact using both 3% and 7% discount rates.  In this analysis, the early expenditures on PTC 
system implementation in response to RSIA08 and the proposed rule cause significant adverse cost 
impact in the early years.  It is not until later years, when productivity-enhancing systems come on 
line, that the net impact becomes beneficial.  If productivity-enhancing systems fail to materialize, 
then the net impact of PTC system implementation would be adverse as is portrayed in the primary 
analysis.  An interesting implication of the model presented in this appendix is that finding a way 
to move costs from early years to later years, perhaps through financing, could provide a 
significant reduction in the adverse diversion impacts.  Smoothing out the expenditures would 
result in fewer negative impacts to shippers and thus fewer costs passed on to society in the years 
before the positive impacts are realized. 
A- 6
Discount            Table A-3           
Rate                   Discounted Net 
7%     Productivity Installed Productivity   Other   Annual Annual Highway 
Year Costs to Indirect  System Productivity Maintenance Productivity Direct  Indirect  Business  Business  Accident 
  Shippers Costs Costs System Costs Benefit Benefit Benefit Net Net Impact 
2009 $ 48,000,000 $ 43,206,101 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 -$ 43,206,101 -$ 43,206,101 -$35,048,271
2010 $ 55,200,000 $ 51,888,000 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 -$ 51,888,000 -$ 48,493,458 -$42,090,923
2011 $ 500,624,589 $ 491,432,693 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 -$ 491,432,693 -$ 429,236,347 -$398,644,304
2012 $ 716,016,466 $ 734,004,788 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 -$ 734,004,788 -$ 599,166,550 -$595,415,876
2013 $ 952,777,072 $ 1,019,978,919 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 -$ 1,019,978,919 -$ 778,137,033 -$827,394,659
2014 $ 1,447,822,783 $ 1,618,599,193 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 -$ 1,618,599,193 -$ 1,154,038,855 -$1,312,988,242
2015 $ 1,905,316,491 $ 2,224,411,104 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 -$ 2,224,411,104 -$ 1,482,219,042 -$1,804,415,595
2016 $ 685,199,367 $ 835,389,276 $ 30,000,000 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 -$ 865,389,276 -$ 538,920,948 -$677,657,756
2017 $ 685,199,367 $ 872,394,483 $ 30,000,000 $ 30,000,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 126,580,500 $ 148,102,267 $ 161,162,043 -$ 471,049,673 -$ 274,155,199 -$576,943,221
2018 $ 685,199,367 $ 911,038,909 $ 30,000,000 $ 60,000,000 $ 9,000,000 $ 253,161,000 $ 296,204,533 $ 336,602,064 -$ 64,071,312 -$ 34,850,548 -$465,976,275
2019 $ 685,199,367 $ 951,395,166 $ 30,000,000 $ 90,000,000 $ 13,500,000 $ 506,322,000 $ 592,409,066 $ 703,025,027 $ 806,860,927 $ 410,167,181 -$201,474,876
2020 $ 685,199,367 $ 993,539,082 $ 30,000,000 $ 120,000,000 $ 18,000,000 $ 759,483,000 $ 888,613,600 $ 1,101,250,350 $ 1,707,807,868 $ 811,367,216 $87,374,088
2021 $ 685,199,367 $ 1,037,549,845 $ 0 $ 150,000,000 $ 22,500,000 $ 1,075,934,250 $ 1,258,869,266 $ 1,629,212,560 $ 2,903,966,231 $ 1,289,395,736 $479,949,695
2022 $ 685,199,367 $ 1,083,510,152 $ 0 $ 150,000,000 $ 22,500,000 $ 1,265,805,000 $ 1,481,022,666 $ 2,001,625,563 $ 3,642,443,077 $ 1,511,484,380 $744,764,204
2023 $ 685,199,367 $ 1,131,506,361 $ 0 $ 150,000,000 $ 22,500,000 $ 1,265,805,000 $ 1,481,022,666 $ 2,090,291,496 $ 3,683,112,801 $ 1,428,374,645 $777,754,996
2024 $ 685,199,367 $ 1,181,628,656 $ 0 $ 150,000,000 $ 22,500,000 $ 1,265,805,000 $ 1,481,022,666 $ 2,182,885,060 $ 3,725,584,070 $ 1,350,323,117 $812,207,180
2025 $ 685,199,367 $ 1,233,971,216 $ 0 $ 150,000,000 $ 22,500,000 $ 1,265,805,000 $ 1,481,022,666 $ 2,279,580,238 $ 3,769,936,688 $ 1,277,007,988 $848,185,491
2026 $ 685,199,367 $ 1,288,632,393 $ 0 $ 150,000,000 $ 22,500,000 $ 1,265,805,000 $ 1,481,022,666 $ 2,380,558,719 $ 3,816,253,992 $ 1,208,128,281 $885,757,532
2027 $ 685,199,367 $ 1,345,714,894 $ 0 $ 150,000,000 $ 22,500,000 $ 1,265,805,000 $ 1,481,022,666 $ 2,486,010,240 $ 3,864,623,011 $ 1,143,402,499 $924,993,901
2028 $ 685,199,367 $ 1,405,325,977 $ 0 $ 150,000,000 $ 22,500,000 $ 1,265,805,000 $ 1,481,022,666 $ 2,596,132,942 $ 3,915,134,632 $ 1,082,567,350 $965,968,321
                    $ 6,129,794,313   
 
A- 7
 
 
            Table A-4           
Discount Rate                 Discounted Net 
3.00%     Productivity Installed Productivity   Other   Annual Annual Highway 
Year Costs to Indirect  System Productivity Maintenance Productivity Direct  Indirect  Business  Business  Accident 
  Shippers Costs Costs System Costs Benefit Benefit Benefit Net Net Impact 
2009 $ 48,000,000 $ 43,206,101 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 -$ 43,206,101 -$ 43,206,101 -$35,048,271 
2010 $ 55,200,000 $ 51,888,000 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 -$ 51,888,000 -$ 50,376,699 -$42,090,923 
2011 $ 500,624,589 $ 491,432,693 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 -$ 491,432,693 -$ 463,222,446 -$398,644,304 
2012 $ 716,016,466 $ 734,004,788 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 -$ 734,004,788 -$ 671,718,360 -$595,415,876 
2013 $ 952,777,072 $ 1,019,978,919 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 -$ 1,019,978,919 -$ 906,238,058 -$827,394,659 
2014 $ 1,447,822,783 $ 1,618,599,193 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 -$ 1,618,599,193 -$ 1,396,217,883 -$1,312,988,242 
2015 $ 1,905,316,491 $ 2,224,411,104 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 -$ 2,224,411,104 -$ 1,862,909,280 -$1,804,415,595 
2016 $ 685,199,367 $ 835,389,276 $ 30,000,000 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 -$ 865,389,276 -$ 703,640,674 -$677,657,756 
2017 $ 685,199,367 $ 872,394,483 $ 30,000,000 $ 30,000,000 $ 4,500,000 $ 126,580,500 $ 148,102,267 $ 161,162,043 -$ 471,049,673 -$ 371,850,962 -$576,943,221 
2018 $ 685,199,367 $ 911,038,909 $ 30,000,000 $ 60,000,000 $ 9,000,000 $ 253,161,000 $ 296,204,533 $ 336,602,064 -$ 64,071,312 -$ 49,105,325 -$465,976,275 
2019 $ 685,199,367 $ 951,395,166 $ 30,000,000 $ 90,000,000 $ 13,500,000 $ 506,322,000 $ 592,409,066 $ 703,025,027 $ 806,860,927 $ 600,380,306 -$201,474,876 
2020 $ 685,199,367 $ 993,539,082 $ 30,000,000 $ 120,000,000 $ 18,000,000 $ 759,483,000 $ 888,613,600 $ 1,101,250,350 $ 1,707,807,868 $ 1,233,756,740 $87,374,088 
2021 $ 685,199,367 $ 1,037,549,845 $ 0 $ 150,000,000 $ 22,500,000 $ 1,075,934,250 $ 1,258,869,266 $ 1,629,212,560 $ 2,903,966,231 $ 2,036,783,487 $479,949,695 
2022 $ 685,199,367 $ 1,083,510,152 $ 0 $ 150,000,000 $ 22,500,000 $ 1,265,805,000 $ 1,481,022,666 $ 2,001,625,563 $ 3,642,443,077 $ 2,480,326,494 $744,764,204 
2023 $ 685,199,367 $ 1,131,506,361 $ 0 $ 150,000,000 $ 22,500,000 $ 1,265,805,000 $ 1,481,022,666 $ 2,090,291,496 $ 3,683,112,801 $ 2,434,971,454 $777,754,996 
2024 $ 685,199,367 $ 1,181,628,656 $ 0 $ 150,000,000 $ 22,500,000 $ 1,265,805,000 $ 1,481,022,666 $ 2,182,885,060 $ 3,725,584,070 $ 2,391,310,647 $812,207,180 
2025 $ 685,199,367 $ 1,233,971,216 $ 0 $ 150,000,000 $ 22,500,000 $ 1,265,805,000 $ 1,481,022,666 $ 2,279,580,238 $ 3,769,936,688 $ 2,349,299,907 $848,185,491 
2026 $ 685,199,367 $ 1,288,632,393 $ 0 $ 150,000,000 $ 22,500,000 $ 1,265,805,000 $ 1,481,022,666 $ 2,380,558,719 $ 3,816,253,992 $ 2,308,896,426 $885,757,532 
2027 $ 685,199,367 $ 1,345,714,894 $ 0 $ 150,000,000 $ 22,500,000 $ 1,265,805,000 $ 1,481,022,666 $ 2,486,010,240 $ 3,864,623,011 $ 2,270,058,717 $924,993,901 
2028 $ 685,199,367 $ 1,405,325,977 $ 0 $ 150,000,000 $ 22,500,000 $ 1,265,805,000 $ 1,481,022,666 $ 2,596,132,942 $ 3,915,134,632 $ 2,232,746,573 $965,968,321 
                    $ 13,820,044,963   
A- 8
Much of the preceding analysis depends on analysis conducted earlier and presented in the 2004 
report, so it is important to introduce the key concepts from that report.   
 
As part of a Congressionally mandated study of all costs and benefits of PTC, including business 
benefits, FRA had a contractor, Zeta-Tech Associates (Zeta-Tech), examine the business benefits 
and costs of PTC implementation.  FRA combined that analysis with FRA estimates of modal 
diversion and societal consequences, and with findings from a joint effort between FRA and the 
Volpe Center (Volpe) to analyze potential accident cost reductions and additional societal benefits 
from implementing PTC.  
 
FRA then conducted a peer review workshop to which representatives of railroads (freight and 
passenger), labor organizations, suppliers, and shippers were invited.  Draft reports were 
presented, and post-workshop written filings were received. 
 
Although there was significant disagreement over the FRA contractor’s report, if the Zeta-Tech’s 
analysis is correct then major benefits might arise from (1) improved railroad productivity; (2) 
resulting reductions in shipper logistical costs caused by faster, more reliable rail shipments, and 
(3) diversion of freight traffic from highway to rail.  Adaptations made in order to conduct the 
present analysis are discussed throughout this appendix.  
 
Zeta-Tech studied the costs, and found they were similar to those estimated by the RSAC in 1998-
1999.  However, according to peer reviewers, on-board systems were expected to be about one-
third less expensive than previously estimated.  In its analysis of the proposed rule, FRA is using 
higher costs for on-board systems because FRA believes the railroads are facing a very constrained 
market with the tight deadlines of RSIA08. 
 
The 2004 report analyzed two levels of PTC, then called PTC A and PTC B, for purposes of 
analysis. In general, both the costs and benefits of PTC A were similar to, but smaller than the 
costs and benefits of PTC B.  PTC B is more like the systems that will be installed under RSI08.  
Significant timing issues, which were not considered fully in that analysis, have impacted the use 
of the results in this analysis.  The most significant timing issue is that PTC will take several years 
to deploy and the benefits, especially the business-related benefits, will not flow until the systems 
are substantially complete.  In the 2004 report, FRA analyzed the effects on railroads using 
estimates based on year 2000 traffic flows, but the truck-to-rail diversion estimates that formed the 
basis for additional societal benefits were estimated for 2010, and 2020.  This did not allow for any 
growth in traffic leading to conservative diversion estimates.  Another timing issue is that the 
intermodal diversion projections were based on PTC having been in service for several years, yet a 
realistic timeline for systemwide adoption of PTC might not have had PTC in place before year 
2010.  In fact, FRA is not projecting full PTC deployment until the end of 2015, and FRA is not 
projecting full productivity benefits until 2022.  Thus the level of productivity benefits presented 
for 2010 in the 2004 report are more likely reflective of Year 2022 under current circumstances. 
 
The 2004 report did not definitively resolve whether, in order to realize any modal diversion, 
railroads would have to make additional investments in yard and terminal capacity to handle the 
additional traffic volume.  If that were necessary, several hundred million dollars in additional 
A- 9
investment might be required to realize improvements in rail service that generate the largest 
portion of the possible benefits, which come from productivity enhancements.  Some additional 
highway and railroad investment might also be required to provide access to new or expanded 
intermodal terminals from the interstate highway system. 
 
Finally, the 2004 report did not examine an issue that is critical for the success of PTC–the 
question of communications capacity.  More sophisticated forms of PTC will require rapid flows 
of digital data.  Developments in communications technology promise a rich set of options for 
addressing this need.  However, to the extent a PTC system requires partial reliance on a 
commercial service, additional costs might be incurred.  That is, the data communication backbone 
might not be available “free” for auxiliary business functions.   FRA believes that the data needed 
to operate PTC is sufficient to add productivity benefits, and has accounted for communication 
costs in the main analysis of the proposed rule. 
 
Key Elements of the Business Benefits: 
 
Work Order Reporting: 
 
The purpose of the work order system is to plan and schedule the work of train crews.  However, it 
is not possible to schedule all work in advance, since it is impossible to perfectly predict future 
occurrences.  However, the addition of unplanned work may mean delays to cars or train crews, 
since without advance knowledge of work to be done, crews may run out of time before 
completing all scheduled work and any unplanned work.  Outbound connections in yards may also 
be missed if large volumes of additional work delay completion of a switching shift. 
 
Work order reporting systems send instructions over the digital data link communications network 
from the control center to train crews regarding the setting out and picking up of loaded and empty 
cars enroute. When crews acknowledge accomplishment of work orders, the system automatically 
updates the on-board train consist information and transmits information on car location and train 
consists back over the digital data link communications network to the railroad's operating data 
system and to customers. Work order reporting information can be displayed in locomotives on the 
same screens that would display PTC instructions and information. 
 
Real-time or near real-time information will reduce additional, unplanned work, by reducing the 
volume of inaccurate or out-of-date information used in the generation of work orders.  The earlier 
there is knowledge of unplanned work the better the plan is able to accommodate that work 
without disruption of other elements of the plan.  Since yard and industry switchers and local 
freights perform most additional work, the benefits resulting from a reduction in additional work 
will be realized mostly in these services.  For this reason, the analysis presented here is confined to 
switchers and local freights.  There simply do not seem to be large benefits to be realized from 
real-time reporting of train consist data and completed work by unit trains and through freight 
trains, because those trains do not undergo much switching activity. 
 
Zeta-Tech estimated the benefits from work order reporting to be $10 million per year, under 
A- 10
either PTC A or PTC B1 (the additional features of PTC B have nothing to do with collecting and 
disseminating information useful for work order reporting).  The methodology used to derive these 
benefits focuses on the ability to process a rail car more rapidly through a terminal area, given 
better and more timely information about that car, and therefore to reduce the likelihood that the 
car will miss the next train leaving the yard for its destination.  At present it does not appear, based 
on anecdotal information, that any Class I railroad has a work order reporting system that can 
provide these benefits without PTC, however, it also appears that such systems are under 
development.  
 
The AAR, in its comments, said that these benefits were already being derived from other, non-
PTC systems.  (One of these, the UP work order reporting system, actually utilizes an ATCS 
communications platform.)   
 
FRA recognizes that commercial wireless communications have become available that no longer 
make a train control communications platform a necessity.  The widespread availability of 
commercial communications services offers an alternative means of realizing these benefits.  
Further, most major railroads now have car scheduling programs that address the same needs.  The 
Automatic Equipment Identification (AEI) program provides data on cars passing fixed points 
throughout the national rail system.  Accordingly, the extent to which work order reporting might 
be profitably employed in the future is not known, and FRA has not included any quantified 
benefit from this report.  FRA does believe that a PTC communications platform could help hold 
down the cost of work order reporting. 
 
Fuel Savings: 
 
PTC can let train operations be paced, so that trains do not operate at top speed for a short 
duration, only to wait for an extended period to acquire authority for the next track segment.  A 
great deal of fuel could be wasted in accelerating from a stop, or from operating at unnecessarily 
high speeds. 
 
FRA has described its estimation process for this value added above. 
 
Precision Dispatch: 
 
Precision dispatching is dispatching based on very frequent updates of the positions, and in some 
cases, speeds, of trains.  PTC systems can provide frequent updates on train position, and in most 
cases speed.  Most PTC systems also require modifications of the railroad’s operating system and 
rules.  A railroad can opt to install precision dispatching concurrently with PTC at a lower cost 
than the marginal cost of a stand-alone precision dispatching system.  That is not to say that a 
railroad cannot attempt to install a stand-alone precision dispatching system.  At least three 
railroads now report efforts to upgrade their computer-aided dispatching systems to include 
                                                 
1Quantification of the Business Benefits of Positive Train Control, Zeta-Tech Associates, Cherry 
Hill, NJ, March 15, 2004, pp. 35 et seq. 
A- 11
planning elements.   
 
Precision dispatching involves traffic planners.  FRA has identified two types of traffic planners 
that might be of use in precision dispatching: 
 
Tactical traffic planners (TTPs) produce plans showing when trains should arrive at 
each point on a dispatcher's territory, where trains should meet and pass, and which 
trains should take sidings. As the plans are executed, a TTP takes the very detailed 
train movement information provided by the PTC system and compares it with 
desired train performance. If there are significant deviations from plan, the TTP will 
re-plan, adjusting meet and pass locations to recover undesired lateness. TTPs make 
use of sophisticated non-linear optimization techniques to devise an optimal 
dispatching plan. Once a TTP prepares a plan, the dispatcher need only accept it. 
Then the computer-assisted dispatching system of PTC produces all authorities 
needed to execute the plan and sends them over the digital data link 
communications network to trains and maintenance-of-way vehicles. Some 
prototype TTPs have been developed and tested. 
 
Strategic traffic planners (STPs) - TTPs cannot function without knowing the 
schedule for each train. STPs measure train movements against a set of externally 
defined schedules that include information on scheduled block swaps and 
connections, both internal and with other railroads. STPs integrate a flow of 
information about actual train performance from the TTP, the performance of 
connections, and detailed consist information for all trains from operating data 
systems.  They make cost-minimizing decisions on whether, and how, train 
priorities and schedules might be adjusted on a real-time basis. STPs are the 
highest-level real-time control system in the PTC hierarchy. STPs will be able to 
display the performance of trains against schedule, the real-time location of every 
train by type (e.g., coal, intermodal, grain, intercity passenger), and the location of 
trains at future times based on current performance. The Federal Aviation 
Administration developed an STP (called "central flow control") to support the U.S. 
air traffic control system; the same philosophy could apply to railroad STPs. 
 
The main benefit of precision dispatching is that a railroad can have a dispatch plan that is updated 
and optimized at frequent enough cycles to provide near optimal operations.  At least one railroad 
has contended that precision dispatching has no benefit because rail operations are unpredictable, 
due to unanticipated events, such as broken rails and broken equipment.  FRA disagrees, and 
believes that unpredictable events are better managed when a railroad can respond promptly with 
optimized alternatives. 
 
Further, even in ordinary operations, precision dispatching has much to offer.  According to Smith, 
Resor, and Patel, significant reductions in travel time are available when there is a greater 
availability of real-time or near real-time information for railroad dispatchers.  In fact, their study 
showed that a travel time reduction of 2.3% could be available as a result of dispatchers receiving 
train position information every 3.5 minutes, as can be expected under PTC A, rather than every 
A- 12
17 minutes, as would be expected under a classic CTC system.  For this reason, the benefits of 
precision dispatching are included in the discussion of PTC A benefits. 
 
FRA notes that even without precision dispatching, more precise information on where trains are 
would allow dispatchers to “roll up” authorities behind a train more rapidly as it passes, freeing the 
track for use by the next train more rapidly, which might create additional capacity, or enhanced 
throughput.  Nonetheless, the AAR objected to any such increases in estimated throughput. 
         
With effective meet/pass planning achievable with accurate position information and possibly 
supplemented with sophisticated computer analysis, system velocity and reliability can increase.  
When system velocity increases, each car reaches its destination more rapidly, and is available 
sooner for its next move.  Likewise, each locomotive is ready more rapidly to pull its next train.  
This means the railroad can use less equipment to accomplish any given level of traffic.   
 
Railroads disagreed with this point, saying that they already have the cars they need to transact 
business, and that there is no reduction in procurement cost.  Further, many cars sit idle because 
of seasonal or cyclical shifts in demand for cars.  Nevertheless, railroads still need to replace 
existing stock, and to buy locomotives to service different types of business as shipper demand 
patterns change.  Railroads could accommodate these shifts in demand with less equipment, 
yielding considerable savings.   
 
Zeta-Tech estimated these benefits at $400 million to $1 billion per year, for both PTC A and PTC 
B, but in a letter to FRA agreed with a point raised by the AAR, that the savings in car utilization 
should only be applied to the portion of the time a car is in motion.   
 
As noted above, in response to Zeta-Tech and AAR’s comments on ownership cost savings, FRA 
had reduced Zeta-Tech’s estimate of the potential savings to railroads from precision dispatch (i.e., 
better utilization of plant and equipment) by 75% of the original estimates 
 
Capacity Benefits: 
 
PTC B adds a central safety system, traffic planning functions, and the capability to both “pace” 
trains and apply more advanced energy management technology to reduce fuel consumption by 
improving train handling and the capability to implement “dynamic headways” (moving block 
train separation).  Dynamic headways can increase line capacity by permitting shorter and lighter 
trains to operate on closer headways, rather than constraining all trains to the separation required 
by the longest and heaviest trains.  Dynamic headways, in conjunction with a tactical planner, can 
reduce average running times. 
 
Zeta-Tech measured the benefits of capacity improvements in terms of avoided infrastructure costs 
for track and signals, including maintenance.  This estimate was derived by estimating the number 
of miles of track at or above capacity, and estimating the costs of investments that would need to 
be made in order to maintain an adequate level of service.  Zeta-Tech estimated the benefit of 
improved capacity at $800 million to $1.2 billion per year. 
 
A- 13
Railroad commenters, including the AAR, stated that PTC safety systems may have the effect of 
reducing line capacity.  They noted that the conservative braking algorithms used in current PTC 
projects may result in trains operating at slower speeds approaching targets.  Further, even if it is 
possible to achieve dynamic blocks, the full benefit of the technology would be realized only in 
multi-track territory.  A major signal supplier called attention to the technical risk associated with 
dynamic block architectures, noting that such projects have not been successful in conventional 
railroading internationally.  
 
Demonstration of dynamic block capability is a major objective of the North American Joint PTC 
project, and several transit applications are presently being deployed using this approach. FRA 
agrees that dynamic block capability will be one of the last attributes of communication-based 
train control that will be deployed (due to the technical challenge, communications requirements, 
etc.).  FRA believes that attainable PTC systems, used in combination with precision dispatching, 
can increase line capacity by releasing restrictions on movements to the rear of trains and more 
efficiently staging train operations, regardless of whether dynamic blocks are employed for freight 
operations. 
 
FRA is aware of the challenges currently being experienced in developing and implementing 
braking algorithms within the current PTC projects.  These difficulties must be overcome for PTC 
to be a viable safety system and contribute to the efficiency of the industry.  FRA believes that 
these issues will be resolved through use of realistic train consist and track database information 
and a more refined understanding of how specific train types perform.  During the period PTC is 
being implemented, railroads will also be converting to use of electronically-controlled pneumatic 
(ECP) brakes, which will lead to more extensive use of train braking; and that in turn will provide 
feedback on the actual performance of each individual train (as well as exception information on 
the braking systems on individual cars). 
 
However, in response to comments, including those from the AAR in writing and at the Peer Review 
Workshop, FRA has modified the Zeta-Tech estimate, reducing it by 60%, to account for such issues 
as the fact that adding PTC is not as effective as double tracking in increasing capacity, and that a 
railroad could increase capacity substantially by installing a series of long sidings, at cost much less 
than that of double tracking.  FRA believes this is a conservative assumption, and the societal benefits 
estimated remain significant even after reducing the estimate of this benefit substantially. 
 
Shipper Benefits: 
 
Zeta-Tech, in its analysis, said that PTC can enable railroads to deliver shipments more rapidly, 
and with greater certainty of the arrival time, a statement with which the AAR strongly disagreed in 
its comments.   
 
The theory underlying these projected benefits is that a PTC communications system, coupled with 
precision dispatching, could reduce delays and help trains adhere to their schedules.  Implicit in 
this analysis is the assumption that precision dispatching, informed by real-time information, can 
improve recovery from unexpected occurrences.   
 
A- 14
Reduced variability in arrival time is extremely important to shippers, as it enables them to lower 
logistics costs.  Zeta Tech estimated this benefit using three methodologies: 
 
1. Determine the savings shippers might realize in terms of the reduced inventory 
portion of logistics cost reduction if service reliability improves.  This would be one 
measure of the total benefit available from improved service when PTC is installed. 
 The Zeta-Tech report showed that a reduction in the cost of carrying safety stock 
may be a useful surrogate for a lower-bound measure of the total benefit available 
from improved reliability. 
 
2. Determine what additional amount shippers might be willing to pay for improved 
service reliability. 
 
3. Determine the cross-elasticity of demand and price relative to PTC-enabled 
improvements in transit time and its variability as reported in a study on total 
logistics cost that had been prepared for the Federal Highway Administration.  This 
method for measuring the size of the total benefit provides a useful check on the 
first two methods used. 
 
Zeta-Tech developed estimates of shipper benefits which ranged from $400 million per year to 
$2.6 billion per year.  It appeared that the higher estimates might be unrealistic, so in developing a 
summary of benefits, Zeta Tech picked as representative figures estimates of shipper benefits 
between $400 million and $900 million per year for PTC A and between $900 million and $1.4 
billion per year for PTC B. 
 
These benefits would only occur if the improvements in service, as estimated by Zeta-Tech, were 
realized.  AAR took strong exception to those estimated improvements in service, stating that many 
of the delays and uncertainties relate to handling of cars in yards and terminal areas and that 
even if PTC could perform as promised shippers would not see the projected service quality 
improvements.  
 
FRA notes that the estimates provided above are based on achieving a 3.5-10% improvement in 
trip times and 3.8-11% improvement in reliability.  Even though the absolute benefit numbers are 
large, these are modest improvements from a percentage viewpoint.  FRA agrees it is not possible 
to say with certainty whether they might be achieved without testing and demonstrating the 
technology.  For instance, precision dispatching requires development of very sophisticated 
software that proved to be a much greater challenge than originally anticipated by the first vendor 
to offer the product.  It is also true that uncertainties with respect to yard dwell times may be more 
influential in affecting service quality than over-the-road planning.  Nevertheless, this is an era in 
which all successful businesses are utilizing real-time data and analysis to address customer 
expectations.  It is difficult to imagine that railroads, which are both capital and labor intensive, 
could contrive to make no gains in service quality with ready availability of current data regarding 
their train operations.    
 
A- 15
Modal Diversion 
 
This model depends on the estimates of improved rail velocity and reliability derived in the Zeta-
Tech study, which have been challenged by several commenters (see discussion above). 
 
To assess the potential for highway to rail diversion, FRA employed the Department’s Intermodal 
Transportation and Inventory Cost (ITIC) Model.  The ITIC model measures shipper logistics cost 
for both highway and rail.  If rail can improve its service offerings, lowering shipper logistics cost 
vis-à-vis highway service offerings, then rail should have the opportunity to better compete and 
potentially capture the business from motor carriers.  Business that rail can capture from highway 
results in shipper logistics cost savings. 
 
FRA used input values for improved transit time and service reliability developed by Zeta-Tech. 
Of course, if the Zeta-Tech estimates are not correct, then neither are the estimates derived 
by FRA.  Zeta-Tech estimated that transit time would improve between 3.5% and 10% and that 
reliability would improve by between 3.8% and 11%.  Details of the impact of modal diversion can 
be found in the 2004 report, Appendix B, and Appendix D, Tables 7 and 8. 
 
One caution to readers of the diversion study: the study assumes constant railroad rates, which is 
not meant to be a realistic assumption.  The assumption is meant to provide conservative estimates 
of total diversion.  An artifact of using constant rates is that it appears in the study that railroad 
revenues will grow substantially.  In reality most of that revenue would be passed on to shippers in 
the form of lower rates, and actual diversion would be greater.  It does, however provide an 
indication that the shipper benefits in the Zeta Tech study might be conservative. 
 
Heavy trucks operating over highways create a risk of accidents, and moving them to railroads 
removes that accident risk from the highways, although it does increase somewhat the rail safety 
risk.   According to the diversion model, PTC will divert between 1.937 billion VMT and 3.723 
billion VMT from highway to rail in 2010.  The diversion increases to between 3.005 billion VMT 
and 5.714 billion VMT in 2020.  The safety benefits of diversion accrue primarily to highway 
users. 
 
As described here, the safety benefit from PTC would in part be offset by what FRA estimates to 
be volume related rail accident costs of $22 million to $44 million per year.  
 
FRA estimates diversion of between 30.7 billion ton-miles and 59.5 billion ton-miles in 2010, and 
between 46.4 billion ton miles and 89.4 billion ton-miles in 2020.  As previously noted, the 2010 
figures may be overstated because the PTC systems might not be in place until 2010.  This implies 
reduced air pollution costs between $68 million and $132 million in 2010, and between $102 
million and $198 million in 2020.  This benefit would accrue to the general public. 
 
In its May 2000 Addendum to the 1997 Highway Cost Allocation Study, the Federal Highway 
Administration said that the cost responsibility2 of an 80,000 pound combination was 8.65 cents 
                                                 
2Highway Cost Responsibility is an entire chapter in the 1997 Federal Highway Cost Allocation 
A- 16
(10.08 cents in 2009 dollars) per mile, but that the actual contribution of such combinations only 
covered 80% of their cost share.  That means that such trucks created a net societal cost of 1.73 
cents per mile, in 2000 dollars, or 2.02 cents, in 2009 dollars. 
 
Again, railroad commenters strongly disputed the estimated improvements in velocity and 
reliability, without which benefits to shippers and the public would not be realized. 
 
As noted above, FRA remains convinced that an integrated communications, command and control 
system such as PTC and allied elements should be able to contribute to improvements in service 
quality.  Modal diversion is highly sensitive to service quality.  It may be true that problems with 
terminal congestion and lengthy dwell times might overwhelm the benefits of PTC; or it may be 
that the other initiatives that the railroads have been pursing (reconfiguration of yards, pre-
blocking of trains, shared power arrangements, car scheduling, AEI, etc.) might actually work in 
synergy with PTC.  
     
Summary 
 
FRA has done its best to integrate the analysis from the 2004 report with the analysis of the 
proposed rule.  FRA has removed benefit elements, such as locomotive diagnostics, which no 
longer apply, and added more significant fuel savings, and increased accident cost savings, as a 
consequence of DOT adopting higher VSLs.  The 2004 report did not account for adverse impacts 
of PTC funding, while this analysis has attempted to estimate those impacts.  It would take 
between twenty and twenty five years for business benefits to bring the rule to the break-even 
point, assuming what seem to be reasonable costs and effective productivity enhancing systems.  
Should the railroads incur higher costs for PTC, the system may never pay for itself.  Should 
productivity enhancing systems prove unfeasible, or institutionally unacceptable, the costs of PTC 
will far exceed its benefits. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                
Study, , Federal Highway Administration, Washington, DC, 1997, pp. V-1 et seq..  The basic 
concept is that each user should pay the highway costs it creates or “occasions.” 
