DEPT. OF TRANSPORT/WON
DOCKETS
m APR i b A <* u i
U.S. Department of Transportation
FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION
Office of Aviation Policy and Plans
Washington, D.C 20591
INITIAL REGULATORY EVALUATION
CONGESTION MANAGEMENT RULE FOR
NEW YORK LAGUARDIA AIRPORT
Office of Aviation Policy and Plans
Operations Regulatory Analysis Branch
April 11,2008
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Executive summary iii
Total Costs and Benefits of This Rulemaking iv
Who Is Potentially Affected By This Rulemaking v
Key Assumptions v
Other Important Assumptions v
Alternatives We Have Considered vi
Benefits of This Rulemakmg vii
Costs of This Rulemaking vii
REGULATORY EVALUATION 8
Introduction 8
Background 10
Summary of the Proposed Rule 14
Operational Cap and Slots 17
Initial Grandfathering of Slots 18
Fair Allocation of Slot Life 19
Small Communities 20
Use-or-Lose Requirements 20
Perimeter Rule 21
Auction 21
Property Rights 24
Secondary Market and Swaps ...25
Re-Assignment of Returned Slots 26
DISCUSSION OF BENEFITS AND COSTS OF THE RULE 27
Delay Consequences in the Absence of a Cap 30
Longer Term Costs of Instituting a Cap 34
Option Cases for the Present: Regulation 35
Economic Efficiency 36
Baseline Allocation of LGA Slots 39
Slot Auctions and Economic Efficiency 42
Economic Efficiency of Options 1 and 2: A Comparison 45
Characterizing Benefits from Reallocation 47
The Benefits of Reduced Delays and Cancellations in Option 1 50
Costs of the Proposed Rulemaking 51
Summary of the Benefits and Costs of the Rule 54
Distributional Impacts of the Proposed Rule 58
Airlines 58
Slot Values 62
Small Communities 65
Consumers 69
Airport Operators 70
APPENDIX A 72
Updating Estimates of Net Surplus Due to a Cap 72
Estimating Illustrative Benefits and Costs of Different Types of Flying 74
Estimating Schedule Delay 79
Estimating Carrier Impacts 81
Estimating Impacts on Non-Scheduled Operators 82
Illustrative Estimates of Surplus for Different Types of Operations at LGA 83
Sample Calculations 85
TABLE OF EXHIBITS
Exhibit 1: Options 1 and 2 of Proposed Long-Term Regulation for LaGuardia 16
Exhibit 2: UMD Sample Days: LaGuardia 31
Exhibit 3: UMD Delay Simulation Runs for LaGuardia 31
Exhibit 4: UMD Cancellation Simulation Runs for LaGuardia 32
Exhibit 5: Air Service Characterisics at LaGuardia in January 2007 47
Exhibit 6: Indicative Average Surplus to Society Produced by a Flight at LGA 49
Exhibit 7: Estimated Resource Cost of Auction Over Five Years 53
Exhibit 8: Costs and Benefits of the Rulemaking 56
Exhibit 9: LaGuardia Opeating Authorizations and Implications of Options 1 and 2....59
Exhibit 10: Indicative Slot Lease Values and Implied Auction Proceeds 63
Exhibit 11: Value of a Slot per Seat Offered per Day 64
Exhibit 12: Changes in Small Community Air Service Pattern at LGA: January 2007 vs.
2008 67
Exhibit 13: Small Community Operations at LGA by Fleet Type January 2008 68
Exhibit 14: Adjusted Net Benefits of a Cap at LaGuardia 74
Exhibit 15: Equation Estimates of Schedule Delay (minutes) 81
Exhibit 16: Illustrative Estimates of Surplus for Different Types of Flying at LGA 83
Exhibit 17: Annual Effect of Proposed Slot Retirements in Option 1 84
Exhibit 18: Sample Calculations of Surplus at the Segment Level 86
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Executive Order 12866 directs that each Federal agency shall propose or adopt a
regulation only upon a reasoned determination that the benefits of the intended
regulation justify its costs. In conducting this analysis, FAA has determined this
proposed rule has benefits that justify its costs, is a "significant regulatory action" as
defined in section 3(f)(l) of Executive Order 12866, which is also known as an
"economically significant" regulatory action and is "significant" as defined in DOT's
Regulatory Policies and Procedures. The analysis detailed in this document is
summarized below.
The need for this regulation is driven by a market failure with regard to
congestion at New York area airports. Properly functioning markets are the most
efficient method of allocating scarce goods and services. In some instances, however,
markets can fail to produce an efficient outcome, as when an externality exists. A
"negative externality" arises when producers are able to avoid some of the costs of
production attributable to their actions while continuing to capture the full benefits of
their activities. Without a cap on operations at LaGuardia Airport, an air carrier can
over-schedule operations in a manner that creates delays for all other airport users, but
incurs costs only for delays to its own aircraft. The costs to society in aggregate of such
practices exceed the total of the benefits to individual air carriers. The existence of
externalities often requires some type of governmental intervention, as in the caps and
auctions proposed in this rulemaking, to prevent overuse and enable markets to
efficiently allocate resources.
Total Costs and Benefits of This Rulemaking
Through implementation of an auction, FAA estimates that this proposed rule
would result in a long-term improvement in the allocation of scarce slot resources at
LaGuardia Airport in New York (LGA). The estimated present value of net benefits of
improved slot allocation is between $65 and $197 million from 2009-2019. The costs of
the rule/ with a present value between $12 and $23 million, are due to the design,
implementation and participation in an auction of slots.1
This regulatory impact analysis also assumes as a baseline that in the absence of
this rulemaking, FAA would not otherwise impose a cap on aircraft operations at LGA.
Therefore, consistent with trie Initial Regulatory Evaluation undertaken for the agency's
2006 notice of proposed rulemaking for LGA, the FAA estimates that, through the long
term implementation of a cap on aircraft operations, this proposed rule would result in
about a 32% reduction in the average delay per operation at LGA relative to a situation
with no cap. This reduction in average delay generates present value net benefits of
about $2.02 billion from 2009-2019.2 The benefits are estimated by comparing the no-
rule scenario (similar to the situation at LGA in 2000) with the proposed cap.
1
 Present value costs and benefits are based on a 7% discount rate. At a 3% disount rate, the estimated
present value of net benefits of improved slot allocation is between $86 and $251 million from 2009-2019.
Since the costs of the rule are low, the present value of costs at 3% is about the same when rounded.
2
 Estimate based on a 7% discount rate. The net present value of benefits this reduction in avarege delay is
$2.49 billion based on a 3% discount rate.
IV
Who Is Potentially Affected By This Rulemaking
+ Operators of scheduled and non-scheduled, domestic and international flights,
and new entrants who do not yet operate at LGA.
•>• All communities, including small communities with air service to LGA.
•> Passengers of scheduled flights to LGA.
>> The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, which operates the airport.
Key Assumptions
+ Base Case: no operating authorizations or caps
+ Cap on operations provides additional delay improvement
• Option 1:100 percent of slots3 held by carriers with fewer than 21 slots
would be reassigned to the carrier with 10 years of life; for holders with 21
or more slots, 90 percent of slots would be reassigned to the carrier with
leases of 10 years, two percent retired and eight percent with shorter
leases auctioned over five years.
o Delay improvement in Option 1 due to reduction of approximately
one minute per average operation,
• Option 2: Identical to Option 1 except no retirement of slots, and for
holders with 21 or more slots, 80 percent grandfathered with 10-year
leases and 20 percent with shorter leases auctioned over five years.
-> For the purposes of this evaluation, the effective date is (11/1/08).
Other Important Assumptions
+ Discount Rates - 7% and 3%
* Period of Analysis - 2009 through 2019
->- Assumes 2008 Constant Year Dollars
•f Passenger Value of Travel Time ~ $30.86 per hour4
3
 A "slot" is defined as the right to land or depart {not both) in IFR conditions in a 30-minute time window.
4
 GRA, Incorporated "Economic Values for FAA Investment and Regulatory Decisions, A Guide", prepared
for FAA Office of Aviation Policy and Plans, (October 3,2007). Value weighted using LaGuardia shares of
55% leisure and 45% business travel.
Alternatives We Have Considered
•> No caps (no action): This alternative would let the High Density Rule order
expire on January 1, 2007 without replacing it. Based on history, FAA expected
operators would most likely continue to expand operations/ and hence further
worsen airport delays.
•> 2006 NPRM: Our 2006 proposed rule would have instituted caps, provided for
mandatory upgauging, and withdrawn slots for periodic reallocation; we are
amending this proposal in favor of the one proposed here.
^- Caps: This alternative would permanently impose caps at 75 scheduled
operations plus three unscheduled operations per hour; it would grandfather
current holders of operating authorizations to operate at the airport.
^ Option 1 + Caps: This alternative would institute caps as above, retire
approximately two percent of eligible5 slots in the interest of reducing delays and
reallocate eight percent of eligible capacity via an auction over five years.
^- Option 2 + Caps: This alternative would institute caps as above, and reallocate
twenty percent of eligible slots, via auction, over five years.
We are requesting comment from industry on the alternatives considered.
5
 Slots may be retired from a pool consisting of all slots held by individual holders above 20 slots.
VI
Benefits of This Rulemaking
The primary benefits of this rulemaking would be due to the delay reduction
from the caps on operations and an improvement in the allocation of scarce slot
resources through the use of an auction mechanism. Under Option 1 of the proposed
rulemaking, there would also be some additional benefits due to delay reduction
associated with retiring approximately 18 slots.
Costs of This Rulemaking
The major costs of this proposed rule are the costs to the public and private
sectors of designing, implementing and participating in the auction. Under this
rulemaking there will be a reduction in flights into LGA compared to what would occur
without caps. The 2006 Regulatory Evaluation estimated the value of these flight
reductions and deducted them from the delay benefits of the caps to calculate overall
net benefits.6 FAA requests comment on all possible costs of the rule.
6
 See Appendix A for more information.
VII
REGULATORY EVALUATION
Introduction
The purpose of this proposed rule is to provide a long-term solution to address
the expiration of the High Density Rule (HDR) at New York's LaGuardia Airport
(LaGuardiaorLGA). The HDR expired at LGA on January 1,2007. In the past,
demand has exceeded available capacity at LGA and is expected to remain high.
Accordingly, on December 26, 2006, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) placed
temporary limitations on the flight operations at LGA pending development of a long-
term solution.
The FAA and the Office of the Secretary of Transportation (OST) have been
researching congestion management solutions that could be implemented at the airport.
We intend to make a long-term commitment to caps at LGA by replacing the temporary
Operating Authorizations with slots based on holdings of record as of January 2007.8
There are two options that the FAA is seeking comment on. Both would feature
the following provisions:
+ Slot leases which define FAA and operator property rights,
->• Grandfathering of 100 percent of the first 20 slots held by incumbents,
^ An auction of either eight or twenty percent of slot holdings above 20 slots over
five years,
>> A regulatory term through March 2019,
7
 This regulatory evaluation was prepared by GRA, Incorporated of Jenkintown, PA www.gra-inc.com
8
 While the main thrust of today's proposal concerns the implementation of an auction, for reasons
described below, a no cap scenario is technically the base case for the regulatory evaluation.
^- Protections for Canadian slot holders,
^ Continued application of the 80 percent use/lose rule for grandfathered slots
(not subject to auction),
-)• Allowance for carriers to make logistical swaps of slots,
+ A secondary market where all carriers are notified that a holder wishes to
sublease slots.
There are two main distinctions between Option 1 and Option 2. In Option 1,
two percent of each carrier's current portfolio above 20 slots would be retired from
service in order to improve delay performance at the airport. Because we recognize that
under the cap we could retire some slots without instituting an auction, we present the
economic impacts related to slot retirements separately from those related to the auction
in Option 1. Under Option 2, no slots would be retired.
Another major distinction is eight percent of slots in Option 1 would have initial
lease terms of less than or equal to four years after which they would be auctioned off to
the highest airline bidder with the proceeds going to FAA to offset the cost of the
auction and for capacity enhancing programs (including NextGen) at New York
airports. In Option 2, 20 percent of slots would have initial lease terms of less than or
equal to four years after which they would be auctioned off to the highest airline bidder
with the proceeds going to the incumbent holder and incumbents would not be
permitted to bid on their former slot holdings but may bid on all other slots. Under
both Options, the FAA would recoup the costs associated with conducting the auction.
Background and Need for the Regulation
LGA is one of the most congested airports in the United States. Given its
proximity to mid-town Manhattan, LGA experiences a heavy flow of arrivals and
departures throughout the day. This flow of traffic, when unconstrained, has
historically created inefficient levels of congestion and delay that affect the entire
National Airspace System.
The need for this regulation is driven by a market failure with regard to
congestion at New York area airports, Properly functioning markets are the most
efficient method of allocating scarce goods and services. In some instances, however,
markets can fail to produce an efficient outcome, as when an externality exists. A
"negative externality" arises when producers are able to avoid some of the costs of
production attributable to their actions while continuing to capture the full benefits of
their activities. Without a cap on operations at LaGuardia Airport, an air carrier can
over-schedule operations in a manner that creates delays for all other airport users, but
incurs costs only for delays to its own aircraft. The costs to society in aggregate of such
practices exceed the total of the benefits to individual air carriers. The existence of
externalities often requires some type of governmental intervention, as in the caps and
auctions proposed in this rulemaking, to prevent overuse and enable markets to
efficiently allocate resources.
The FAA also believes recent congestion in the summer of 2007 serves as a stark
reminder that the demand for access to New York City is exceptional. New York City is
10
served by three major airports; however, while LaGuardia remained a constrained
airport last summer, JFK and Newark were not constrained and carriers were allowed
to add flights at will. As a result, the New York City area airports experienced nearly
unprecedented delays last summer, which affected the National Airspace System. The
delay numbers at JFK were so high that the FAA initiated a Scheduling Reduction
Meeting in October 2007 and announced a cap at the airport in January of this year.
Concerned that those carriers that could not obtain desired access at JFK would quickly
oversubscribe Newark, the FAA proposed a cap there in March. Looking forward/ FAA
expects that maintaining a cap on all three major airports in the New York City area will
be necessary.
In 1969, to address congestion and delay at LGA and several other capacity-
constrained airports, the FAA limited access to these airports by promulgating the High
Density Rule (HDR). In 1985, the agency published a rule that grandfathered most
HDR slots to the incumbent air carriers and created a lottery mechanism, with a
preference for new entrants, to reallocate slots that came back to FAA over time, and
that permitted slots to be bought and sold. The 1985 rule is generally referred to as the
"buy-sell" rule.
In 2000, Congress enacted the Aviation Investment and Reform Act for the 21st
Century (AIR-21), which loosened the slot restrictions at Chicago O'Hare International
Airport (ORD), John F. Kennedy Airport (JFK), and LGA. The Act essentially allowed
more operations by authorizing non-marketable slot exemptions for new entrant
airlines and carriers serving small hub and non-hub airports with certain size aircraft.
11
This legislation also provided for the ultimate phase-out of slot controls at O'Hare by
July 2002 and at LGA and JFK on January 1, 2007. Given the opportunity to increase
their presence at LGA, air carriers requested over 600 new slot exemptions. Delays
soared as a result and by September 2000, 25 percent of flight delays in the U.S. were
attributed to the congestion at LGA.
In response to the delays at LGA, the FAA capped the number of scheduled
operations at LGA at 75 per hour plus six unscheduled operations per hour between
7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. This level of operations includes the limited number of slot
exemptions (159 per day) that were awarded to air carriers by means of a lottery. As a
result of these actions, the average number of aircraft delays fell from 330 per day in
October 2000 to 98 delays per day in April 2001. Had FAA taken no action after the
HDR expired on December 31,2006, we believe it is likely that the very high levels of
congestion and delay would have reappeared as carriers rushed in to gain access that
has been limited since 1969.
Accordingly, the agency proposed for comment in the August, 2006 Notice of
Proposed Rulemaking (NPRM) and then issued a temporary order (the "2006
LaGuardia order") that created operating authorizations that replaced slots;
grandfathered holders (or operators if the holder was not an airline) as of December 31,
2006; retained the 80 percent use/lose rule; permitted short term leasing of operating
authorizations (since the temporary order term was correlated to the issuance of a
longer-term regulation); and permitted carriers to continue making logistical swaps.
Since the order does not permit the buying and selling of operating authorizations and
12
anticipated its replacement by a long-term regulation/ all operating authorizations were
to be assigned again by the F A A when the order expired and upon the adoption of a
longer-term regulation.9 Finally/ the temporary 2006 order did not set-aside operating
authorizations for small communities.
The FAA and the Office of the Secretary of Transportation (OST) have for the
past four years contracted with the National Center of Excellence for Aviation
Operations Research (NEXTOR) to conduct research on various proposals to implement
congestion management at LGA upon the expiration of the HDR. As part of the
research, NEXTOR has conducted a number of strategic simulations with industry in an
effort to design and assess the potential effectiveness of various allocation mechanisms
including: (1) auctions, (2) congestion pricing, and (3) various administrative measures
at LGA. The NEXTOR congestion management project was initiated in anticipation of
the termination of the HDR at LGA in January 2007.
In November 2004, NEXTOR conducted a 2-day simulation of congestion pricing
and various administrative measures at LGA. FAA/ OST, several industry stakeholders
and airlines attended the workshop. The simulation measured airline responses to a
variety of congestion pricing fees and administrative rules. Subsequently, on February
24 - 25, 2005 NEXTOR conducted a second strategic simulation in which they
demonstrated how an auction model could be used to allocate capacity. The simulation
9
 Under the temporary order, any operating authorizations withdrawn for failing to meet the minimum
usage requirements would be redistributed via lottery under procedured defined in 14 CFR para 93.225; if a
new entrant or limited incumbent wins an operating authorization in the lottery, it would not revert to its
original holder at the end of the temporary regulation.
13
was structured around a mock auction for arrival and departure slots at LGA. The
purpose of this simulation was to familiarize the relevant industry and government
communities with auction processes and the specifics of slot auction design. The
exercise also brought in views from industry and government on the overall policy of
using auctions to allocate arrival and departure capacity.
Some of the concepts developed in the NEXTOR research have been included in
the present regulatory proposal.
Summary of the Proposed Rule
This proposed rule would replace the temporary order governing airspace access
at LGA. The FAA intends to address congestion at LGA by replacing the temporary
Operating Authorizations with slot leases based on holdings of record as of January
2007.
The impact of either the NPRM or today's proposal on demand at LGA is difficult
to judge because of many reasons. The 2006 LaGuardia Order has kept operations from
growing since the expiration of the HDR; however, that order is by design temporary. In
addition, although we continue to believe potential demand at LaGuardia is significantly
greater than the supply afforded by the 2006 LaGuardia Order, airline operations have
continued to evolve since the last experience of unconstrained LaGaurdia demand. Since
the 2006 LaGuardia order was temporary, however, we feel the appropriate baseline to
compare this rule against is an unconstrained airport, which is the baseline we used in the
14
2006 NPRM. The last time the airport was close to unconstrained was in 2000, which is
why the FAA relied on its 2000 experience to inform this analysis.
There are two options being proposed for this 10-year rule, as summarized below
in Exhibit 1. A discussion of the two options begins immediately below the table.
15
Exhibit 1: Options 1 and 2 of Proposed Long-Term Regulation for LaGuardia
Feature
Base Schedule
Slot
Number of Slots
Slot Definitions
Slot Time of Day
Mechanics
Auction
Auction Proceeds
Use/Lose
Term
Bidders
Holders
New or returned capacity
Secondary market
Logistical swaps of slots
Option 1
Week 2 January 2007
Defined as right to land or depart
(not both) in a 30-minute time
window;
75/hour •>• 3 unscheduled less 2%
retired and not redistributed
Common Slots: The Baseline (up
to 20 slots per carrier) plus 90%
of slots above 20 have 10 year
leases; Limited Slots: 8% above
the Baseline would have shorter
leases and be auctioned over five
years (1 .6% each) (after which
they convert to Unrestricted
Slots); and 2% would have
shorter leases & then be retired
over 5 years (0.4%/yr)
6:00 a.m. through 9:59 p.m.,
Monday through Friday and
Sunday from 12 noon through
9:59 p.m.; no more than 75 in
anyone hour or 38 in any half-
hour
"Fair" initial distribution with half of
slots with less than 10 years life
selected by carriers; the other half
selected by FAA according to
specified rules
For slots returned to FAA
because life has expired, an
ascending clock auction among
air carriers
Auction funds to FAA to defray
costs of auction, then to NY
capacity / projects
Only on grandfathered slots as
consideration for slots
Program is through March 2019;
slot lives are whatever proportion
of 10 years remain upon
reallocation
Airlines
Holders of record (not marketing
carrier)
Auctioned
Transparent not blind: carrier
notifies FAA of intent to sell; FAA
makes slot availability known;
bilateral negotiations; final terms
disclosed to OST for monitoring
Permitted
Option 2
Same
Same
75/hour + 3 unscheduled
Common Slots: The Baseline (up
to 20 slots per carrier) plus 80%
of slots above 20 would have 1 0
year leases; Limited Slots 20%
would have shorter leases and
then be reallocated via auction
over five years (4%/yr)
Same
Same
Same
Auction funds (net of auction
costs) to incumbent holder;
incumbent cannot bid on own
slots
Same
Same
Same
Same
Same
Same
Same
16
Operational Cap and SUots
On the effective date of the rule, an operational cap for the airport would become
effective (Monday through Fridays, and Sunday after 12 P.M.); this cap would replace
the temporary operating authorizations at the airport on a one-for-one basis. Both
arrival and departure slots would be distributed in half-hour time windows. There
would be three unscheduled operations per hour and 75 slots per hour for scheduled
operations.
For a scheduled operator, a slot would be required to operate at LGA; a slot
would be defined as the right to land or depart (not both) in a 30-minute time window.
Each slot would have an initial-lease term of 10, 4, 3, 2, or 1 years.10 Any slot with less
than 10 years of life would be subject to reallocation via an auction operated under the
authority of the FAA (discussed below), or in Option 1 may be retired.
Slots would not be allocated to carriers on Saturdays since there is a significant
drop in traffic on that day. However, the rulemaking contains similar provisions that
would enable the FAA to cap operations on those days if traffic and delays become
unacceptable in the future.
With regard to unscheduled operations at the airport, up to three unscheduled
fixed wing operations would be permitted per hour at the airport
10
 Some slots currently held by incumbents would be Limited Slots subject to immediate reallocation in the
first auction to be conducted in January 2009. Thus, there will be five auctions.
17
Initial Grandfathering of Slots
The initial allocation of slots would be grandfathered to each slot holder at LGA
based on schedules as of January 2007. Where an operating carrier conducts flights
solely under the control of another carrier, the carrier that "holds" the slot would
receive it.
With regard to a carrier's initial allocation, under Option 1 of the proposed rule,
the "baseline" would consist of up to20 slots that would have leases of 10 years; 90
percent of its remaining holdings above the baseline would also have 10-year leases.
These slots would be designated as Common Slots and would not be subject to
reallocation during the term of the rule (10 years). Ten percent of the slots above the
baseline would be termed Limited Slots; two percent would be retired in even
increments for five years beginning in the summer of 2009 and would not be
reallocated. This retirement should improve the delay performance of the airport,
although the airlines will have fewer opportunities for flying into LGA. The remaining
eight percent would be evenly divided into portions, which would have leases ranging
from about one to four years. These shorter-lived slots would be auctioned after the
expiry of their initial lives, with the proceeds going to the FAA to offset the cost of the
auction and to provide incremental funding for New York capacity programs, including
the early implementation of NextGen technologies. The first auction would be held in
January 2009. Upon their reallocation, these slots would be termed Unrestricted Slots
18
and have whatever life is left until the rule expires - up to ten years. Other auctioned
slots would be treated similarly.
Under Option 2, many of the features would be the same, except that Common
Slots would comprise eighty percent of the slots of portfolios above 20 slots/ none of the
slots would be retired, and twenty percent of the capacity (above the baseline) would be
Limited Slots evenly divided into portions of four percent. The first portion would be
immediately subject to reallocation in the first auction to be conducted in January 2009.
The remaining portions would have lives of about one to four years and would be
auctioned after the expiration of their initial terms. The proceeds of these auctions would
go to the initial slot holder after the FAA recouped its costs. However, the initial slot
holder would not be permitted to bid on any of its own slots. Upon their reallocation,
these slots would become Unrestricted and have whatever life is left until the rule
expires.
Fair Allocation of Slot Life
NEXTOR has developed a methodology for the initial allocation of slot leases
based on different lives. For all operators of more than. 20 slots (except those holding
slots under international obligations), either 10% (Option 1) or 20% (Option 2) of their
slot leases would be Limited Slots and have less than 10 year terms. The number of
years of lease duration for Limited Slots would be distributed in a manner that fairly
distributes the relative length of lease durations among carriers in proportion to their
initial holdings. Carriers would be asked to identify one-half of their short-lived slots
19
by hour of the day; FAA would then choose the remaining fifty percent to fairly
distribute the total across the day. Thereafter, the slot lives would be assigned. The
details of the process will be published in the docket in a separate paper being
developed by NEXTOR.
Small Communities
The temporary order did not designate operating authorities for specific uses
(small community, commuter or exemptions, etc.). We propose to continue with this
policy to allow carriers the greatest flexibility in the use of scarce slot resources.
Therefore, there is no difference between the current temporary operating
authorizations and the proposed rules.
Use-or-Lose Requirements
The FAA proposes to continue application of the Minimum Use Requirements
that are part of the temporary rule and were traditionally applied under the HDR.
Scheduled operators would continue to be required to use their grandfathered Common
Slots (not subject to auction) 80 percent of the time in rolling two-month intervals.
However, Unrestricted Slots would be exempt under this proposal.
Slots returned to the FAA for failure to meet the Minimum Use Requirements
would be auctioned under the proposed rule.
20
Perimeter Rule
For purposes of this regulatory evaluation, it is assumed that the Port Authority
of New York and New Jersey will continue to keep its 1,500-mile perimeter rule in
effect. This traffic distribution policy prohibits commercial flights to and from LGA
beyond 1,500 miles, except on Saturdays.11
Auction
The proposed auction mechanism would apply in both Option 1 and Option 2.
The primary differences are the number of slots up for auction and the rule in the
second option preventing current holders from bidding on their own slots whose lives
have expired. The FAA is in the process of acquiring auction services and cannot at this
time provide complete details of the auction. However, the following discussion
generally explains auction features that the FAA expects any acceptable auction services
would include.
The auction is defined as a market-based process by which the FAA would lease
the exclusive right to use a slot during a given time window. The leaseholder of that
slot would be given the right to trade or sublease this slot for any portion of the leasing
period in a secondary market. The auction is designed to improve economic efficiency,
meaning that the slots put up for bid would be put to their highest and best use, as
revealed by the winner's willingness to pay for them. Given that the FAA also intends
to have a cap at LGA for next 10 years, the over-riding objective of the auction is to
11
 Denver is exempt from the rule.
21
improve economic efficiency by having holders confront the opportunity cost of some
of their holdings, defined as what someone else would pay for them.
FAA proposes that the auction under both options would be structured as an
ascending clock auction with package bidding, in which a bidder submits bids for packages
of slots. Allowing users to submit package bids would reduce the likelihood that a
bidder ends up with a bundle of slots it cannot use; furthermore, the FAA anticipates
that the bidding process would result in some level of price discovery more likely to
reveal preferences and increase the economic efficiency associated with the reallocation
of slots.
The clock auction is a simple iterative auction procedure where the bidders
specify the number of slots they desire in each time period at the prices announced by
the auctioneer. The design allows bidders to specify a collection of slots (i.e., a business
plan) and know that they can win the entire package if they are the high bidder.
Enabling bids on packages of slots protects a bidder against the risk of winning only a
portion of the slots needed for its business plan. The prices provided in each round
allow bidders to understand the cost of competition and limit their evaluation to
packages that they consider most profitable and/or essential to their business.
Prior to the auction, the auctioneer announces the slots to be auctioned, and
provides all of the rules of the auction as well as any requirements (e.g., up-front
payments) that may be required of the bidders. The auction begins with the auctioneer
announcing the number of slots available in each time window and a starring price for
each slot. Given that the value of any particular slot is likely to be dependent on
22
whether the bidder is also able to obtain complementary slots, bids are structured as
package bids. Bidders (air carriers) submit bids for the package of slots they desire
where a package consists of detailing the number of slots that the bidder wishes to
procure for each time window, at the announced prices. Bidders are given a specific
period of time to submit all such bid packages.
Once the bidding period has ended, the auctioneer examines the number of bids
submitted on each of the available slots. Whenever there are more bids (demand) than
the available slots (supply) in that time period, the price of slots in that time is
increased. Bidders review the new price schedule, and submit new bids. The
auctioneer again reviews the bids to determine whether demand for slots exceeds
available capacity, and, if so, a new price schedule is again published.
Rounds of bidding (with prices being raised on those slots which experience
excess demand) continue until overall demand is satisfied (i.e., the market clears) or if
the auctioneer determines that no additional efficiency gains are possible. By utilizing
package bids, this design it minimizes buyers' remorse by ensuring that no bidder can
end up with only a part of what it needs for its business plan.
No slots are awarded until the auction has ended. As the prices of some slots
increase more than others, a bidder may choose to move to a different time window or
reduce the demand for slots in a given time period, or both. Thus, the bidder has the
opportunity to react to changes in prices throughout the auction, by varying the slot
packages and bid prices. The auction includes an activity rule that requires the bidder
to remain active throughout the auction, thereby providing accurate aggregate demand
23
information at given prices. The auction rules also include serious default penalties for
any bidder who reneges on a bid.
This auction design generalizes the auction to accommodate multiple items and
it utilizes methods to prevent last minute "bid sniping/'12 The auction proceeds in
rounds. No item is "won" until the end of the auction. Since more than one slot would
be auctioned in a given time period, a bidder specifies the number of slots desired in
each time period at the specified price.
Among the important features of the proposed auction are the following:
1. Enabling bids on packages of slots protects bidders against the risk of
winning only a portion of the slots needed for their businesses.
2. The auction design limits the amount of non-essential information provided
to the bidders, thereby reducing potential problems of collusion and
retaliatory bidding. Price and demand information are provided to the
bidders after each round, but information about the specific behavior of
particular bidders is not provided.
3. After each auction, the auctioneer and FAA would review the outcome and
process and invite comments on design from the bidders. The intent of this
review would be to adjust future auction designs to improve the economic
efficiency of the outcomes.
Property Rights
One of the most important features of the proposed rules is to define more
precisely the property rights of the FAA and slot holders. Both options make it clear
12
 The FAA believes bid-sniping, where an interested bidder remains silent until the end of the bidding
process and then outbids the highest bidder by a nominal amount, contorts the bidding process. Bid-
sniping may also result in undervalued awards because an active bidder has no idea that there is another
bidder who is willing to engage in the auction.
24
that the slots are the property of the FAA, which would lease them to carriers over a 10-
year period. Some observers have noted that in the past the indeterminate nature of
slot property rights may have adversely affected the secondary market under the HDR.
Slot holders may have been reluctant to sell slots for fear of never having an
opportunity to regain them in the future if their business prospects changed. For the
same reasons, those carriers seeking additional slots may have been frustrated.
Under both proposals offered in the rulemaking, the FAA would cause some
slots to be eligible for reallocation among carriers. In addition, because carriers would
have to pay for at least some slots, the opportunity cost of holding them would become
clearer. Finally, all parties would recognize that FAA would revisit the entire issue by
March 2019 and make appropriate adjustments to the slot program; this should reduce
the risk some carriers may currently face of being permanently denied slot access.
Under both options, slot leases would be allocated for the summer season of 2009
and would finally expire in March 2019. During the 10-year life of the rule, some slot
leases would have interim expiration dates and would be eligible for reallocation via
auction (or retirement in Option 1).
Secondary Market and Swaps
The main objective of this rulemaking is to assure good allocation of scarce slots
among carriers and potential uses. To accomplish this goal, it is important that there be
a well-functioning secondary market and that holders are free to swap slots for
25
logistical reasons. Both activities help to ensure that slots are put to their highest and
best use.
Under both options, carriers may sublease slots to other carriers. The carrier
wishing to sublease would give the FAA notice of its intention, together with
information about the slot(s) available and the duration of the sublease; the carrier may
also set a minimum reservation price. The FAA would then post the information on its
website including times when opening and closing bids must be received. Carriers
would be free to negotiate bilaterally. Upon consummation of a sublease, the holder
must provide information to OST regarding all bids received (either directly or via the
FAA website posting), the names of the parties to the transaction, the duration of the
sublease and the consideration received (cash or in-kind). In addition, the FAA has
proposed no changes to the swapping of slots on a one for one basis.
Re-Assignment of Returned Slots
Slots returned to the FAA for failure to meet the Minimum Use Requirements
would be auctioned under the proposed rule. The objective would be to use the auction
to reallocate the slots to the highest and best use.
26
DISCUSSION OF BENEFITS AND COSTS OF THE RULE
There are several benefit and cost categories discussed in detail below, including the
following:
*f The current temporary Operating Authorizations expire upon the final
adoption of a rule in the present proceeding. Therefore, the final action in the
rulemaking would be to implement a cap at LGA, with the alternative being
no caps. We provide some estimates of the delay consequences for LGA in
the absence of a cap.
*> Assuming a cap at the airport, there are two alternatives designated above as
Options 1 and 2. Both involve leasing of some shorter-lived leases using an
auction. Option 1 also includes some slot retirements in order to reduce
delays.
*> The primary purpose of the proposed rule is to improve the allocation of slots
among alternative uses and carriers. Option 1 would also serve to more
broadly allocate the benefits generated with respect to slot quantity
restrictions. In particular, FAA would use the net proceeds of the auction
under Option 1 to fund capacity improvements in New York, which would
reduce costs to carriers and passengers and potentially create more capacity
for additional services.
27
No one knows the extent to which slots would be reallocated as a result of the
rule; below we characterize the current alternative uses to give some measure
of the economic consequences if there is some reallocation.
We are confident that the allocation of slots should improve if at least some of
them are available to all carriers during the ten-year tenure of the rule. Slots
do not need to change hands to improve the use of slots; for example, when
confronted with a cash cost of carrying slots, an airline might choose to
sublease it or find a higher and better use for it,
The proposed program would reduce uncertainty in the market for slots by
making clear the property rights of the FAA and air carrier slot holders; this
change in property rights should stimulate the secondary market. All slot
leases would be for ten or fewer years. Slots should be available more
frequently than in the past. Some slots would be available in the primary
auction in each of the first four years; all carriers would be made aware of
sublease opportunities in the secondary market Thus, the incentives should
be reduced for incumbents to overvalue and hold slots because of the
difficulty of ever replacing them. Similarly, incumbents would be less
inclined to overbid for slots that have limited tenure rights or to charge
excessive rents for them. New entrant incentives to undervalue slots should
be reduced because they would have no expectation that slots can be acquired
for free. By improving property rights definitions, the secondary market
28
should become more active. The FAA does not have an independent estimate
of these benefits.
The proposed slot program replaces the temporary cap, except that in Option
I, two percent of slots are retired; this would result in some delay savings
relative to the current temporary order. Estimates of the net benefits of these
delay reductions are provided below.
The FAA estimates the direct costs of the rulemaking relate to the
administrative effort that the FAA and carriers would have to undertake to
create, operate and participate in the auction. Below we estimate the costs to
all parties due to the auction.
General aviation and public charter operators currently must acquire
reservations at LGA. This rule limits the number of operations available for
these operators to three per hour. Reservation requirements are not new costs
for these operators.
There would be potential distributional impacts among airlines, communities
and the general public that would result from the rule; we describe these
below. However, we anticipate these effects would not likely be significant
because few slots are involved.
Provided below are some rough estimates of potential slot values in the
auction based upon past slot lease transactions. The actual values realized in
the auctions may be different. The money cost of purchasing a slot is a
29
transfer of an asset from one party to another and thus does not constitute an
economic cost of the proposed rule.
Delay Consequences in the Absence of a Cap
In the regulatory evaluation conducted for the 2006 NPRM, FAA provided
estimates of expected delays if a cap did not exist at LGA, These estimates have been
updated in the present regulatory evaluation. For the purposes of this analysis, airport
delay and cancellations results developed by the University of Maryland (UMD) have
been applied. The team at UMD collected a significant sample of delay experience from
the ASPM-analysis database maintained by the FAA. The levels of operations observed
on those days were meant to correspond to a range of operations that have been
observed historically at LGA. The delay and cancellation experience over the sample
was then computed for each level of operations.
To model the higher level of operations that would likely take place in the
absence of the rule, a queuing simulation model was applied. The UMD study assumed
that approximately 1,400 operations would take place at LGA in the absence of the High
Density Rule. This relatively high level of operations would not be experienced in
either the base or scenario cases for this rule, but the resulting delay functions provide
background information on the consequences of not having at cap at LGA. A summary
of the UMD delay and cancellation analysis is shown in Exhibit 2.13 The exhibit shows
13
 Because there has been no change in the physical layout of the airport nor an appreciable change in the
characteristics of service there since this study was done, we believe it adequately represents the capacity
and delays at the airport under different demand levels.
30
the average delay per operation and the percent of scheduled flights cancelled at
different levels of operations.
Exhibit 2: UMD Delay Minutes and Cancellation Probability
by Different Operation Levels: LaGuardia
Operations per Day
1,100
1,160
1,220
1,300
1,350
1,400
Average Delay Minutes
12.5
14.9
16.6
24.0
35.7
47.8
Cancellation Probabilty
4.8%
4.4%
6.8%
7.3%
9.2%
13.0%
Source: Mukherjee, A., Lovell, D., Ball, M., Odoni A. and Zertoib, G. "Modeling Delays and Cancelllation
Probilities to Support Strategic Simulations" from proceedings of 6th USA/Europe Air Traffic
Management R&D Seminar, 2005
To facilitate the present analysis, exponential functions were fit to the UMD
simulation results for both delays and cancellations. These results are shown in
Exhibits 3 and 4, which include the functional form of the equations.
Exhibits: UMD Delay Simulation Runs for LaGuardia
60.0
S 50.0
_
•§• 40.0
0.0
delay minutes per operation = o.07eoow6dll*0fw
R2 = 0.9605
*47.8
1000 1100 1200 1300
Operations
1400 1500
31
Exhibit 4: UMD Cancellation Simulation Runs for LaGuardia
0.140
0.120
i1 0.100
o 0.080
0040
0.020
0.000
Prob. of cancellation = 0.001 •
R2 * 0.9088
1000 11 OH 1200 1300
Operations
1400 1500
To estimate likely delays in the absence of a cap, the total number of operations
at LGA on a sample day was developed, consisting of:
Scheduled Commercial Operations
- Less cancellations (estimated using the relationship in Exhibit 4 between
the probability of cancellation and the number of scheduled flights).
- In addition, the expected number of unscheduled operations, according to
the FAA Slot Office, is 48 per day.
In the preliminary regulatory evaluation, FAA examined exemption requests
filed by the carriers after AIR 21 relaxed the cap for regional jet flying in the fall of 2000.
Exemption requests for more than 600 flights at LGA were filed with the Department of
Transportation and approved. By September 2000, air carriers had added nearly 200
new scheduled flights at LGA with plans to operate more than 300 new flights by the
32
end of January 2001. Since no new airport infrastructure or air traffic control
procedures were created or implemented/ capacity remained the same while the
number of aircraft operations and delays soared. By analyzing these requests and the
infrastructure of the airport, we concluded that approximately 1,340 operations would
be scheduled at LGA. Using the cancellation rates from the schedule shown above, we
concluded that on the average day about 9.5% (or 129) of these operations would be
cancelled resulting in 1,211 flown commercial flights. Add to these the 48 average
unscheduled operations at the airport, and the typical day at LGA would find 1,259
operations, which on average would be delayed approximately 23 minutes. In contrast,
at today's level of operations, average delays are estimated to average 15.7 minutes
(almost 32 percent less). Note that these delay estimates are net of cancellations and
also do not take account of the additional time incorporated into carrier schedule
times.14 In our August 29, 2006 Initial Regulatory Evaluation we provided estimates of
the benefits of a cap at LGA. While our original proposal included an upgauging
provision that is not part of this supplemental proposal, in the initial year there was no
effective upgauging. We have updated that year's estimate of benefits to reflect the
limited inflation that has ensued since that estimate was made. We have also adjusted
our estimate downwards to exclude the downstream costs of delay that are avoided due
the cap; we are in the process of revising our methodology on these types of costs and
prefer to exclude them pending completion of our work in this area.
14
 Average block times at LaGuardia, like most US airports, have increased over time as carriers "pad"
schedules to better reflect actual travel tunes; this has the effect of lowering reported delays, which are
incorporated into the scheduled block times.
33
Using the adjusted one-year net benefit estimate over the time horizon of the
proposed rule, we conclude that the cap provides discounted benefits of approximately
$2.02 billion.J5 The details of these calculations can be found in Appendix A.
Longer Term Costs of Instituting a Cap
Under this rulemaking, there will be a reduction in flights into LGA compared to
what would occur without caps. The 2006 Initial Regulatory Evaluation estimated the
value of these flight reductions and deducted them from the delay benefits of the caps
to calculate overall net benefits.16
The net benefits of a cap in the 2006 evaluation were based on a snapshot of the
market for air service at LGA and what is known about the 600 flight offers made by
carriers in the brief period after AIR 21,17 These additional flight offers would increase
the average frequency, average number of seats offered, costs, revenues, delays and
cancellations incurred at LGA. The 2006 evaluation estimated the net change in
consumer and producer surplus due to the additional flying. The results suggested that
operations beyond the cap impose a net cost to society, even though some consumers
and producers might benefit from them.
Some have observed that there are some longer-term costs of a cap unless there
are provisions made to create opportunities for entry. If, as was the case under the
15
 Estimate based on a 7% discount rate. The net present value of benefits this reduction in avarege delay is
$2.49 billion based on a 3% discount rate.
16
 See Appendix A for more information.
17
 See the "Background and Need for the Regulation" section of this Regulatory Evaluation for additional
information on carrier filings of proposed flights under AIR-21.
34
HDR, slots are allocated on a semi-permanent basis to carriers, then adverse incentives
may come into play. Incumbents tend to overvalue slots because incentives exist to
hold them for competitive reasons (to prevent entry) and because they are so difficult to
replace. New entrants tend to undervalue slots if, because there is no other way to
acquire them, the government grants exemptions to the cap. In the long run, air service
at the airport is hindered because potential entry is slowed or halted entirely. There is
little basis for exchange between slot holders and those who want to increase their slot
holdings. These matters are discussed in detail below.
In this SNPRM, FAA hopes to avoid at least some of these longer-term costs by
instituting a periodic auction of some slots. The intent is to better define the property
rights to remove some of the adverse incentives and make at least some slots leases
available periodically to allow for potential entry and changes in air service. In
addition, holders of Limited Slots may find it advantageous to sublease them knowing
that these assets will be subject to reallocation via auction.
Option Cases for the Present Regulation
In addition to the cap, the FAA is proposing to institute a longer-term slot
program featuring an auction mechanism. With the exception of the retirement of two
percent of eligible slots in Option 1 (discussed below), the delay experience should be
identical in the option cases. The main objective of the auction is to improve the
allocation of resources; economists measure such improvements in terms of economic
efficiency, which we discuss in detail below. The costs of the rule are likely to be
35
isolated to the resource cost of conducting the auction for both the FAA and the carrier
participants, and the opportunity cost of the slot retirement under option 1. Finally,
there are important distributional effects that may result from the reallocation of slots.
Economic Efficiency
Implementing either of the two proposed options for auctioning slots at LGA
would likely result in some reallocation of scarce resources at the airport. The economic
efficiency resulting from this reallocation is an important consideration in assessing the
desirability of slot auctions. A reallocation of resources improves economic efficiency if
society prefers the goods and services produced under the new allocation to those
produced under the initial allocation. Typically, we measure society's preferences for
alternative bundles of goods and services by estimating the total surplus (consumers' as
willingness-to-pay for the good or services minus their production cost) they generate
for society. Thus, a change in resource allocation improves economic efficiency if, net of
costs, society as a whole is willing to pay more for the new bundle of goods and services
than it was for the bundle produced at the baseline allocation of resources.
Air carriers and their customers (i.e., consumers of passenger and cargo services)
are two of the principal stakeholders involved in slot use at LGA. While increasing
total welfare, a change in slot use at the airport is also likely to improve the welfare of
some of these stakeholders at the expense of others. For example, the slot auctions are
likely to result in some new air transport services and the termination of some existing
services. As a result, consumers of the new transport services are likely to benefit from
36
the new resource allocation, partly at the expense of consumers of terminated services.
Similarly, some air carriers who acquire slot rights during the auctions are likely to
benefit from the new regime, while carriers who lose slots would likely suffer losses. In
short, the change in resource allocation resulting from the slot auctions is likely to
benefit some members of society while others would likely suffer welfare losses.
The airport authority, the New York area and outlying communities are also
stakeholders in slot use but would not directly participate in the auction. Their welfare
may also be affected by the change in air service patterns that result from slot
reallocation.
The scenario described above is typical of most public policies affecting resource
use; some members of society benefit, others are made worse-off, while (hopefully) the
total social welfare of society increases. There is a commonly adopted standard for
economic efficiency in these cases. Specifically, a change in resource allocation is said to
improve economic efficiency if the beneficiaries can potentially compensate the losers for
loses and still be better off.18
The remainder of this section assesses qualitatively the likely effects of the
proposed slot auctions on the relative economic efficiency of resource allocation, as
defined above. A brief summary of conclusions is as follows:
18
 A different, arguably stricter standard states that a reallocation of resources improves efficiency if the
welfare of at least one member of society is made better-off, and no member of society is made worse-off.
However, because losers are rarely compensated for losses, this strict standard would almost never be
satisfied in any regulation, which often by definition is an attempt by the government to use its power to
impose costs on one group for the benefit of others. As a result, most policy evaluations adopt the standard
of potential compensation, and then describe how benefits and costs are distributed among various
members of society. We describe the distributional impacts of the proposed slot auctions elsewhere in this
report.
37
The current slot allocation has evolved from administrative and regulatory
controls and a slot exemption lottery. These allocation methods are unlikely
to have resulted in the best use of the limited slots at LGA. The secondary
slot market has probably resulted in an improved slot allocation relative to a
pure administrative program. However, this market has not been robust, in
part because property rights have not been well defined. In addition, because
slots have been granted for free as exemptions in the past some potential new
entrants may undervalue them now. Furthermore, incumbents may have
incentives to strategically hold slots for competitive reasons and they may
have been reluctant to part with slots having quasi-permanent lives, which
are not easily replaced.
Slot auctions may improve economic efficiency because carriers with the best
slot uses are likely to submit winning bids during the auctions. Slot turnover
should reduce barriers to entry at LGA and promote efficiency by allowing
carriers to better respond to changing market conditions.
The two proposed options for slot auctions are similar in most respects.
Option 2 calls for more slots to be auctioned during the first five years of the
program; however, Option 1 should also generate benefits. Other differences
between the two options are discussed below.
38
Baseline Allocation of LGA Slots
It is apparent from the LGA history that the existing slot allocations at the airport
have evolved from several layers of regulatory and administrative controls including
the initial allocation of slots in 1968, the redistribution of slots via scheduling committee
until 1985, the granting of slot exemptions in the 1990's, the further granting of
exemptions in 2000 resulting from the rush to enter in the wake of AIR 21 legislation,
and the temporary cap we imposed at the end of 2006. It is highly unlikely that these
regulatory and administrative controls have resulted in economically efficient uses of
scarce LGA slots. The market for commercial airline services is simply too dynamic to
expect a quasi-permanent allocation of criticaly limited LaGuardia slots to have resulted
in economically efficient outcomes over time.
FAA believes the presence of a secondary slot market has improved allocations
resulting from regulatory and administrative controls. The secondary market has
included buy/sell and sub-leasing arrangements. In theory, a well-functioning
secondary market can redress many misallocations in the primary market.
Unfortunately, in the past the secondary market for carriers seeking to increase their
holdings of LGA slots has not been robust The FAA has seldom observed more than a
few slots available in the secondary market, except in cases when one carrier is buying
another. Carriers desiring to add slots to their portfolios have frequently been unable to
find sellers.
39
FAA believes the lack of robustness in the secondary market is likely a symptom
of a larger problem shared by the HDR and the current temporary order. First, the
property rights to slots have not been well defined. Second, in part to address the lack
of robustness in the market, some slots have been granted to new entrant carriers via
exemptions in an attempt to increase competition at the airport. New entrants may
have become conditioned to expect that this process would continue. At the same time,
incumbents may expect that the government was unlikely to grant them additional slots
via exemptions and so have an incentive to hold on to them, knowing that there might
be little opportunity to increase their holdings in the future.
Moreover, incumbents who are potential sellers may fear that relinquishing slots
would result in increased network competition from potential slot buyers. Each
incumbent knows that there may be at least some alternative uses of slots that could be
more profitably exploited by another carrier, and that they may be able to sell some of
their slots in the secondary market in such a circumstance and increase (at least
temporarily) the value of their firm. However, the incumbent cannot be sure of the
future use and so is reluctant to relinquish control of an asset that could be used to
compete against them. In other words the "value" of the slot to the incumbent firm
may include the loss in their own profitability. For example, if in the future a new
entrant was able to assemble a number of slots and use them to fly to its hub, the result
could be increased competition across much of the incumbent's network.
Thus, incumbent slot holders have incentives to hold slots. This behavior,
although individually rational, likely results in sub-optima! use of some slots at LGA, and
40
has prevented the secondary market from completely addressing inefficient slot
assignments that have evolved from regulatory and administrative controls.
In extreme cases, the slots may be little used for landings, but held simply for
strategic purposes, leading to a very inefficient utilization of LGA. One of the defenses
against this has been the "use-it or lose-it rule/' which mandates that carriers use their
slots 80 percent of the time. This rule increases the cost to carriers of this type of strategic
behavior; however, the incentive to hold onto a slot higher valued by a competitor may
still exist even if that slot were being utilized.
Carriers have shown a greater willingness to "sublease" slots to another carrier
than to sell them. One reason is that by leasing to another carrier rather than selling, the
incumbent carrier retains "title" to the slots. This allows the carrier to preserve its
potential use while realizing lease payments from the slot that, in theory, should exceed
the owning carrier's own short-term profits from using the slot. Another benefit is the
ability to secure financing by the slot owner, using the slot as collateral, even though it
may be leased out. In a lease transaction, one might expect the incumbent carrier to
prefer and select a leaseholder that will not use slots in ways that negatively affect the
incumbent's network profitability. Incumbents can write provisions in the lease allowing
them to recapture the leased-out slots on short notice, perhaps to fulfill their own needs
or if they find that the lesee's service has caused greater than expected network harm (of
course, this may lower the value of the lease). Incumbents might also use slot leasing to
gain other in-kind services (e.g., handling, access to software) from another firm. Seen
from this perspective, leasing does provide a mechanism for greater use of under-utilized
41
slot assets, but does not necessarily result in the best or most efficient use of slots. Those
carriers with the highest potential use of the slots could easily be shut out of the market
entirely.
FAA is not alone in our observations about ill-defined property rights and the
consequent problems in the secondary market. In a recent paper by the Economic
Analysis Group of the U.S. Department of Justice, the authors note that:
A lack of clear property rights could have contributed to the apparent problems in
the secondary market. Under FAA regulations, slots are operating authorizations,
not property rights, and the FAA retains the right to repossess them at any time.
This uncertainty can impose substantial transactions costs because parties to a slot
transaction may have to specify a variety of contingencies to the transaction and it
may reduce the economic value of a slot.. .The structure of the slot system may
also have led incumbents and potential entrants to systematically value slots
differently, preventing what otherwise would be efficient transactions.19
Improving property rights in the proposed rulemaking should improve the workings of
the secondary market.
Slot Auctions and Economic Efficiency
Slot auctions are a market-based solution to the slot allocation problem. The
notion that auctions will improve the economic efficiency of slot use is straightforward.
Those carriers with the best uses for slots will have the highest wiliingness-to-pay and
should submit winning bids during the auctions. Winning bidders would be conveyed
a well-defined property right to schedule operations at LGA over the life of the lease.
19
 Whalen, Carlton, Heyer, Richard: "Proposal for a Market-Based Solution to Airport Delays" Economic
Analysis Group, US Department of Justice (October, 2007) page 8.
42
Note that this result, allocation by willingness-to-pay, is consistent with our earlier
criterion for the preferred or most economically efficient resource allocation.
Air carriers and their customers, consumers of air transport services, are
principal stakeholders in how slots are allocated and used. During the auctions,
however, only the air carriers would be active participants. Accordingly, air carriers
would act as economic agents for consumers during the auctions. It is reasonable to
assume that air carriers' bids on slots would be motivated primarily by profit potential.
Consumers, on the other hand, benefit primarily from a higher valued level of flights
arriving in LaGuardia. This higher value could manifest itself in many ways: service
and schedule quality, reduced travel times, lower prices, etc. While the motives of air
carriers and their customers are not perfectly aligned, FAA believes they coincide
closely in this case. The demand for slots is ultimately derived from the demand for air
travel. The best uses of the slots are likely to be the most profitable among the set of
alternative slot uses, at least in part because they are valued the most highly or are
demanded by the most potential air travelers. As a result, if air carriers submit bids on
slots motivated by their own profits, they would serve as efficient economic agents for
their customers.
Carriers may still have incentives to hold slots to prevent competitive entry.
However, under an auction, carriers would have to pay cash to preserve this strategy
(although in Option 2 the net cash outlay for incumbents may be small). When a slot
lease expires, if a holding carrier's potential loss of network profits exceeds the
willingness of the next highest bidder to pay for a slot, then the holding carrier may
43
succeed in preserving its position. However, at a minimum, the proposed rule should
increase the cost of holding slots to prevent entry.
In addition to causing a reallocation of slots among uses and/or air carriers
currently serving LGA, the auctions are also likely to afford new carriers opportunities
for entry at the airport. While there are some differences in details, both of the
proposed slot auctions prescribe defined lives (about one to four years) for some slots,
which then would be reallocated via auctions. This turnover of slots should create
opportunities for actual or potential entry by new carriers, thus reducing barriers to
entry and stimulating competition in markets served by LGA carriers. Slot turnover
would also promote efficiency as it accommodates market dynamics. As markets for air
transport services change over time, the best or most efficient uses of slots change
accordingly. The auctions create opportunities for carriers to react to fluid markets.
Both of the proposed options for slot auctions stipulate a finite life on all LGA
slot leases, a maximum of ten years. This arrangement contrasts sharply with the quasi-
permanent lives of slots under the HDR. The finite slot lives under the proposed
options should increase the ability of the market for LGA air carriers' services to
accommodate entry by new carriers and overall market dynamics. Also, it is
anticipated that finite slot lives may create more fluidity and efficiency in secondary slot
markets.2o The quasi- permanent slot life under the HDR may have made carriers with
marginal uses for some slots reluctant to offer them in secondary markets for fear that
they may have better uses for these slots in the future. The lack of robustness in
20
 Both of the proposed options allow for secondary slot markets including, sub-leasing and slot swaps.
44
secondary slot markets is likely to compound this fear. The finite slot lives under the
proposed options may reduce this motive for holding onto slots with marginal uses and
create more robust secondary slot markets.
Economic Efficiency of Options 1 and 2: A Comparison
The two proposed slot options are similar in most respects. There are, however,
some differences between the two options that could affect economic efficiency.21
Option 1 grandfathers 90 percent of the LGA slots with ten-year lives, and 10 percent
with Limited Slots that have shorter leases. Of the ten percent with shorter lives, 8
percent would be reallocated via five annual auctions beginning in January 2009, and
the remaining 2 percent would be retired. Option 2 grandfathers 80 percent of the LGA
slots, also with ten-year lives. The remaining 20 percent would be Limited Slots with
have shorter leases and be reallocated via auction. No slots would be retired under
Option 2.22
Option 2 prescribes a more rapid pace for more slot turnover during the first five
years of the program. To the extent that the auction improves economic efficiency, we
might expect Option 2 to produce larger benefits, although incumbents will have the
21
 The FA A recognizes that the percentage of slots the agency proposes to reallocate represents a relatively
small percentage of the total number of slots at the airport particularly since up to 20 of each carrier's slot
will not be subject to reversion. Accordingly, we do not know the extent to which the percentages proposed
under either option are sufficient to ensure the opportunity for new entry and an efficient allocation of slots
among all carriers at the airport, such that each slot is allocated to the user who values it the most highly. In
addition, the agency would consider other percentages of slots available for auction (both in total and
annually) sufficient to assure an efficient allocation of this scarce resource.
22
 Both options provide a "protected" base. If a carrier holds 20 or fewer slots, then those slots would have
ten year lives. Also, 42 Canadian slots will be protected under both options.
45
benefit of some offsetting auction receipts in this option, and therefore may retain many
of their slots.
Eventually, two percent of the existing LGA slots would be retired under Option
1, while none would be retired under Option 2. Eliminating some slots is likely to
produce the benefits of reduced delays at LGA, but at the same time, affected carriers
and their customers would lose the benefits associated with the foregone flights. Thus,
the net effect of this feature of Option 1 would depend on the magnitude of the benefits
of reduced delay relative to the adverse impacts associated with reduced air transport
services.
Under Option 1, revenues generated by the auctions would be used to defray
auction costs and to fund capacity expansion projects at the airport. Under Option 2,
after the FAA recoups the cost of the auction, auction revenues would go to incumbent
slot holders. Also, under Option 2, incumbents may not bid on their own slots. The
disposition of auction revenues involves transfer payments, and would not directly
affect economic efficiency. However, denying incumbents the right to bid on their own
slots could reduce the efficiency of auctions if incumbent slot holders have the most
efficient use of their slots, or if, because of small numbers, incumbents find that there
are no one-for-one replacements of their slots to bid on. On the other hand, incumbents
would be compensated for any slots reallocated in the auction, and would have in-
coming funds to use in bidding for other slots available. The net cash cost to
incumbents of participating in the Option 2 auction would thus likely to be muted,
while new entrants would have to face cash outlays without any corresponding offsets.
46
Characterizing Benefits from Reallocation
No one can say for sure how many slots would change hands and what the net
effects would be from the auction. However, for the reasons just discussed, there
would be some improvements in economic efficiency. Exhibit 5 shows the
characteristics of commercial air service at LGA during the base period defined for this
rulemaking - January 2007. Operations at the airport are dominated by legacy carriers
(flying standard jets) and their code share regional partners (operating turboprops—
props-and regional jets —RJs). Legacy, prop and RJ operators offer more frequency in
markets than do low cost carriers (LCCs), which have a relatively small share of
scheduled operations (seven percent), when compared with national trends. Standard
jet operations by legacy and LCCs produce more seats and passengers per slot-use, fly
longer distances and have lower costs per seat-hour than either prop or RJ operators.
Load factors for all operations at LGA were relatively low in January of 2007.
Exhibit 5: Air Service Characterises at LaGuardia in January 2007
Weekday Scheduled Flights
Pet of Daily Schedule
Total Seats Offered (roundtrip)
Pet of Seats Offered
Number of Markets
Pet of Markets
Avg. Roundtnps
Avg Passengers per Operation
Total Passengers per day
Pet of Total Passengers
Avg. Block Time
Avg, Variable Cost per Blk Hour
Avg. Segment Fare
Avg Load Factor (January 2007)
Avg. Seat Size
Avg. Cost per Seat Hour
Legacy
506
42%
71306
64%
29
29%
8.72
91
45850
67%
2.27
$3,428
$155
64%
141
$24.33
Prop
164
14%
5612
5%
16
16%
5.13
11
1863
3%
1.45
$1,027
$68
33%
34
$30.02
RJ
442
37%
21842
20%
44
44%
5.02
25
11074
16%
1.82
$1,482
$131
51%
49
$29.99
LCC
88
7%
12826
11%
11
11%
4.00
104
9145
13%
2.57
$3,075
$117
71%
146
$21.10
Source: OAG, DB1a third quarter 2007, Form 41 reports by carrier
47
Because this service pattern is largely a product of the regulatory and
administrative allocation of slots, it is likely to change when some access rights are
auctioned off. Carriers would have to pay cash for some portion of LGA capacity and
make their business cases work in competition with other bidders. The auction should
encourage the most efficient use of the slots made available, resulting in an increase in
societal benefits.
To give some dimension to the potential size of these benefits, Exhibit 6 shows
the average surplus (consumer and producer) for operations at LGA in January of 2007
using the methodology applied in the regulatory evaluation of our earlier proposal
published August 29,2006.23 These estimates are offered only as indicative of the
relative value to society of different types of air services at LGA. Any one service may
be far different than the average. Details on the methodology are available in that
document and in Appendix A below. The method accounts for delay and cancellation
costs, cash outlays and time expended by both consumers and operators at LGA in the
average markets described in Exhibit 5 in a so-called full price of travel framework.24
The exact values of the estimates are less important than their relative size. What
we are interested in is whether the reallocation of even a few slots is likely to offset the
costs to society of running the auction. Given the estimates of the costs of the rule
(discussed below), FAA estimates that the answer is yes. On average, a reallocation of
23
 2006 Initital Regulatory Evaluation, Initial Regulatory Fkxibility Determination, Trade Impact Assessment and
Unfunded Mandate Reform Act Assessment, Congestion Management Rule for LaGuardia Airport. Prepared by GRA
Incorporated. There are some differences in approach discussed in Appendix A.
24
 Please see Appendix A for a discussion of the full price of travel.
48
one operation from lower valued flying to higher valued flying results in net benefits to
society of $3.3 million annually.
This analysis is simply meant to be illustrative of the potential efficiency gains of
an auction. There is no way to be sure how slots would be reallocated; indeed, the
whole point of the auction is to unleash market forces in the pursuit of a better
allocation for society. The market should cause the scarce slot resources to go to the
highest valued users, regardless of the size of aircraft.
Exhibit 6: Indicative Average Surplus to Society Produced by a Flight at LGA
TOTAL SURPLUS per Operation
Annual Surplus per Operation
LOG
$9,936
$3,626,646
LEGACY JET
$10,798
$3,941,202
PROP
$115
$42,052
RJ
$2,491
$909,369
Reallocation Example
Annual
Surplus Change
From
RJ
RJ
Turboprop
Turboprop
To
Legacy
LCC
Legacy
LCC
$3,031,813
$2,717,257
$3,899,150
$3,584,594
Average $3,308,204
Of course, Exhibit 6 shows average, not marginal, values. Some small aircraft
operations are doubtless extremely valuable and will compete well for the scarce slot
assets (see our discussion of small community service below). However, the values do
give some dimension to the possible benefits of reallocation that result from higher
valued flying at LGA. If only a few slots move from lower valued to higher valued
flying, the benefits to society are likely to exceed the costs of the rule (discussed below).
49
Higher valued users should acquire some slots in the auction and our numerical
estimates in Exhibit 6 can be used to illustrate the benefits of this process. Whether
those higher valued operations would be with larger or smaller aircraft is not known.
At LGA, a carrier's current slot portfolio may or may not be big enough to fully
implement its best business plan; our intent is also to give carriers the opportunity to
adjust their slot portfolios and to allow the market to test the associated business case via
the auction, thus improving the allocation of resources.
The Benefits of Reduced Delays and Cancellations in Option 1
FAA has developed an estimate of the costs saved by consumers and operators
under Option 1 after two percent of eligible slots are retired. In Option 1, slots held by
operators with fewer than 20 slots and Canadian and non-scheduled operators are not
subject to retirement. As a result, approximately 1.5 percent of scheduled slots (18)
would be retired. Nevertheless, the retirement would result in a noticeable (almost one
minute) reduction in average delay, according to the UMD model described previously.
To estimate annual benefits of the delay savings including the lost surplus from
reduced flights, the surplus model was reevaluated at lower levels of flying. Details of
the analysis are shown in Appendix A. Once they are fully implemented in year five of
the rule, the annual estimated net benefits due to delay reductions are approximately
$23.1 million (net of lost surplus).25
25
 This estimate assumes that airlines delete some or all of the service in low operating profit markets, which
may include one or more round-trips per day to the same airport. We also assume that carriers delete an
even number of operations so that a total of 22 operations are deleted if 18 slots are retired. The number of
50
Costs of the Proposed Rulemaking
The only economic costs of the rule relate to the public and private sectors costs
of creating, operating and participating in the auction. Many of the features of the
proposed rulemaking in terms of reporting requirements for carriers and administrative
overheads for the FAA are little changed from today's environment.
The price paid for a slot in an auction is not an economic cost of the rule, but
rather is a transfer payment from the buyer either to the FAA (in Option 1) or, after
FAA recoups the cost of the auction, to the incumbent holder (in Option 2). The auction
itself does not create slots or provide other services. It is merely a reallocation
mechanism, which is by definition a transfer process. The proposed rule would
substitute a market mechanism for an administrative/regulatory one. The only
resource costs are related to the cost of the auction itself, and in option 1, the foregone
surplus of the slots that are retired26
Regarding the cost of the auction, the FAA is in the process of undertaking a
market survey of potential contractors capable of designing and implementing an
auction by December 2008. We intend to issue an RFP for such services in the near
term. The agency also recognizes that carriers would incur some costs in preparing for
and participating in an auction of LGA slots. Our preliminary view is that the costs to
slots retired and the number of operations reduced for each airline is as follows: American (5 slots; 6
operations), Delta (4,4), Northwest (1,2), United (1,2), US Airways (7,8). In the cost-benefit analysis, these
benefits are phased-in over five years.
26
 There is a requirement for GA operators to acquire a reservation (beyond any flight plan they might file)
at LGA; this process is already automated and should not add appreciably to either private or public sector
costs. The costs to private charter operators of acquiring a reservation in advance should be little changed
from today.
51
the FAA and the carriers to participate in the auction would not vary appreciably when
comparing Options 1 and 2; the absolute number of slots available in the auction would
not change the amount of work involved in designing the software, acquiring the secure
communications links, designing other features of the auction, or the amount of work
carriers need undertake to prepare for the mock and actual auctions.
Based on past experience, the FAA believes there would be few if any slots
returned to the FAA under the use/lose provisions of the rule; carriers would be better
off subleasing slots in the secondary market. Therefore, the agency has not made
provisions for reallocating returned slots in years six through ten in the cost estimates.
However, even if the costs were identical to those in years one through five, the
rulemaking would be more than justified (see below).
Exhibit 7 summarizes the estimated costs of the proposed rule. The preliminary
estimate of the cost to the government is that the first year cost including design of the
auction would require between $2.4 and $6.3 million, and that the annual cost of each
auction would be on the order of $975,000 to $1.45 million. These relatively wide ranges
reflect in part the FAA's intent to contract out virtually all aspects of the auction, save
its role in supervising the overall process. The FAA has included $0.1 to $0.2 million for
the one-time "fair allocation" of slot lives discussed earlier. To manage the auction
process, the agency has assumed that FAA would devote two full person-years of effort
in each of the auction years, assuming GS-14, totaling $0.5 million in costs annually.
Finally, the FAA has assumed that the private sector costs of participating in the auction
would equal those of the government. These participation costs will likely vary
52
substantially from carrier to carrier. Some carriers may choose to build elaborate
valuation tools to assist them in the auction process; others may simply establish a
"business case" and a "not to exceed" figure and allow their representatives to bid as
they see fit.
The agency notes that in the NEXTOR mock auction, carriers understood the
auction process and how to bid in their own best interest. Both incumbents and
potential new entrants have data and information available to them from their route
profitability systems and from market planning tools to help them establish bidding
strategies in the auction.
With respect to the private sector costs, some carriers currently engaged in trying
to acquire slots may be expending resources contacting holders and/or making special
pleadings to government for access. Some of these costs would be avoided once the
auction and secondary market features are implemented.
Exhibit 7: Estimated Resource Cost of Auction Over Five Years
Estimated Resource Cost of the Auction
Low High
Fixed Costs
Recurring Cost First Year
Total First Year Costs
Cost: Auctions 2-5
Total Government Costs
Estimated Private Sector Costs
TOTAL RESOURCE COSTS
1,450,000
975.000
4,800,000
1.450.000
2,425,000 6,250,000
3.900.000 5.800.000
6,325,000 12,050,000
6,325,000 12,050,000
12,650,000 24,100,000
Estimates are very preliminary and subject to change
53
Summary of the Benefits and Costs of the Proposed Rule
Through implementation of an auction, FAA estimates that this proposed rule
would result in a long-term improvement in the allocation of scarce slot resources at
LaGuardia Airport in New York (LGA). As shown in Exhibit 8, the estimated present
value of net benefits of improved slot allocation is between $65 and $197 million from
2009-2019. The costs of the rule, with a present value between $12 and $23 million, are
due to the design, implementation and participation in an auction of slots.27
This regulatory impact analysis also assumes as a baseline that in the absence of
this rulemaking, FAA would not otherwise impose a cap on aircraft operations at LGA.
Therefore, consistent with the Initial Regulatory Evaluation undertaken for the agency's
2006 notice of proposed rulemaking for LGA, the FAA estimates that, through the long
term implementation of a cap on aircraft operations, this proposed rule would result in
about a 32% reduction in the average delay per operation at LGA relative to a situation
with no cap. This reduction in average delay generates present value net benefits of
about $2.02 billion from 2009-2019.28
Previously the FAA has noted that the main objective of the present rulemaking
is to promote an efficient allocation of slots at LGA. The FAA does not know what the
outcome of the auction would be, but has suggested that all other things being equal,
larger aircraft service should have advantages simply because there would be more
27
 Present value costs and benefits are based on a 7% discount rate. At a 3% disount rate, the estimated
present value of net benefits of improved slot allocation is between $86 and $251 million from 2009-2019.
Since the costs of the rule are low, the present value of costs at 3% is about the same when rounded.
28
 Estimate based on a 7% discount rate. The net present value of benefits this reduction in avarege delay is
$2.49 billion based on a 3% discount rate.
54
revenue and potential profit to cover the cash payment for a slot. We have provided
some indicative values for different types of service at LGA and the implications if one
is substituted for another. However, some very high valued operations with smaller
aircraft may also be made possible by the proposed rule, but these are hard to
anticipate. Furthermore, some operations with small aircraft would likely be preserved
because carriers would look at network contribution of a service. Finally, incumbent
carriers may continue to have incentives to hold slots and would be particularly
advantaged in Option 2 where auction proceeds would tend to offset their bids for slots.
As noted above, in Option 1, there would be delay reductions of a bit more than
a minute per operation (on average) that would result from the retirement of
approximately 1.5 percent of slot capacity at LGA; with an additional cost of the surplus
foregone from these retired slots.
On net, it would not take much in terms of benefits from reallocation to offset the
costs of this rulemaking. Only a few slots need to be reallocated to higher use to justify
the rule, as shown in Exhibit 8, where it is assumed that only one slot is reallocated
from smaller to standard jet aircraft in each year the auction is held. This means that
over the five years of the auction, seven percent of the slots available in Option 1 would
be reallocated (5/71) or three percent of the slots in Option 2 (5/179). However, more
broadly, the agency believes that an improved market mechanism will always provide
greater net benefits to society than an allocation process that is primarily administrative
and regulatory. This is the key economic justification for this rulemaking.
55
Exhibits: Benefits and Costs of the Rulemaking
Net Benefits of Option 1 ($ mil)
Option 1
Option 1
Benefit of Reallocatkxi Delay Benefit Total Benefits
1 Slot in ea of 5 years
$
$ 3.3
$ 6.6
$ 9.9
S 13.2
J 16.5
$ 16.5
S 16.5
S 16.5
$ 16.5
$ 16.5
S
S 4.6
S 9.2
$ 13.6
S 18.5
$ 23.1
S 23.1
$ 23.1
S 23.1
S 23,1
S 23.1
$
$ 7.9
$ 15-8
$ 23.8
$ 31.7
$ 39.6
$ 39.6
$ 39.6
$ 39.6
S 39.6
S 39.6
Discounted Present Value 121.7 $ 206.9
Option 1 Option 1
Net Benefits NPV of Net Benefits
High Low High Low
$ (12.5)
S 5.0
S 12.9
$ 20.9
$ 28.8
$ 39.6
$ 39.6
t 39.6
S 39.6
S 39.6
£ 39.6
I (4.9)
$ 6.0
$ 13.9
S 21.8
$ 29.7
$ 39.B
$ 39.6
S 39.8
S 39.6
S 396
J 396
$ (12.5)
$ 4.7
S 11.3
S 17.0
$ 22.0
S 28.2
S 26.4
J 24.7
S 23.1
$ 21.5
S 20.1
S (4.9)
S 5.6
5 12.1
S 17.8
S 22.7
S 28.2
S 26.4
S 24.7
S 23.1
J 21.5
$ 20.1
Discounted Present Value S 196 5 S 197.4
Net Benefit* of Option 2 ($ mil)
Option 2
| Option 2
Benefit of Realiocation Delay Benefit Total Benefits
1 Stol in ea of 5 years
-
3.3
6.6
9.9
13.2
16.5
$ 16.5
$ 16.5
$ 16.5
S 16.5
$ 16.5
S
5
$
$
$
*$
S
S$
J
*S 3.3
S 6.6
S 9.9
$ 13.2
S 16.5
$ 16.5
$ 16.5
S 16.5
I 16.5
S 16.5
Discounted Present Value $ 87.2
Option 2
Net Benefits
High
$ (12.5)
J 0.4
S 3.7
$ 7.0
$ 10.3
S 18.5
S 16.5
S 16.5
S 16.5
S 16.5
$ 16.5
[ Option 2
NPV of Net Benefits
Low High Low
S (4.9)
S 1.4
£ 4.7
$ 8.0
S 11.3
S 16.5
S 16.5
5 16.5
S 16.5
$ 16.5
$ 16.5
* (12.5)
$ 0.4
S 3.2
$ 5.7
$ 7.9
S 11.8
$ 11.0
S 10.3
S 9.6
$ 9,0
S 8.4
$ (4.9)
S 1.3
$ 4.1
$ 6.5
$ 8.6
J 11.8
S 11.0
$ 10.3
$ 9.6
$ 9.0
$ 8.4
Discounted Present Value $ 64.9 $ 75.8
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
Costs of the Rulemaking ($ mil)
Auction Costs to the Gov1! Auction Costs to Airlines Total Costs
High Low High Low High Low
$ 6.3
$ 1.5
$ 1.5
$ 1.5
$ 1.5
$
$
$
$
$
$
$ 2.4
$ 1.0
$ 1.0
$ 1.0
$ 1.0$$$$$
£
$ 6.3
$ 1.5
$ 1.5
$ 1.5
$ 1.5
$
$
$
$
$
$
$ 2.4
$ 1.0
$ 1.0
$ 1.0
$ 1,0$$
S$
$$
$ 12.5
$ 2.9
$ 2.9
$ 2.9
$ 2.9
$
$
$
$
$
$
$ 4.9
$ 2.0
$ 2.0
$ 2.0
$ 2.0
$
$
$
$
$
$
Discounted Present Value of Costs $ 22.3 $ 11.5
56
These estimates suggest that very little reallocation needs to take place for there
to be net benefits. However/ the FAA's decision to go forward with the rule depends
more importantly on the increased reliance on the market to allocate scarce resources
than on any exact estimate of benefits.
One feature of Option 1, the retirement of slots, could be undertaken without the
auction. Given the assumptions stated previously, the discounted net benefits of
Option 1 would then be identical to those for Option 2: $65 to $76 million over ten
years. This suggests that the retirement of 1.5 percent of slots increases benefits to
society over ten years by $121 million.
In developing our estimates/ the FAA has:
>•>- Assumed that the cost of the auction does not vary from Option 1 to Option 2;
one could argue that the cost to airlines would increase in Option 2 because
more slots would be involved. However/ once carriers are involved in an
auction, their annual costs should not vary greatly between Option 1 (14
slots) and Option 2 (36 slots).
*f Assumed that only one slot is reallocated in each of five years from turboprop
or RJ services to standard jet (LCC or legacy); the agency has used the
average difference in estimated annual surplus in these calculations.29
^ Estimated for Option 1 the value of delay benefits net of surplus losses as
indicated in our earlier discussion.
>> Expressed all values in 2008 dollars.
29
 To estimate net benefits of a reallocation, the change in surplus would be approximately equal to the
average for standard jets versus the average for RJ's and turboprops; this is indicative of the value of
reallocation although it is not meant to be an precise estimate.
57
Distributional Impacts of the Proposed Rule
This section discusses the distributional consequences of the rule for airlines,
small communities, the consumer and the airport operator.
Airlines
In discussing the distributional impacts of today's proposals, it is important to
state from the outset that the number of slots available for auction in both Options 1 and
2 have been established in full recognition of the historic investments made by
incumbent airlines at LGA and the public interest served by that investment. At LGA,
there are unit terminals in which incumbent carriers have rights and valuable
investments. The FAA also recognizes that any carrier that is a net acquirer of slots
would either already have surplus gate capacity at the right times of day or would need
to acquire it.
Since incumbent airlines have rights to gates, it was important to set the number
of slots available at a level that could be feasibly accommodated each year. In Option 1,
there would be about 14 slots available in each of the first five years of the proposed
program. If each slot requires about one hour of gate time, the 14 annual slots represent
about 1.1 percent of airport gate capacity - 14 slots versus 1200 gate hours (75 gates x 16
hours) to accommodate them. In Option 2, there would be 36 slots in the auction, or
about three percent of gate capacity. Of course, not all of the acquired slots would be
short of gates, so the actual need for incremental accommodation is less than the
58
numbers above suggest. The FAA estimates that at most, there would be 1 or 2 slots per
hour where a carrier might need a gate.
There are other important potential distributional issues that would affect
airlines; some would gain and some would lose. Exhibit 9 provides a summary of the
current operating authorities held by carriers, their base allocation (up to 20) under the
proposed rule, and the number of slots that would be retired (Option 1 only) or subject
to auction under the two options. Because carriers must think of slots in pairs — one
gate turn equals one arrival and one departure — for each carrier, the table summarizes
the number of slot pairs (one arrival and one departure) that would be subject to
auction and the average annual number of slot pairs in the auction in years 1-5.
Exhibit 9: LaGuardia Operating Authorizations and Implications of
Options 1 and 2
LaGuirdli Operating Authorization* and Implications of Options 1 and Z
Carrier
Air Canada
Air Iran Airways
Am en can/Am encan Eagle
ATA Airlines
Colgan Airways
Continental Ai dines
Dalta Air Lines/Com air
Frontier A id in as
JetBlue Airways
Midwest Ai Mines
Northwest Airlines
Spirit Airlines
Untied Airlines
US Airways/Piedmont
Total
Annual Auction
Unallocated'
600
1200
1-400
2000
2100
OA's Base
43
22
249
15
14
34
230
6
15
18
50
22
60
390
1168
42
20
20
15
14
20
20
6
15
18
20
20
20
20
270
18
1
1
5
7
I
Remaining
Slots after
tuicline
removed 2% Retired
1
2
229
0
0
14
210
0
0
0
30
2
40
370
696
0
0
5
0
0
0
4
0
0
0
1
0
1
7
16
Option 1
Auction
8% with
Age Less
than 10
Years
0
0
18
0
0
1
17
0
0
0
2
0
3
30
71
14
Average
Slots
Auctioned
Annually
Yrs. 1-5
0
0
36
0
0
0.2
3.4
0
0
0
0.4
0
0.6
6
Aver.ige
Slot Pairs
Auctioned Auction 20%
Annually win Age Less
Yrs. 1-5 than 10 Years
0
0
18
0
0
0.1
1.7
0
0
0
02
0
0.3
3
I
0
0
46
0
0
3
42
0
0
0
6
0
9
74
179
Option 2
Average
Slots
Auctioned
Annually
Yrs 1-5
0
0
9.2
0
0
0.6
8,4
0
0
0
1 2
0
1.6
148
Aveiage Slot
Pairs
Auctioned
Annually
Yra- 1-5
0
0
4.6
0
0
03
4.2
0
0
0
0.6
0
08
7.4
36
[TOOL 1200 Z2.S* 74 6% 1.5% 59* 1.2% 3.0%
59
There are 1200 operating authorizations at LGA today of which 1168 are
allocated to carriers. There are 14 holders of slots. Under the proposed rule, a carrier
must have more than 20 slots before any would be subject to auction; the exception is
the 42 Canadian slots noted previously. Thus, there are 898 slots above the baseline. In
Option I, two percent of the slots above the baseline would be retired. These slots
would potentially come from six carriers: American, Continental, Delta, Northwest,
United and US Airways.
The same carriers would have a total of 71 slots subject to auction over five years,
representing 5.9 percent of total capacity. On average 14 slots would be auctioned in
Option 1 in each of the first five years of the proposed program. Only one carrier
would have as many as six slots or three pairs auctioned in any one-year. Depending
on the city served, this is approximately equivalent to one airplane's worth of flying per
day. No other carrier has more than about half this much exposure, on average. Thus,
the exposure of any one carrier in the auction is relatively modest. At most, a carrier
might have to reallocate the equivalent of one airplane's worth of activity if it lost all
three pairs of its slots up for bid in a year. Of course, in Option 1, the incumbent holder
is free to bid on its own slots and has the advantage of an established service pattern to
support its efforts. Seen from this perspective, the distributional consequences of
Option 1 for incumbent holders should be relatively benign.
For those carriers seeking to enter LGA or increase levels of service at the airport,
Option 1 would provide an opportunity to buy the equivalent of two city pairs worth of
the same modest service levels described above (7 slots pairs available/3 slot pairs per
60
city). The package-bidding feature of the auction would allow all carriers to bid on slot
pairs that work logistically with their business plans. The package bidding feature
would be particularly important for new entrants who would need to assemble services
that are both attractive and work logistically. As a result, there should be opportunities
for new entrants and expanding carriers to acquire slots that would otherwise be
unavailable under the current rules.
Option 2 provides for almost fifteen percent of LGA capacity to be auctioned
over five years (three percent per year). The same six incumbent holders would have
slots subject to auction in both Options 1 and 2. However, it is important to consider
the consequences of the proposed rule that incumbents would face in Option 2 that
prohibits them from bidding on their own slots. The FAA's intent in this is to preclude
carriers from bidding up the prices on their own slots to foreclose other bidders and
then "paying themselves." Recall that the proceeds of the auction in Option 2 go to the
incumbent holders. Returning to Exhibit 9, note that that there would be 36 slots (18
pairs) up for auction each year; if no carrier has say more than eight pairs that it cannot
bid on (on average US Airways has 7.4 annually), there should be an adequate number
of slots to bid on so that incumbents would have the opportunity to replace their slots
even with our proposed bidding procedures.30
The opportunities for new entrant and expanding carriers is greater in Option 2
than in Option 1. Option 2 would provide these carriers with an opportunity in each of
30
 The FAA will attempt to auction an even number of slots during each hour to provide an opportunity for
a carrier to replace a slot that it is required to auction with a similar slot another carrier is required to
auction. Such replacements may not always be available.
61
the first five years of the program to acquire as much as 6 city-pairs worth of service
(assuming three round-trips per day). This is more than double the opportunity in
Option 1. At the same time, it is likely that incumbents would have an advantage in the
Option 2 auction because they can use proceeds from slot sales to finance purchases of
slots; new entrants or carriers seeking to add to their portfolios would be net cash
payers. However, the FAA anticipates that the amount of net proceeds would be small
from slot purchases given the extent of the proposed auctions.
Slot Values
Carriers would also be affected by the payments made for auctioned slots. In
Option 1, funds would be collected by the FAA to offset the cost of the auction and to
undertake capacity enhancements in New York. After the FAA has recouped its costs
associated with conducting the auction, in Option 2, auction proceeds would be
collected by incumbent holders of shorter-lived slots. In Option 1, funds would be
transferred from carriers to the FAA; in Option 2, funds would be transferred primarily
among carriers. The net revenue impacts on individual carriers would depend on the
outcome of the auction.
No one knows how much slot leases would trade for in the auction. It is the
FAA's understanding that slot leases have traded in the range of $3,000 to $20,000 per
month at LGA under the HDR. Slots have been sold in the range of $230,000 to over $1
million at LGA. Of course, historically HDR slots were treated as quasi-permanent
assets with indefinite lives whereas under the proposed rule. One of the most
62
important features of the proposed rule is to define more precisely the property rights
of the FAA and slot holders. Some observers have noted that in the past the
indeterminate nature of slot property rights may have adversely affected the secondary
market under the HDR. Slot holders may have been reluctant to sell slots for fear of
never having an opportunity to regain them in the future if their business prospects
changed.
The most recent lease transactions of which we are aware were in the range of
about $7500 per month. Using a 12 percent cost of capital over the slot lives ranging
from 6 to 10 years provides one way to estimate potential slot values in an auction.31
Exhibit 10 summarizes these values and the implied auction proceeds. We stress that
these are indicative values and the actual values in an auction may be different.
Exhibit 10: Indicative Slot Lease Values and Implied Auction Proceeds
Indicative Slot Lease Values and Implied Auction Proceeds
Average Monthly Value of a Slot $ 7,500
Cost of capital 12%
Lease
Year Value
Slot Life
2009 10 $ 522,754
2010 9 $ 493,933
2011 8 $ 461,458
2012 7 $ 424,863
2013 6 $ 383,628
Option 1
Slots Traded Value
14 $ 7,318,555
14 $ 6,915,068
14 $ 6,460,409
14 $ 5,948,088
14 $ 5,370,791
Total' $ 32,012,910
Option 2
Slots Traded Value
36 $ 18,819,141
36 $ 17,781,603
36 $ 16,612,480
36 $ 15,295,082
36 $ 13,810,606
Total" $ 82,318,912
* Funds collected by FAA
** Funds transferred among carriers
31
 This cost of capital is based on information from GRA Incorporated, the preparer of this Regulatory
Evaluation. The 12 percent cost of capital is used to estimate what an airline would pay for a slot; the airline
will look at its own weighted cost of capital (not the average for the economy in the long run). This is not
used to discount the benefits and costs of the proposed rule. It is used to make an average valuation of a
private asset based on other valuations of slots that have used rates approximtedly equal to 12 percent, It
might be argued that this is low given the cost of capital in today's aviation environment.
63
One way to gauge the effect of slot-related cash outlays on carriers is to compute
the slot value on a per seat-day basis. This is the amount that carriers would have to
amortize per seat offered in the marketplace. Clearly operators of larger aircraft are
advantaged in this comparison.
Exhibit 11: Value of a Slot per Seat Offered per Day
Average Monthly Value of a Slot $ 7,500
Seat Configuration
200
150
135
100
70
50
35
19
Value per Seat Day
$ 1.25
$ 1.67
$ 1.85
$ 2.50
$ 3.57
$ 5.00
$ 7.14
$ 13.16
Assumes 30 day month
The FAA recognizes however that carriers would look at the cost of a slot on a
network basis, and as part of the cost of their entire service offer in New York; given the
modest number of slots in the auction, the resulting costs for incumbents, who are well-
positioned at LGA and in many cases the other New York airports, are more modest
than one might conclude from Exhibit 11.
Finally, it is not clear who would incur the cost of a slot. In Option 1 where slot
proceeds flow to FAA, there is a net cash outlay by the industry. If markets were
relatively inelastic, consumers would pay a greater share of these costs; if markets were
more elastic, airlines would pay a larger share. Any conclusions are made more
difficult by the fact that the auction proceeds are likely to be a very small percentage of
64
total revenues for commercial service at LGA and therefore have a small impact in any
case.
In Option 2, after FAA recoups the cost of the auction, proceeds are transferred
among the carriers. While there may be net payers and net receivers of funds, there
would be no cash outlay from the industry from auction proceeds except to defray the
cost of conducting the auction. Some carriers may face higher net cash outlays to
operate at LGA while others may see cash inflows. The FAA cannot be sure until the
auction is done. However, even in Option 2, only 15 percent of total capacity would be
auctioned over five years and the netting out of cash among the carriers would tend to
mute the impacts on the incumbents. The carriers most likely to have net cash outlays
are new entrants and carriers with 20 or fewer slots who would not have any cash
flowing in from the auction to offset costs of their slot purchases.
Small Communities
As noted previously, the number of slots that would be reallocated in each of the
five years under either Option 1 or Option 2 is relatively modest—the equivalent of two
to six city pairs worth of flying per day (assuming daily frequency of three round-trips
per day). Nevertheless, there may be some changes in service to small communities as a
result of the auction. Here small communities are defined as being served by FAA non-
or small-hubs.
During the base week in January 2007, there were approximately 244 operations
(122 flights) per day to and from small communities - or about 10 percent of the
65
airport's scheduled capacity. Since our implementation of a temporary cap in that
month, there has been some change in the composition of flights among small cities, but
the total number has not changed appreciably; in January 2008 (on a weekday) there
were 121 roundtrips to small communities. FAA believes this is significant: under the
temporary order there is no carve-out for small communities, therefore airlines appear
to continue to see flights to these small cities as a profitable service worth continuing. A
summary of the service pattern for small communities at LG A in January of 2007 and
208 is shown in Exhibit 12.
66
Exhibit 12: Changes in Small Community Air Service Pattern at LGA:
January 2007 vs. 2008
ARRLOC JARRNAME
$Gflfc3&a NANTUCKET, MASSACHUSETTS
WPtgk*" ALBANY, NEW YORK
H
! I
Oft
I
Ii
N3ift£ BANGOR, MAINE
fey« BIRMINGHAM, ALABAMA
1̂;̂  BURLINGTON, VERMONT
: WJ COLUMBIA, SOUTH CAROLINA
: ggj, AKRON/CANTON, OHIO
^gE CHARLOTTESVILLE, VIRGINIA
**jf CHARLESTON, SOUTH CAROLINA
DAYTON. OHIO
! giff1:.'-̂  DES M01NES. IOWA
•Hg
1
'&&£ FLINT, MICHIGAN
I '•&--'. GREENSBORO/H.PT/WIN SALEM, N.C.
•'ISÎ 1- ''''*• GREENVILLE/SPARTANBURG. S-C.
WW1"^-^ HUNTSVILLE/DECATUR. ALABAMA
n-f. , WILMINGTON, NORTH CAROLINAITHACA, NEW YORK
Lgfc' ' ' .:- LEBANON. NEW HAMPSHIRE
^-'_ ; LEXINGTON, KENTUCKY
SSyri-Y HARRISBURG, PENNSYLVANIA
;
. i$N;'i.. ' MADISON, WISCONSIN
•X8U :'•* MYRTLE BEACH, SOUTH CAROLINA
PjHP'&i--': NEWPORT NEWS/WILLIAMSBURG, VA.
1 WEt?* PORTLAND, MAINE
| :.. jjjJL. RICHMOND/WMBG.. VIRGINIA
ROI H? ROANOKE, VIRGINIA
•-•I ?S ROCHESTER, NEW YORK
SW^^^M SAVANNAH, GEORGIA
LOUISVILLE. KENTUCKY
Mt^&T- SYRACUSE, NEW YORK
£%••-• -•-. KNOXVILLE. TENNESSEE
FAYETTEVILLE NORTHWEST, ARKANSAS
NWflMV^k^ '̂tWa^
2007 2008
2 1
3 4
3 3
6 5
4 3
3 3
KOgg î
2007 2008
5 4
8 6
3
2 2
9 5
12 10
8 8
10 9
M^^^^w
2007 2008
1
3 2
2 2
2 2
5 6
4 4
1 2
2
2 1
9 9
5 4
1
1 1
1 2
2 3
3 4
3 6
1 2
2 2
Nevertheless, all other things being equal, the FAA expects that in the auction
carriers with business plans that utilize standard jets may derive an advantage from
having more passengers on board over which to amortize the cost of a slot. To the
extent that small community service depends on smaller aircraft, this service may be
relatively disadvantaged. Exhibit 13 shows that in January of 2008, virtually all small
community service at LGA was performed by RJs and turboprops.
67
Exhibit 13: Small Community Operations at LGA by Fleet Type
January 2008
Small Community Operations at LGA by Fleet Type January 2008
^vE^^ î
ACK
ALB
BHM
BTV
CAE
CAK
CHO
CHS
DAY
DSM
FNT
GRR
GSO
GSP
HSV
ILM
ITH
LEB
LEX
MDT
MSN
MYR
PHF
PWM
RIC
ROA
ROC
SAV
SDF
SYR
TYS
XNA
Totals
Pet
*w^M /̂:&&& '̂̂ mmmmgw&£m
NANTUCKET, MASSACHUSETTS
ALBANY, NEW YORK
BIRMINGHAM, ALABAMA
BURLINGTON, VERMONT
COLUMBIA, SOUTH CAROLINA
AKRON/CANTON, OHIO
CHARLOTTESVILLE, VIRGINIA
CHARLESTON, SOUTH CAROLINA
DAYTON, OHIO
DES MOINES, IOWA
FLINT, MICHIGAN
GRAND RAPIDS, MICHIGAN
GREENSBORO/H .FT/WIN SALEM, N.C.
GREENVILLE/SPARTANBURG, S.C.
HUNTSVILLEVDECATUR, ALABAMA
WILMINGTON, NORTH CAROLINA
ITHACA, NEW YORK
LEBANON, NEW HAMPSHIRE
LEXINGTON, KENTUCKY
HARRISBURG, PENNSYLVANIA
MADISON, WISCONSIN
MYRTLE BEACH, SOUTH CAROLINA
NEWPORT NEWS/WILLIAMSBURG, VA.
PORTLAND, MAINE
RICHMOND/WMBG., VIRGINIA
ROANOKE, VIRGINIA
ROCHESTER, NEW YORK
SAVANNAH, GEORGIA
LOUISVILLE, KENTUCKY
SYRACUSE, NEW YORK
KNOXVILLE, TENNESSEE
FAYETTEVILLE NORTHWEST, ARKANSAS
'-C~S TjRjpl
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
7
5.8%
ft&ffiSQttl
0
0
2
0
2
0
0
6
4
2
2
1
9
4
1
3
0
0
1
0
2
0
0
4
10
0
1
4
6
1
2
2
69
57.0%
1
4
0
6
0
0
4
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
5
3
0
3
0
0
0
1
0
3
7
0
0
8
0
0
45
37.2%
However, carrier decisions on schedules would depend on network profitability
before and after the auction. As shown earlier, using other indicative slot value of
$7500 per month, to cover the cover the price of a slot, operators of 135 seat standard
68
aircraft may be amortizing about $1.85 per seat-day offered. The value is two to six
times higher for RJs and turboprops. However, it is important to note that carriers
would view the amount paid for slots on a network basis. Carriers would view the
auction as a cost of doing business at LGA; all incumbents would have between eight
and nine times more slots that they would hold over ten years without any incremental
payments. Seen this way, the established service patterns to small communities may be
able to compete effectively for scarce slots holdings. In contrast, new entrants would
have to amortize the full value per seat over the life of their slot, and would have
important incentives to fly larger aircraft. The market would sort out winners and
losers, but in this environment small community service may not be appreciably
disadvantaged. Regardless, under each Option under consideration, only a small
percentage of capacity would be allocated by auction; therefore, airlines would
maintain considerable capacity to continue small community air service using non-
auctioned slots, which is the case today.
Consumers
As noted above, there will likely be some changes in the service pattern at LGA
as a result of the auction. Some consumers would gain in this process and others would
lose. For example, consumers in small communities may lose some service. However,
there is little doubt that an auction would result in better outcome for consumers as a
group; the allocation of slots would be determined by airline willingness to pay, which
should be closely linked to consumer demand. The greater the demand, the higher
69
should be the bid for a slot. As a result the slots available in the auction should tend to
go to those with the highest and best use as measured by consumer demand.
Airport Operators
The Port Authority has been an active participant in the NEXTOR process and in
many other forums that have focused on the application of the markets to slot allocation
at New York airports, including the recently concluded New York Congestion Aviation
Rulemaking Committee. Throughout, the Port has emphasized its concerns that (1) a
slot auction could result in difficulties because some acquiring carriers might not be
able to find gates at the right times of day; (2) the auction itself might draw money
away from carriers, some of which are financially struggling and (3) the auction could
cause a reallocation that would result in reduced small community service, which is
important to the Port Authority.
The FAA has taken these concerns into account in the design of Options 1 and 2.
Although the FAA believes the Port Authority would be able to accommodate a
different mix of airlines operating the same number of slots at existing gates,
nevertheless, the proposed rule limits the number of slots that would be auctioned in
part to facilitate accommodation. Indeed, the Port Authority should see reduced
administrative costs since any needs for new slots would come at relatively predictable
intervals and in small batches. This same limitation on the number of slots subject to
auction should reduce the burden on air carriers who make net cash outlays for slots.
This should be particularly the case in Option 2 where incumbent net outlays should be
70
offset to some extent by proceeds they receive. In Option 1, some of the funds would be
targeted for capacity improvements in New York, which would reduce costs to the
carriers and potentially create more capacity for additional services.
Finally, we have noted that small community service may be affected by our
proposal but that it may not be appreciably disadvantaged, because carriers have
continued these services in the current temporary HDR environment where there are
not small community carve-outs, and because carriers would view the cash outlays for
slots in the context of their overall service to LGA and New York. To the extent small
community service makes an important network contribution, the value in such uses
may be high and compete effectively in the auction.
71
APPENDIX A
A complete discussion of the methodology for estimating net benefits to society
of the cap provisions of the proposed rule can be found in the earlier Initial Regulatory
Evaluation dated August 29,2006, which is a part of the record in this rulemaking. This
appendix documents three new estimates made for the SNPRM. First, the original
estimates of the benefits of a cap have been adjusted. Second, some indicative estimates
of the benefits to society of different types of flying at LGA are provided. Third,
estimates are made regarding the net benefits of retiring approximately 1.5 percent of
LGA capacity.
Updating Estimates of Net Surplus Due to a Cap
In the August 29,2006 Initial Regulatory Evaluation there are estimates of the
benefits of a cap at LGA. While the original proposal included an upgauging provision
that is not part of this supplemental proposal, in the initial year there was no effective
upgauging. The initial year's estimate of benefits has been updated to reflect limited
inflation that has ensued since. According to the latest data on passenger air carrier
costs published by ATA, unit costs increased by 0.2% from the third quarter of 2006 to
the third quarter of 2007. This index was applied to adjust operator benefits of the cap.
In evaluating the benefits and costs of a cap at LGA, the 2006 Regulatory
Evaluation took account of the benefits to consumers and producers of the additional
flying that would occur if the cap were not imposed. It identified from carrier filings
72
the additional proposed flights that would have been undertaken as a result of Air-21.32
The additional flying increased the average frequency, average number of seats offered,
costs, revenues, delays and cancellations incurred at LGA. The 2006 Regulatory
Evaluation then estimated the net change in consumer and producer surplus due to the
additional flying. The results suggested that operations beyond the cap impose a net
cost to society, even though some consumers and producers might benefit from them.
There are also estimates of consumer benefits due to a cap; about half of these
benefits can be adjusted as they relate to changes in money fare; the remainder relate to
passenger delay costs, which we do not adjust in our cost benefit studies.33 According
to the BTS Air Fare Index, airfares actually fell by 0.8% from the third quarter of 2006 to
the third quarter of 2007. This index was applied to adjust consumer benefits of the cap.
The benefits of a cap have been adjusted downward to exclude the downstream
costs of delay that are avoided due the cap. The FAA is in the process of revising the
methodology on these types of costs and prefers to exclude them pending completion of
the work in this area.
Using the adjusted one year net benefit estimate over the 10 year time horizon of
the rule, the cap provides discounted benefits of approximately $2.021 billion. The
details of these calculations are shown in Exhibit 14.
32
 See the "Background and Need for the Regulation" section of this Regulatory Evaluation for additional
information on carrier filings of proposed flights under AIR-21.
33
 These are based on the passenger value of time which is not escaslated each year.
73
Exhibit 14: Adjusted Net Benefits of a Cap at LaGuardia
Adjusted Annual Benefits of a Cap at LaGuardia ($mi!)
Annual Estimate ($2007) 303.4
less Downstream Delay Costs -34.7
Revised Annual Estimate ($2007) 268.7
Consumer Surplus ($2007) -57.8
BTS Air Fare Inflation Adj. -0.8% x 50% -0.2
(a) Consumer Surplus ($2008) -57.6
Other Operators ($2007) 326.5
ATA Cost Index Inflation Adj. +.02% 0.7
(b) Other Operators ($2008) 327.2
Annual Estimate ($2008) (a+b) 269.6
Sources: Regulatory Evaluation (August 29,2006) Ex. 12
ATA Passenger Airline Cost Index YE 3Q 2007; BTS Air Fare Index
BTS Air Fare Index YE 3Q 2007
Estimated Net Benefits of a Cap ($mil)
Annual Discounted
Benefits Benefits
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
Total Discounted Value
269.6
269.6
269.6
269.6
269.6
269.6
269.6
269.6
269.6
269.6
269.6
251.9
235.5
220.1
205.7
192.2
179.6
167.9
156.9
146.6
137.0
128.1
2021.5
Estimating Illustrative Benefits and Costs of Different Types of Flying
The empirical analysis described below is based on estimating the full price of
travel and social marginal costs for representative markets at LGA. Estimates are
74
provided for average legacy (standard jet), regional jet (RJ), turboprop and LCO
(standard jet) markets. The estimates are meant to be illustrative of the consumer and
producer surplus produced by an average operation over a year. Comparison of the
surplus produced by the four types of markets gives some feel for the consequences for
society if one type of service is traded for another as a result of an auction.
The consumer benefits related to a reallocation of slots can be estimated using
the economic concept of consumer surplus/ defined as the difference between what
consumers must pay for a given level of service and what they would be willing to pay.
In passenger transportation markets, consumer surplus is usually defined in the context
of the full price of travel. The full price of travel includes the money fare that a
consumer must pay and the value of his or her time in transit (including both the
scheduled time and any expected delays) and the value of schedule delay (the
difference between the ideal time of departure/arrival versus the actual schedule
offered weighted by the probability of being accommodated on the desired flight). The
common sense interpretation of the full price of travel model is that consumers prefer to
fly at a time closest to their desired departure (or arrival) time, at the lowest possible
price and in a manner that minimizes the expected time in transit, including the risk of
delays and cancellations.
Interpretation of the full price of travel in the context of consumer surplus is
straightforward. A consumer would not choose to purchase a transportation service
unless it was worth more to him or her than the sum of the money price plus the value
34
 LCC is low cost carrier.
75
of his or her time, including airport and schedule delay. Consumer surplus is the value
of air transportation in excess of the full price of travel. Although it is not always the
case, larger aircraft would tend to exhibit more consumer surplus per operation because
there are more passengers on-board who tend to fly longer distances, expend more time
traveling, and pay more for the service, than on a smaller aircraft. Smaller aircraft will
tend to exhibit less consumer surplus per operation for the same reasons and in
addition, to the extent smaller aircraft are used for shorter haul flights, their use may be
less advantageous to consumers at a highly delayed airport with high cancellation rates.
Consumers can more easily elect to take other forms of transportation, such as rail, in
shorter haul markets if they are confronted with less reliable air service.
It is also important to account for producer surplus, or the amount carriers earn
per flight in excess of marginal cost (including delay and cancellation costs at LGA).
Carriers will tend to focus on their own delay costs, and not worry about the costs they
impose on other operators. At LGA, a carrier does not and would not have an
opportunity to earn producer surplus in the absence of a slot. A reallocation of slots
might increase producer surplus for some carriers and reduce it for others. By adding
producer and consumer surplus together, the FAA derives an estimate of the benefits to
society of the air service at LGA. A reallocation via auction should increase these
benefits.
The analysis is carried out at the segment level, i.e., each non-stop destination
from LGA is considered to be a separate market. To implement the analysis, estimates
are needed for the full price of travel and social marginal costs as of January 2008.
76
The full price of travel (FPT) in each case is defined as:
FPT = money fare + value of scheduled time in transit + value of airport delay and
cancellations + value of schedule delay
For the sample schedule day (January, 2008), data are available to estimate each term in
the above equation:
*> Money fare: Average segment fare35 for each of the four types of service
>> Average time in transit: Weighted average block time from the OAG sample
day
•> Expected airport delay and cancellations:36 From a UMD analysis described
above
>> Value of travel time applied to transit time/ delay and cancellations: GRA,
Incorporated" Economic Values for FAA Investment and Regulatory
Decisions, A Guide", prepared for FAA Office of Aviation Policy and Plans,
(October 3, 2007) weighted using LGA shares of 55% leisure and 45%
business reported internally by FAA - $30.86 per hour
>> Schedule delay; Computed from the OAG data using a method described
below
^ Value of time in schedule delay: $2.70 per hour from a study by Morrison
and Winston37
35
 Based on DB1B third quarter 2007. The calculation includes "zero fare" observations (frequent flyers) and
all O-D trips with 2 or less connect points involving LaGuardia as an endpoint or a connect point. It is
important to include frequent flyers in order to avoid overestimating carrier revenues (calculated as total
passengers x average fare). To derive the segment fare observations, the total itinerary fare for each DB1B
record is first allocated to separate O-D trips using the DB1B trip break indicators and a weighting factor of
W = exp(2.485+0.720668*ln(miles)) - this represents an approximation to ICAO formula prorates. The O-D
trip fare is then further allocated to individual segments based on direct segment distance.
36
 Passenger delay costs are estimated as the product of expected delay time and the value of time.
Cancellation costs are calculated the same way. In estimating expected passenger time lost due to a
cancellation, we assume that a passenger is reaccommodated on the next flight out with enough available
seats, where available seats are estimated as (1- load factor) x seat capacity. In some cases, passengers can be
reaccommodated on the next flight out; in others, they might have to wait for the second flight.
37
 Morrison and Winston, "Enhancing the Performance of the Deregulated Air Transportation System,"
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Microeconomics, 1989, p. 66, use the ratio of value of schedule
delay/value of travel time applied to current estimate of travel time value. The results of this study suggest
77
For each segment, there are e data on the level of service by the four types of
aircraft operations (legacy/ LCC, regional jet and turboprop). These data are aggregated
up to the segment level, to estimate an average money fare, passengers per day each
way, and measures of travel time, airport delay and schedule delay. The resulting
sample day full price of travel and number of passengers together represent a point on
the segment FPT demand curve. The corresponding point on the money demand curve
can be found by substituting the money fare for the FPT.
One additional point is required to identify the two demand curves in
mathematical terms. To do this, one additional roundtrip with the average load (for
each type of service) on the segment is assumed. The FAA's suggested money elasticity
is applied to estimate change in the money price at the increased level of service.38 This
procedure provides another point on the (assumed) linear money demand curve for the
flight segment. With this information, we recalculate the other components of the full
price of travel and thus another point on the FPT curve. Finally we calculate the
intercept point for the FPT demand curve assuming it is linear and, with the fully
that consumers place a lower value on schedule delay than on travel time. The rationale is that while
consumers will prefer to fly at precisely the time that fits their schedules, deviations from the schedule do
not generally result in large losses of consumer benefits because they are able to use any deviations in other
productive or leisure pursuits. For example, a business person who would prefer to leave at 4pm but is
forced to leave at 5 FM because of the schedule of available service may find ways to productively use the
extra hour at work.
38
 The elasticity estimate is based on a weighted average of the recommended values from FAA's "Airport
Benefit-Cost Analysis Guidance," 1999 - -2.0 for leisure travel <, 500 miles, -1.0 for leisure travel > 500 miles, -
1.6 for business travel <. 500 miles, -0.8 for business travel > 500 miles. The April 19 baseline schedule
indicates 42.7% of seats were offered in markets < 500 miles; 57.3 % were in markets > 500 miles. The
leisure/business split is assumed to be 55/45 based on internal FAA estimates.
78
identified function, estimate the total consumer surplus for the segment (the so-called
welfare triangle).39
In order to attribute consumer surplus to the different types of flying on a
segment, we calculate average segment consumer surplus per passenger (that is,
passengers were indifferent between the types of flying - legacy, LCC, regional jet and
turboprop). Then we multiply average consumer surplus by the number of passengers
per flight for each type of flying to estimate consumer surplus per flight for a segment.
For each type of flying, we calculate total consumer surplus on a segment by
multiplying by the number of flights.
To calculate the average consumer surplus per flight across all segments for each
type of flying, we sum the surplus across segments and divide by the total number of
daily flights. Assuming each flight is offered daily, we multiply the average per flight
figure by 365 to obtain an estimate of average consumer surplus per flight for legacy,
LCC, regional jet and turboprop operations at LGA.
Estimating Schedule Delay
One of the important differences that need to be accounted for between the cases
is the effect of frequency and average seat size on consumer benefits. In general,
consumers prefer more frequent flight opportunities and larger aircraft so that they can
more easily accommodate their own schedules. For example, one of the reasons
consumers value legacy carrier operations at LGA so highly is that legacy carriers fly
39
 Note, the full prive of travel demand curve is not linear. But we assume it is to calculate surplus. This
tends to understate consumer surplus.
79
relatively large aircraft with high frequency. In contrast, LCC's fly larger aircraft on
average but much less frequently, perhaps in part because they have less access to slots.
Economists measure the value of frequency using a concept termed "schedule delay."
The idea is that consumers can reduce schedule delay when there are more frequent
flights and more seats. For example, a businessperson can more precisely plan a
business trip when there are more opportunities to fly to a distant city to make a
meeting at a particular time. In contrast, when service is relatively infrequent, the
traveler might incur wasted time or even have to stay overnight to accommodate a
meeting schedule. Personal travelers also benefit from increased frequency.
For valuation purposes, schedule delay is broken into two components -
frequency delay and stochastic delay. Frequency delay measures the average difference
between a passenger's preferred departure time and the closest scheduled departure
time. Frequency delay (FD) in minutes for a given market segment is parameterized as:
where F is daily flight frequency.40
Stochastic delay measures the expected delay due to the probability that a
passenger would not be able to obtain a seat on his most preferred departure because of
capacity limitations of the aircraft. Stochastic delay (SD) is parameterized as:41
12010
40
 Douglas and Miller (1974). Economic Regulation^fJDornesticj\ii^Transport: Theory and Policy, p. 105.
41
 Morrison and Winston, op. cit,, p. 63. This is based on a parameterization of the Douglas and Miller (op.
cit.) schedule delay equation.
80
where F = daily flight frequency
P - passengers per flight
5 = seats per flight
The sum of frequency delay and stochastic delay yields total schedule delay. Estimates
of schedule delay from these equations for various values of F and S are shown below
in Exhibit 15 below (using the observed average LGA system load factor of 68.6%):
Exhibit 15: Equation Estimates of Schedule Delay (minutes)
Daily Frequency
4
6
8
10
Average Seatsize
50
213
150
118
98
75 100 125
149 120 103
108 88 77
86 71 63
72 60 54
150
92
69
57
49
Schedule delay is valued at $2.70 per hour based on estimates developed by Morrison
and Winston cited earlier.
Estimating Carrier Impacts
This analysis also includes estimated producer surplus impacts. For each type of
flying (legacy, LCC, regional jet or turboprop) carrier revenues are computed based on
the estimated number of passengers served and the money fare (net of passenger taxes,
segment and security fees, and PFCs). For present purposes, carrier costs include
scheduled aircraft variable block-hour costs, airport delay costs, downstream delays
and cancellation costs.
Variable block-hour costs are taken from the FAA "Economic Values" study
completed in 2007.42 Estimated airport delay costs are computed as average delay
42
 FAA, "Economic Values for FAA Investment and Regulatory Decisions, A Guide", op cit; Table 4-3.
81
minutes per operation multiplied by the average variable block-hour costs summed
across all operations and cancellation costs.
Cancellation costs are difficult to measure because some portion of crew and
other costs may still be incurred, and downstream operations may be affected. Ignoring
downstream effects, one can estimate a ceiling on such costs based on the delays
discussed above. Clearly, a carrier will cancel a flight only when the net costs of doing
so are less than those that would be incurred by operating it and accepting the
consequent delays. So a ceiling on (own-airport) cancellation costs can be estimated by
taking the difference between (1) net operating profits with no cancellations (and
therefore very high delay costs) and (2) net profits with cancellations. For this analysis,
incurred cancellation costs were assumed to be 50 percent of the profit estimate
difference.43 This is likely to be a conservative estimate of cancellation costs since it does
not include downstream effects,
Estimating Impacts on Non-Scheduled Operators
Delay effects on non-scheduled operations are also taken into account. The FAA
assumed that non-scheduled operations remain constant at 48 per day in all three cases.
Non-scheduled passenger delay costs are estimated assuming 2.8 passengers per flight44
43
 In estimating carrier revenues when there are no cancellations, it was assumed that each 1-point reduction
in cancellations from the current value would lead to an increase in passengers equivalent to about 0.14 load
factor points; this value was obtained from a comparison of T-100 load factors and cancellations rates at
LaGuardia for December 2000 (when cancellations were very high) and April 2001 (when cancellations had
returned to more normal historical rates.)
44
 FAA, "Economic Values for FAA Investment and Regulatory Decisions, A Guide", 2007; Table 3-15,
average passengers in operations involving Turboprop 1-9 seats multi-engine and Turbojet <12,500 Ibs
aircraft, the prevalent operators at LaGuardia.
82
and using the same value of time as for scheduled passengers. Non-scheduled aircraft
delay costs are estimated assuming an average cost of $1,108 per block hour.45
Illustrative Estimates of Surplus for Different Types of Operations at LGA
Exhibit 16 shows the illustrative average surplus per day and per year for
operations at LGA. We stress again that these are illustrative. They are rough estimates
of the relative benefits to society of alternative types of service at LGA. The relative
values are of primary interest. It should not be surprising, given the economic
methodology for calculating society benefits, that more frequent service with larger
aircraft produces more surplus. On average, consumers as a group are willing to pay
more for such service than they are for less frequent service with smaller aircraft.
Exhibit 16: Illustrative Estimates of Surplus for Different Types of Flying at LGA
Daily Results
Consumer Surplus
Producer Surplus
Non-Scheduled Passenger Delay Costs
Non-Scheduled Aircraft Delay Costs
TOTAL SURPLUS
Annual Results
Consumer Surplus
Producer Surplus
Non-Scheduled Passenger Delay Costs
Non-Scheduled Aircraft Delay Costs
TOTAL SURPLUS
Scheduled Operations
Avg Seat Size per Scheduled Operation
Avg Pax per Scheduled Operation
Per Operation (excluding Non-Scheduled)
Consumer Surplus
Producer Surplus
TOTAL SURPLUS per Operation
Annual Surplus per Operation
LCC
$426,445
$447,924
$874,369
$155,652,373
$163,492,442
$319,144,816
86
145.8
115.7
$4,846
$5,090
$9,936
$3,626,646
LEGACY JET
$2,603,621
$2,860,073
$5,463,694
$950,321,627
$1,043,926,629
$1,994,248,256
506
140.9
102.4
$5,145
$5,652
$10,798
$3,941,202
PROP
$75,371
-$56,477
$18,895
$27,510,571
-$20,614,049
$6.896,523
164
34.2
16.8
$460
-$344
$115
$42,052
RJ
$635,020
$466,213
$1,101,232
$231,782,168
$170,167,652
$401,949,820
442
49.4
33.7
$1,437
$1,055
$2,491
$909,389
TOTAL
$3,740,457
$3,717,733
-$1,081
-$13,928
$7,443,181
$1,365,266,739
$1,356,972,675
-$394.660
-$5,083,722
$2,716,761,033
1200
93.0
66.4
$3,117
$3,098
$6,215
45
 FAA, op. cit. Table 4-10.
83
Exhibit 17 shows the estimated net surplus due to reducing operations by
roughtly 1.5 percent in Option 1. This estimate assumes that airlines delete some or all
of the service in low operating profit markets, which may include one or more round-
trips per day to the same airport. The FAA also assumes that carriers delete an even
number of operations so that a total of 22 operations are deleted if 18 slots are retired.
The number of slots retired and the number of operations reduced for each airline is as
follows: American (5 slots; 6 operations), Delta (4,4), Northwest (1,2), United (1,2), US
Airways (7,8). In the cost-benefit analysis, these net benefits are phased-in over five
years.
Exhibit 17: Annual Effect of Proposed Slot Retirements in Option 1
EFFECT OF CANCELLED OPERATIONS LCC LEGACY JET PROP RJ TOTAL
Dally Results
Change in Consumer Surplus tor Cancelled Flights:
CMH
MSY
RDU
GRR
ORD
Change in Consumer Surplus for Remaining Flights:
OTHER
CHANGE IN CONSUMER SURPLUS
Change in Producer Surplus for Cancelled Flights:
CMH
MSY
RDU
GRR
ORD
Grange in Producer Surplus for Remaining Flights.
OTHER
CHANGE IN PRODUCER SURPLUS
TOTAL CHANGE IN SURPLUS
Annual Results
$0
SO
50
$0
ID
55,843
$5,843
SO
$D
$0
$0
10
$4,970
$4,970
$10,813
$3,946,584
$0
$0$o
so
-58,601
$29,623
$21,022
$0
$0
$0
so
44,038
$31.342
$26,504
$47,526
(17,347,024
$0
$0
$0
$0
$0
$1,584
$1,584
$0
$0
$0
$0
$0
$3.096
$3,096
$4,680
$1,708,105
-$14,297
-$2,996
-$2,504
-$2,664
$0
$8,159
-$14,301
$5,698
-$896
-$822
-$1,717
$0
$12.030
$14,493
$192
$70,066
-$14,297
-$2,996
-$2,504
-$2,664
-$8,601
$45,209
$14,147
$5,398
-$896
-$822
-$1,717
-$4,83B
$51,438
$49,063
$63.210
(23,071,779
46
 To develop the estimates, we estimated the lost surplus (consumer and producer) from the flights
eliminated and subtracted it from the estimated reduction in passenger and operator delay costs for all
other flights. Expected delays per operation fall from 15.7 minutes to 14.6 minutes as a result of the
proposed retirement of slots in Option 1. We assume that none of the passengers on the eliminated flights is
reaccommodated, which tends to overstate the cost of the proposed retirement.
84
Sample Calculations
The following table shows the individual calculations applied to data at the
segment level. In the analysis, consumer and producer surplus estimates are developed
at the segment level and then summed across segments. The segment shown is LGA -
Atlanta, which was selected because it has a variety of different types of flying.
The general assumptions are shown at the top of the table; the calculations for the
segment then follow below.
85
Exhibit 18: Sample Calculations of Surplus at the Segment Level47
IMVTS
UnschBduted Daily Ops
% Leisure traffic
Value of Travel Tima per H-
Value o* Schedule Delay per Hr
PassengerfSegjnent/ASJH Tax Rate
RFC and Security Fee per Segment
Money Fare Arc Elasticity
Downstream delay multiplier
Chg in LF with 1 pt incr in completion rate
Cancellation cost factor
Include cancellation effects?
Avg BlkccBt per Hour for GA
Passengers per GAflight
Annual ration Factor
Total Scheduled Operations
Cancellation Rate
Realized Operations ind Unscheduled
Airport Delay per Cp(min)
Airport Delay Cost per Pax
CANCELLATIONS
CNH
MSY
RTJU
GRR
ORD
48
69%
$30.86 Source: Business and leisure values from FAA critical values, LGA8haresfromvwwnjcdecaiKna.com
$270 Source: Morrison and Winston, "Enhancing the Performance...", EnxiWngs 1969.
8%Source: GHelledy,FY04schBduMaicn«sticpaxsvc(airiinerw%ticketrs^
$7.00 $4.50 PFC + JZ50 Security Fee
-1.372 Arc elasticity assumed to apply between current P,Q and that v^ch would occur w l̂addHionai flight in tt« market
0
0,14 T-100 LF and cotrptefen rates, Dec. 2000 vs. Apr 2301
50%
Y
$1,109 Source: FAAcritical values Table 4-10, avg. of Wjrd-EnjrwTiJboprcpl̂ sealsandTunbcietorliSOOIbsvarcpcosts
Z8 op. ciL, Table 3-15
365.0
Wm Cancellations
1200 1178
5,9% 5.5%
1177 nei
15.7 14.6
$8.09 $7.51
LCC LEGflCV. PROP RJ TOTAL
0 14
0 2
0 2
0 2
14
2
Z
2
TOTAL 20 22
47
 The first table in Exhibit 18 contains assumptions used for model calculations, including Option 1 slot
retirement presented as segment cancellations by equipment type. The second table presents sample
calculations for the LGA-Atlanta segment.
86
Data
SumofFLTCOUNT
Sum of SEATSIZE
Sum of TIME
SumofTOTCOST
Sum of pax
Sum of totrev
Scheduled Operations
Scheduled Roundtrips
Sdieduled RT Seats
Avg Seatsize
Cancellation Rate
Realized Roundtrips
Realized RT Seats
Segment PDEWs
Pax per Operation
Avg Load Factor
BlkHrs/Operatton
VarCost
VarCost/Hr
PASSENGERS
Avg Segment Fare
Money Fare Arc Elasticity
Travel Time Cost per Pax
Airport Delay Cost per Pax
Avg Time between Flights (nrs)
LCC
18
2346
2599
112216
1862.72
272312
LCC
18
9.0
1173.0
1303
5.9%
8.47
1103.62
931.36
103.46
79.4%
2.41
$112,216
$2.591
.EGACYJET
36
6453
5697
367262
4681.33
655826
LEGACY JET
38
19.0
3226.5
169.8
5.9%
17.68
3035.67
234567
123.46
72.7%
2.50
$367,252
$3.868
PROP
0
0
0
0
0.00
0
PROP
0
0,0
0.0
0,0
0.0%
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.0%
0.00
$0
$0
^
4
176
620
15067
120.03
17547
RJ
4
2.0
88.0
44,0
5.9%
1.88
82.80
60.02
3001
68.2%
2.58
$15.087
$1,460
# Flighls needed to Accommodate All Cancelled Pax
Total Passenger Hours Incurred
Cancellation Cost per Pax
Frequency Delay (min)
Stochastic Delay (min)
Schedule Delay Cost per Pax
Avg Full Price of Travel
With 1 Additional Scheduled Flfght
Segmenl PDEWs
Intermediate calculation
Avg Segment Fare
1034.85 2469.12 0.00 90.02
Grand Total
60
8975
8916
494555
6674.09
975685
TOTAL
60
30.0
4467,5
149.6
5.9%
28,23
422208
3337.04
111.23
74.4%
2.48
$494,555
$3,328
$146.19
-1.372
$76.43
$809
060
5.15
36540
$3.38
19.51
8.69
$1.27
$235.35
3593.99
-18.504
$138.50
Hem Descriplon
a
b
c
d
e
f
a
g
h
ij
k
L
m
n
o
P
d
q
r
s
t
u
V
w
X
y
z
aa
ab
ac
ad
ae
af
OAG
OAG
OAG
Form 41
T100 Load Factor x OAG seats
Ob1a segment faarex pax
OAG
a/2
W2
h/g
UMD model at sample day ops
g'd-i)h-d-j)
e/2 passengers per day each way
9/8
e/b
c/a/60
d/c-60
fte
FAA Airport Guidance
VOT'p
VOT/60 x avg. airport delay (15.7 minutes)
18hours/g
j-m/Hm'g)
number pax accommodated (l-nVg) per fit x minutes of delay for ea fit
x/m*VOT
92*gA(-0.456)
12010/g-n*0.5725'(i-tiH-1.79)
(y+z) ' value of schedule delay / 60
r+t+u+y+ab
ifgpO,m*(g*iyg
s'(ad+my2/(ad-m)
-r*(0.5+aey(0.5-ae)
(ignore marginal changes in airport delay and cancellation costs)
Frequency Delay (min)
Stochastic Delay (min)
Schedule Delay Cost per Pax
Avg Full Price of Travel
Money slope
Money intercept
FPT Slope
FPT Intercept
Tolal Daily Consumer Sun>us
Annual Consumer Surplus
CARRIERS
Airline Revenue
Variable Bock Costs (before delays)
Airport Delay Costs
Downstream Delay Costs (Oeps only)
Daily Airline Profit (before cancellations)
Cancellation Costs
Daily Airline Net Profit
Annual Airline Net Profit
$93,926
$34.233,678
$237,489
$105,579
$11,495
$0
$120,414
-$6,039
$126,453
$46,155,436
$236.560
$86,344,556
$598,120
$345,531
$36,231
$0
$216,359
-319,436
$235,795
$66,065,187
$0
$0
$0
$0
$0
$0
$0
$0
$0
$0
$6,053
$2,209,205
$15,303
$14,195
$1,440
$0
-$331
-$787
$456
$166,468
18.68
7.90
51.20
$227.59
-0.030
$246.09
-0.030
$336.20
$336,541
$122,837,441
$850,911
$465,304
$49,165
$0
$336,442
-$26,263
$362.704
$132,387,091
ag
ah
al
AJ
a*
aL
am
an
ao
ap
aq
ar
as
at
ay
av
aw
ax
92*(g+ added flights) A(-0.456)
12010/(g-t added tlights)*nA0.5725-(i-n)A(-l 79)
(ag*ah) * value ol schedule delay 1 60
af+t+u+y+ai
(af-ry<ad-ni)
af-ak'ad
(aJ-acX(ad-m)
aJ-am * ad
(am-ac) *m *.5 *2
30*365
m*r*2*(1-8%tax) - PFCs-secufflylee
d'(1-J>
k -2' expected delay -QV60
MA
aq-ar-as
1/2 ' (profit w/ cancels - profits w/o cancels)
au-av
aw*365
87
