 25 
  Recurring Year Employee Population Estimates 
 
In order to estimate the number of employees that will need to be vetted in the recurring 
years, several assumptions were made.  Below is the step-by step process used to 
estimate the number of recurring year contract employees that will be vetted though E-
Verify.  
 
The initial year of the period of analysis is FY 2009; therefore the first “recurring year” 
is FY 2010.  In this section, we estimate the number of employees vetted through E-
Verify due to this rulemaking for FY 2010 through FY 2018.  Consistent with the 
previous section, “Initial Year Employee Population Estimates,” we calculate the 
number of employees expected to be vetted through E-Verify based on FY 2007 data 
and then estimate the number of employees vetted through E-Verify in FY 2008, since 
FY 2008 is the first “recurring year” after FY 2007.  After we estimate the number of 
employees vetted in FY 2008, we make adjustments to the FY 2008 estimate based on 
anticipated future contract growth to arrive at the FY 2010 employee population 
estimate.   
 
Recall that as discussed in the “Recurring Year Company Population Estimate” section 
of this document, after the initial year, we assumed that 80% of the covered contracts 
each year would be performed by contractors and/or subcontractors that worked on 
contracting transactions within the scope of the accompanying rule in the previous year 
and consequently were already required by this rule to be enrolled in E-Verify.  For the 
subsequent years, we estimated 20% of the contractors will be newly required to enroll 
into the E-Verify program. 
 
Similarly, we estimate that 80% of the employees will work for contractors who are 
already enrolled in the E-Verify program and will continue to work on new or ongoing 
contracts. The remaining 20% of employees would be required to be vetted through the 
E-Verify program as they are performing work for a newly covered contractor.   For 
example, in FY 2008, there would be 324,017 employees (1,620,08511 * 20% = 324,017) 
directly assigned to the contract and required to be vetted by E-Verify because their 
employer is newly required to enroll in E-Verify.  We previously estimated a 5% growth 
rate in future years.  Allowing for this growth, the number of employees directly 
assigned to the contract vetted through E-Verify would be 81,004 (1,620,085 * 5% = 
81,004).  The total new direct labor working on contracts in FY 2008 would be 405,021 
(324,017 + 81,004 = 405,021) using FY 2007 as the initial year and FY 2008 as the first 
“recurring year”. 
 
Throughout each subsequent year we estimate that there will be a 40.7% turnover rate in 
employees.12 The amount of turnover is based on the number of employees working for 
a covered contractor since all newly hired employees by the contractor will be required 
                                                
111,620,085 is the number of employees initially vetted through E-Verify (without assuming subsequent 
turnover). In Table 2 column 7 this can be found by summing the two Labor rows together (1,540,004 
(contractor) + 80,080 (subcontractor) = 1,620,085). 
12 “Job Openings and Labor Turnover: January 2007” www.bls.gov/jlt/ 
 26 
to be vetted through E-Verify.  In order to determine the amount of turnover expected 
for FY 2008, we first need to look at FY 2007.  In FY 2007, the total number of 
employees expected to work on a covered contract either directly or in an overhead or a 
support role is 2,851,349.13 For FY 2008 this number is expected to increase by 5%, 
from 2,851,349 to 2,993,916 (2,851,349 * 1.05 = 2,993,916), due to growth.   
 
In addition, to account for the new hires of a covered contractor or subcontractor that we 
could not calculate based on Table 2, we increase the number of employees by 25%.14  
This brings the number of employees working for covered contractors and 
subcontractors in FY 2008 to 3,742,395 (2,993,916* 1.25 = 3,742,395).   
 
Once we estimate the number of employees that are working for a covered contractor or 
subcontractor we multiply this by the BLS turnover rate of 40.7% to determine that the 
expected turnover in FY 2008 would be 1,523,155 (3,742,395 * .407 = 1,523,155).  
 
The total population of employees that would be required to be vetted through E-verify 
in FY 2008 is 1,928,176 (324,017 (new direct labor employees due to new contractors) + 
81,004 (due to an estimated 5% growth) + 1,523,155 (turnover) = 1,928,176).  Again, 
this FY 2008 estimate is based on using FY 2007 as the initial year and FY 2008 as the 
first “recurring year”. 
 
Now that we have an estimate of the number of employees vetted in FY 2008, we are 
able to update this estimate to reflect anticipated future growth in order to approximate 
the number of employees vetted in FY 2010.  Assuming a 5% future growth rate, the 
number of employees that are anticipated to be vetted in FY 2010 is 2,125,814.  This 
number is calculated by multiplying the FY 2008 estimate of 1,928,176 employees X 
1.05  to equal the FY 2009 estimate of 2,024,585 and then multiplying the FY 2009 
estimate of 2,024,585 X 1.05 to equal the FY 2010 estimate of 2,125,814. 
 
 Table 3 provides an estimate of the number of initial employees that would need to be 
enrolled in E-Verify as well as the number of new employees that would be required to 
be enrolled in E-Verify.   
 
 
                                                
13 This is calculated by summing the total number of employees working directly and indirectly on a 
covered contract and can be found in column 7 of Table 2 (1,540,004 + 616,002 + 554,402 + 80,080 + 
32,032 + 28,829 = 2,851,349). 
14 Recall that in Step 6 of the Initial Year Employee Population Estimate, we also increased the number of 
employees by 25% to account for new hires that were not otherwise included in the employee population 
estimate. 
 27 
Table 3: Number of Initial and New Employees Vetted Through the  
E-Verify Program  
 28 
3. Cost Analysis 
Startup Costs 
All companies wishing to enroll in the E-Verify program are required to first register 
online and sign a memorandum of understanding.   
  Registration  
E-Verify Registration is a ten minute process completed online that we expect will be 
completed by an employee equivalent to a Human Resources manager.  A registration 
wizard is designed to assist employers in determining which access method will best 
suite their company needs. The HR manager is required to enter the company contact 
information, including the number of company locations for which E-Verify will be used 
and the address of these locations.15  Within 24 hours the HR manger will receive an 
email from E-Verify that includes their username and password.   
 
According to the National Compensation Survey provided by the Bureau of Labor 
Statistics (BLS), the average hourly labor rate for an HR manager is $34.52.16  For the 
purpose of this analysis we have multiplied the base wage rate of $34.52 by 1.4 to 
account for the cost of employee benefits such as paid leave, insurance, retirement, etc.17   
The “fully burdened” wage rate of the average HR manager is thus estimated at $48.33 
per hour ($34.52 * 1.4). 
 
Table 4 provides the expected number of hours that an HR manager will need to 
complete the online registration and the percentage of companies that will be expected to 
complete this process. 
 
Table 4:  Initial Registration 
Personnel 
Fully 
Loaded 
Labor 
Rate  Hours  
% of Companies 
Expected to 
Register 
HR Manager  $      48.33  0.17 100% 
 
  Memorandum of Understanding 
 
At the end of registration, the company is required to read and sign a Memorandum of 
Understanding (MOU) that provides the terms of agreement between the employer, SSA 
and USCIS. Only an employee who has signatory authority for the employer can sign the 
                                                
15 Registration for the Employer Verification Program can be found at https://www.vis-
dhs.com/EmployerRegistration. 
16 Bureau of Labor Statistics, Department of Labor, National Compensation Survey Occupational 
Earnings in the United States, June 2006; report dated September 2007 
http://www.bls.gov/ncs/ocs/sp/ncbl0961.pdf    
17 The 1.4 multiplier used here to adjust base compensation levels to account for private industry 
compensation costs was taken from the BLS publication “Employer Costs for Employee Compensation – 
March 2007.” 
 29 
MOU. Prior to January 2007 employers were required to sign and fax in the last two 
pages of the MOU, however, recently the signing of the MOU has become available in 
an electronic format similar to software agreements that provide a button which must be 
checked stating that the user agrees to the terms and conditions of the contract.   
 
It is expected that each company will have an HR manager review the MOU and that 
many companies will also have a lawyer and/or a general manager review the MOU.  
Based on DHS experience with companies currently enrolled in E-Verify, we estimate 
that about 25% of the companies will have legal counsel review the MOU and that this 
will take approximately one hour.  It is also expected that 40% of companies will have a 
general manager review the MOU and we estimate the general manager review will take 
a thirty minutes.  The process of reading and signing is not expected to take more than 
thirty minutes for an HR manager. 
 
Using the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) labor estimates we determined that the 
average hourly labor rate for a general manager is $43.52 and the average hourly labor 
rate for legal counsel is $54.35.18  In order to account for other benefits such as 
insurance, vacation leave, etc. we again used a multiplier of 1.4, which equals a fully 
loaded labor rate of $60.93 ($43.52 * 1.4) for a general manger and $76.09 ($54.35 * 
1.4) for legal counsel.19   
 
Table 5 provides the amount of time that company employees are expected to spend 
reviewing and approving the MOU.  
  
           Table 5: Read and Sign Memorandum of Understanding 
Personnel 
Fully 
Loaded 
Labor 
Rate Hours 
% of Personnel 
Expected to 
Read MOU 
Legal Counsel  $      76.09  1 25% 
General 
Manager  $      60.93  0.5 40% 
HR Manager  $      48.33  0.5 100% 
 
 
                                                
18 Bureau of Labor Statistics, Department of Labor, National Compensation Survey Occupational 
Earnings in the United States, June 2006, http://www.bls.gov/ncs/ocs/sp/ncbl0961.pdf  report dated 
September 2007 
19 The 1.4 multiplier used here to adjust base compensation levels to account for private industry 
compensation costs was taken from the BLS publication “Employer Costs for Employee Compensation – 
March 2007.” 
 30 
Implementation 
  Designated Personnel Training 
Each employee responsible for entering new employees into E-Verify must take an 
online tutorial. The employer has the option to designate an employee as one of the 
following: a Corporate Administrator, a Program Administrator or a General User.20  
 
A Corporate Administrator is someone who has management oversight authority of the 
employer's hiring sites that participate in the program but generally does not perform 
employment eligibility verification queries. The Corporate Administrator’s role enables 
oversight of all the company sites participating in the E-Verify. Once registered, this 
individual will be able to register company sites, add and delete users at company sites, 
and view reports generated by company sites.  For the purpose of this analysis we 
estimate that anybody designated as a Corporate Administrator is a relatively senior 
company official and is the equivalent of a general manager.   
 
A Program Administrator is responsible for creating user accounts at his or her site for 
Corporate Administrators and General Users.  They have the capability to view reports, 
perform queries, update profile information, and unlock user accounts. For the purpose 
of this analysis we estimate that anybody designated as a Program Administrator is the 
equivalent of an HR manager. 
 
A General User performs verification queries, views reports, and has the capability to 
update their personal user profile. For the purpose of this analysis we estimate that a 
General User is the equivalent of an HR specialist.21 
 
Training time will vary depending upon the type of user a person is designated as.  The 
Corporate Administrator’s and General User’s tutorial are both expected to take 
approximately 1.5 hours, while the Program Administrator’s tutorial is expected to take 
approximately 2.5 hours.22  We have assumed that there will be .5 recurring training 
hours for the Program Administrators and the General Users as it is expected that there 
will be some periodic changes and updates to the E-Verify system.   
 
As there is expected to be turnover, these training costs are both an initial and a recurring 
cost. Table 6 below represents the current number and type of HR personnel that we 
expect a company will allocate to use the E-Verify program along with training costs.   
   
                                                
20 USCIS E-Verify User’s Manual:  http://www.ssa.gov/employer/BP-DABP-
%20User%20Manual_040104.pdf 
21 Using the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) labor estimates we determined that the average hourly labor 
rate for an HR specialist is $26.48.  Multiplying by 1.4 to account for other benefits, gives us the fully 
loaded labor rate of $37.07. 
22 Hourly training estimates were provided by USCIS E-Verify program staff. 
 31 
 
       Table 6: Estimated Number of HR Personnel and Training Costs 
Personnel 
Ratio of 
Users Per 
Employer* 
Annual 
Number 
of New 
Hires 
Fully Loaded 
Hourly Wage 
Rate 
Initial 
Training 
Hours 
Required 
Recurring 
Training 
Hours 
Required 
Corporate 
Administrators            0.17            0.07   $                 60.93  1.5 0 
Program 
Administrators       1.50            0.61   $                 48.33  2.5 0.5 
General Users          0.48             0.20   $                 37.07  1.5 0.5 
* Information contained in the “Ratio of Users per Employer” column is based on information of the 
companies enrolled in the E-Verify program as of February 2008. 
  
 
  Computer and Internet Costs 
A computer and internet access are required to use the E-Verify system.  While we 
believe that employers will already have a computer and an internet connection since 
they are federal contractors, there may be a very small number of companies that do not 
have a computer or internet connection at their hiring site.  Many companies have hiring 
sites or multiple hiring sites that are not co-located with the company headquarters or the 
location where the employees perform work for the government.  Consequently, for the 
purpose of this analysis, we have assumed that 2% of the E-Verify registrants will need 
to purchase both a computer and internet access for their hiring site.   
 
We also assume that if a company is required to purchase a computer they would only 
buy a basic computer that would allow them to access the internet and that the computer 
would cost $400.  As such, the computer cost incurred for the initial year would be $1.3 
million (168,624 contractors * .02 * $400 = $1.3 million).   
 
In addition, it is expected that in 4 years a company will need to purchase a replacement 
computer. Those companies that start contracting with the government in year 1 and 
continue to contract with the government would need to replace their computers in years 
4 and 8.   
 
Each firm requiring a computer would need internet access as well.  Based on our 
research the cost of internet access varies between $7 and $40 per month depending on 
the provider and type of service used.  For the purpose of this analysis we assume that 
the cost of internet access that companies would select would fall within the midrange of 
those prices and estimate the cost to be $20 per month or $240 per year.  For the initial 
year of the program, the cost for internet access would be $1.0 million (168,624 * .02 * 
$240 = $0.8 million). 
 
Table 7 reflects the annual cost for computers and internet access.  We request 
comments indicating the extent that covered federal contractors or subcontractors may 
 32 
need to purchase a computer and/or internet connection for their hiring site.  If we do not 
receive comments indicating that covered federal contractors or subcontractors would 
need to purchase a computer and/or internet connection, we may eliminate this category 
of costs in the final rule. 
  
      Table 7: Cost of New & Replacement Computers and Internet Access 
 
 
 Total Annual Startup and E-Verify User Training Costs 
 
The total annual startup and user training costs for the 10 year period of analysis for E-
Verify are $439.8 million.  By far the biggest driver of the startup costs is training, 
$374.7 million, with Employer Enrollment (Registration & MOU), $40.3 million, as the 
second biggest driver.   
 
             Table 8: Total Annual Contractor Startup and E-Verify User Training Costs  
 
 33 
Employee Verification23 
  Submission of Information 
 
After hiring a new employee the employer completes the Employment Eligibility 
Verification form (Form I-9) which is required for all new hires regardless of E-Verify 
participation.  Then employers participating in the E-Verify program must submit an 
electronic query through the E-Verify website that includes information from sections 1 
and 2 of the Form I-9, including the employee's name, date of birth, Social Security 
number (SSN) and citizenship status.  For non-citizen employees, an Alien or 
nonimmigrant Admission number is also required.  For both citizens and non-citizens, 
the types of documents provided on the Form I-9 to establish work authorization and 
proof of identity must be submitted and in most cases, the identifying number on the 
document and any document expiration dates. .  
 
Approximately 35% of the non-citizens whose information is entered into E-Verify 
undergo an additional processing step using the Photo Screening Tool.  The photo 
screening tool enables employers to determine whether certain documents produced to 
complete Form I-9 are fraudulent, to more accurately verify an employee’s identity, and 
to help prevent identity theft.  The Photo Screening Tool step of E-Verify currently 
applies to non-citizens who choose to provide a DHS document with a photograph for 
completion of the Form I-9. Accepted documents with photographs include Form I-551 
Permanent Resident Card (PRC or “Green Card”) and Form I-766 Employment 
Authorization Document (EAD). If the employee does not provide one of these 
documents, the Photo Screening Step will not apply.  
 
When the photo screening tool is triggered, the employer must determine whether the 
photo on the employee’s documentation and the photo displayed in E-Verify reasonably 
appear identical and select “yes,” “no,” or “cannot determine.”  
 
For new hires, employers must initiate the query before the end of three business days 
after the new hire’s actual start date.  Existing employees that have been assigned to a 
federal contract, but whose information the employer has not previously submitted 
through the E-Verify system, must be verified within 30 days of the employer’s 
enrollment in E-Verify or contract award, or within three days of the employees’ 
assignment to the federal contract.  A response to the initial query is sent within seconds 
of submitting the query. The E-Verify program validates the information against Social 
Security Databases and then, if the employee has indicated that he or she is not a U.S. 
citizen the information is sent to USCIS where the employee’s information is validated 
by the Department of Homeland Security’s Databases.  If the employee’s information is 
returned as authorized, the E-Verify process is complete. 
 
                                                
23 Government Costs for an employee verification will be discussed in the Government Cost section later 
in the analysis. 
 34 
DHS estimates that it takes approximately 5 minutes to enter this information into the 
computer and submit the query.24  For those employers who have to go through the 
photo screening step we estimate that it will take an additional 5 minutes to run the 
query and photocopy the document.  
 
  SSA Tentative Nonconfirmation 
If SSA is unable to verify information presented by the worker, the employer will 
receive a “SSA tentative nonconfirmation” notice.  This does not necessarily mean that 
the employee is not authorized to work.  When this happens the HR personnel would 
first double-check that the information that was entered into the system is correct.  If the 
data is not correct then the HR personnel would correct the information and resubmit the 
query.  If, however, the data entered is correct then the HR personnel would print out a 
written notice, called a “Notice to Employee of Tentative Nonconfirmation.”  Based on 
current E-Verify estimates it should take no longer than 5 minutes to verify the data and 
either resubmit the data if it was originally incorrect, or if correct to print out a copy of 
the tentative nonconfirmation notice.  
 
Of the employees vetted through E-Verify, We estimate that 5.1%25 will receive a 
tentative nonconfirmation notice from SSA.  The employer is required to provide the 
employee a written notice of the tentative nonconfirmation and to explain the 
employee’s option to contest or not contest the finding.  The employee must check a box 
on the notice stating that he/she contests or does not contest the tentative 
nonconfirmation, and both the worker and the employer must sign the notice.  It is 
estimated that this will take approximately 10 minutes for both the employer and the 
employee to read and sign the form.  We request comments on this 10 minute estimate.   
  Employee Contests SSA Findings  
Based on DHS’s experience with the E-Verify program, we estimate that of the total 
number of employees vetted through E-Verify, 1.6%26 will receive a tentative 
nonconfirmation and choose to contest it.  When this is the case the employer prints a 
second notice, called a “Referral Letter.” This letter provides an explanation as to why 
SSA was unable to verify the employee’s information. The main reasons for an 
employee receiving a nonconfirmation are due to either the date of birth, name or both 
not agreeing with the SSA number, an invalid SSN, or because SSA was unable to 
confirm U.S. Citizenship.   
 
The letter also provides a phone number for the employee to call if they have questions 
or need to determine the nearest SSA office.  In order to contest an SSA tentative 
nonconfirmation the employee must go in person to an SSA office within in 8 Federal 
                                                
24 All time estimates to complete a E-Verify verification are based on information provided by USCIS E-
Verify program staff. 
25 Percentages are derived from the number of queries and case resolutions for the current E-Verify 
program from Jan. through Jun. of 2007. 
26 Percentages are derived from the number of queries and case resolutions for the current E-Verify 
program from Jan. through Jun. of 2007. 
 35 
work days and provide SSA with paperwork that verifies their age, identity and 
citizenship or alien status. 27   
 
We estimate that the process of printing and reviewing the referral letter will take 
approximately 10 minutes.  
 
  Resolution of the SSA Nonconfirmation 
The 1.6% of employees who receive a tentative nonconfirmation and choose to resolve 
the SSA nonconfirmation must travel to an SSA office to resolve the tentative 
nonconfirmation.  Westat determined in their September 2007 report that the amount of 
time employees spent resolving their cases ranged between 2 hours and a full day.28  Due 
to the wide range of time that employees reported having spent correcting their 
information at SSA we assume for the purpose of this analysis that the time required for 
an employee to visit a local social security office would be a full day or 8 hours.  This 
includes the total time that the employee must take to resolve the SSA issue.   
 
In addition to the time that an employee must take to go to the SSA office and resolve 
their issue there is also an expense incurred to travel to the SSA office. For the purpose 
of this analysis we used the Privately Owned Vehicle Reimbursement Rate 
 of $0.485/mile to determine the cost of travel to and from the SSA office.29  
 
We do not have the data which will provide us with a precise estimate of the number of 
miles that the average employee must travel when visiting the SSA.  However, 
considering that SSA has over 1,30030 field offices nationwide we believe that using a 
round-trip mileage estimate of 60 miles is a reasonable estimate. Some individuals living 
in rural areas may need to travel further distances; however, these instances are likely to 
be offset by the number of instances in urban areas where the distance traveled to and 
from the local SSA office is far less than 60 miles. 
 
The mileage cost for the trip to and from the SSA is approximately $29 ($0.485/mile * 
60 miles).  The opportunity cost of time for the employee’s is approximately $359 (8 
hours * $44.90 wage rate).31 
  
Based on the experience to date with E-verify, we estimate that SSA queries with a final 
nonconfirmation outcome represent 4.7% of all transactions.  If the employee chooses 
not to contest the findings, or does not show up at SSA this is considered the equivalent 
                                                
27 When visiting the SSA office, the employee must bring proof of age, identity, and citizenship or alien 
status.  The employee must bring the original documents. 
28 See, Chapter 10, p. 170 Westat Report, January 29, 2002: 
http://www.uscis.gov/files/article/5%5b1%5d.f%20C_X.pdf , Section IV.D p. 101 
29 Privately Owned Vehicle Reimbursement Rates, February 1, 2007,   
http://www.gsa.gov/Portal/gsa/ep/contentView.do?contentId=9646&contentType=GSA_BASIC 
 
30 http://www.ssa.gov/otherssasites/  
31 $44.90 is the fully loaded wage rate for the average covered contractor. It is calculated by ($66,705/ 
2080 hours/year)*1.4  = $44.90 
 36 
of a final nonconfirmation. Similarly, if an employee is unable to resolve their issue with 
SSA it will result in a final nonconfirmation.   
 
At the end of the 10 federal government work days or sooner if the employee has 
resolved the issue, SSA will update E-Verify and the employer is automatically notified 
through the system.   At this point the employee either receives a confirmation of work 
authorization or a final nonconfirmation.  Only with a final nonconfirmation may the 
employee be terminated from the company based on their employment eligibility status. 
 
Table 9 presents the percentage of employees and the expected hourly burden per 
employee for both the employer and the employee.  While 100% of the queries initially 
go through SSA, once SSA has determined that the employee is not a U.S. citizen their 
case is passed on to USCIS for authorization.  The percentages derived in Table 9 are 
based on the overall population of queries not just the ones handled by SSA.32   
 
                 Table 9:  E-Verify Hours Required to Verify Each New Hire through SSA 
Activity Personnel 
Hours Per 
Verification 
Cost Per 
Verification 
% of 
Overall 
Population 
Employer Enters 
I-9 Form Data 
into Query 
HR 
Specialist 0.08  $           2.97  100.0% 
Employer Verifies 
Accuracy of Data 
& Prints SSA 
Tentative 
Nonconfirmation 
Notice 
HR 
Specialist 0.08  $           2.97  5.11% 
HR 
Specialist 0.17  $           6.30  5.11% 
Employer Informs 
Employee of SSA 
Tentative 
Nonconfirmation 
Employee 0.17  $           7.63  5.11% 
Employee States 
Intent to Contest 
HR 
Specialist 0.17  $           6.30  1.59% 
Employee Visits 
SSA Office 
Employee 8.00  $       359.20  0.65% 
Employer Closes 
Case 
HR 
Specialist 0.02  $           0.74  5.11% 
 
Submission of Information to DHS  
 
                                                
32 Percentages are derived from the number of queries and case resolutions for the current Basic Pilot 
program from Jan. through Jun. of 2007. 
 37 
  Photo Screening Tool Process 
 
The Photo Screening Tool step of E-Verify currently applies to non-citizens who choose 
to provide a DHS document with a photograph for completion of the Form I-9. If the 
employee does not provide a photo document the E-Verify query process will be exactly 
the same as before.  Currently, approximately 35% of the non-citizens (which reflects 
3.8% of the overall queries) that are entered into E-Verify under go this additional 
processing step.      
 
When the photo screening tool is triggered, the employer must determine whether the 
photo on the employee’s documentation and the photo displayed in E-Verify reasonably 
appear identical and select “yes,” “no,” or “cannot determine.” The employer must also 
photocopy the document and keep it on file.  For the purposes of this analysis we assume 
that the process of photocopying and verifying the employee’s document in E-Verify 
will take approximately 5 minutes.   
 
For those businesses where the hiring site is not located in the same office as the 
personnel processing center is located, the photocopy of the employee’s document will 
need to be sent to the personnel office and kept on file.  Since we do not know which 
businesses will be required to mail the photocopy to personnel, for the purpose of this 
analysis, we have assumed that every office that is required to use the photo screening 
tool will need to mail a photocopy of the employee’s document to their personnel office.  
We estimate the cost for the photocopy to be $1 per employee and the cost of postage to 
be .50 cents per employee.  
 
  DHS Initial Verification 
 
If the SSA database information matches the employee information and the employee is 
identified as a non-citizen33 on the Form I-9, the Form I-9 information is forwarded from 
SSA to USCIS to determine whether the employee is work-authorized.  DHS has three 
stages where an employee can be authorized in their verification process.  In the first 
stage USCIS has been able to automatically match and verify that the employee is work 
authorized in approximately 83.1% of the cases they receive (which reflects 9.1% of the 
overall queries).  We assume this rate is applicable to future use of E-verify.  When a 
match and authorization results, a notification is immediately sent to the employer and 
no further action is needed. If DHS is not automatically able to authorize the employee 
then it is sent to the second stage for verification. 
 
  DHS Second Stage Verification 
In the second stage verification, we estimate that of the other approximately 16.9% of 
the cases that were sent to USCIS but were unable to be verified (1.8% of the overall 
queries), an immigration status verifier (ISV) manually checks USCIS records and a 
                                                
33 Naturalized citizens will need to visit an SSA office in order to clear up any discrepancies in their 
paperwork. 
 38 
“DHS verification in progress” notice is sent to the employer.  During this stage 10.6% 
of the total number of queries sent to USCIS (1.1% of the overall number of queries) 
have been approved, and we assume this rate will be consistent in the future.   
 
For those cases that the ISV is able to approve, the employer is electronically notified of 
the worker authorization and no further action is required for the employee to begin 
working.  Those cases where the ISV is unable to authorize the employee’s eligibility to 
work are sent on to the third stage of verification. 
 
  DHS Third Stage Verification 
In the third stage the remaining 6.3% of the estimated cases sent to USCIS (0.7% of the 
overall number of queries) where the ISV is unable to verify the worker’s employment 
authorization, the employer will receive a “DHS tentative Nonconfirmation” notice from 
USCIS.   
 
Upon receiving the notice of tentative nonconfirmation the employer would first double-
check that the information that was entered into the system is correct.  If the data is not 
correct then the employer would correct the information and resubmit the query.  If, 
however, the data entered is correct then the employer would print out a written notice, 
called a “Notice to Employee of Tentative Nonconfirmation.”  Based on current E-
Verify estimates it should take no longer than 5 minutes to verify the data and either 
resubmit the data if it was originally incorrect or if correct to print out a copy of the 
tentative nonconfirmation.  
 
The employer is required to provide the employee with a written notice of the tentative 
nonconfirmation and to explain the employee’s option to contest or not contest the 
finding.  The employee must check a box on the notice stating that he or she 
contests/does not contest the tentative nonconfirmation, and both the worker and the 
employer must sign the notice.  There are a variety of reasons that an employee can 
receive a notice of tentative nonconfirmation from DHS such as, name changes, changes 
in immigration status that are not reflected in USCIS databases, or an invalid Alien or 
Nonimmigrant Admission Number.  It is estimated that this will take approximately 10 
minutes for both the employer and the employee to read and sign the form. 
 
  Employee Contests DHS Findings  
Of the estimated 6.3% of employees vetted through the USCIS database (which reflects 
0.7% of overall number of queries) that receive a DHS tentative nonconfirmation letter 
we estimate approximately 3.9% would choose to contest (0.4% of the total number of 
queries).  If the employee chooses to contest the HR person prints a second notice, called 
a “Referral Letter.” This letter provides an explanation as to why DHS was unable to 
verify the employee’s information and a phone number in order to contact DHS to 
resolve the issue.   
 
 39 
The employee must call DHS via the 1-800 number provided on their referral letter 
within 8 Federal government work days. The process of printing and reviewing the 
referral letter is expected to take approximately 10 minutes.  
 
Resolution of the DHS Nonconfirmation 
Only 1.3% of the employees that are referred to USCIS for verification have resolved 
their issue in the third stage of the process (0.2% of the overall number of queries).  DHS 
estimates that it will take approximately two hours for an employee to call or fax USCIS 
to determine the problem and resolve the issue.  These two hours include the time that it 
will take for an employee to gather the appropriate paperwork,34 speak with USCIS and 
if necessary fax them supporting documents.  DHS assumes that the employer will 
provide the employee with the use of a telephone and fax machine in order to resolve the 
issue.  Once the issue is resolved USCIS will electronically send the results to the 
employer and the employee is authorized to work.   
  DHS Final Nonconfirmation 
The estimated remaining 5% (6.3% less the 1.3% that were authorized) of employees 
referred to USCIS (this reflects 0.5% of the overall queries) to resolve their issue either 
do not contact USCIS or in a very small number of cases are found to be employment 
unauthorized.  When this is the case, USCIS considers this the equivalent of a final 
nonconfirmation and the employer will be notified of the “DHS no show,” or the “DHS 
Employment Unauthorized.”  Only with a final nonconfirmation may the employee be 
terminated from the company.  It is estimated that this procedure will take approximately 
1 minute.   
 
Table 10 presents the hourly burden per employee verification for both the employer and 
the employee.  The percentages derived in Table 10 are based on the overall population 
of queries not just the ones handled by DHS.35  For example, 0.7% of the overall number 
of queries will receive a tentative nonconfirmation notice from DHS.    
                                                
34 This includes but is not limited to papers that verify the workers name, date of birth, and authorization 
status such as their Alien or Nonimmigrant Admission card, passport, and photo id. 
35 Percentages are derived from the number of queries and case resolutions for the current Basic Pilot 
program from Jan. through Jun. of 2007. 
 40 
 
              Table 10:  E-Verify Hours Required to Verify Each New Hire 
Activity Personnel 
Hours Per 
Employee 
Cost Per 
Verification 
% of Overall 
Population 
Employer Enters I-9 
Form Data into Query HR Specialist 0.08  $              2.97  100.0% 
Employer Photocopies  
and Verifies Photo ID 
HR Specialist 0.08  $              2.97  3.80% 
Employer Verifies 
Accuracy of Data & 
Prints DHS Tentative 
Nonconfirmation 
Notice HR Specialist 0.08  $              2.97  0.69% 
HR Specialist 0.17  $              6.30  0.69% Employer Informs 
Employee of the DHS 
Nonconfirmation 
Employee 0.17  $              7.63  0.69% 
Employee Contests 
HR Specialist 0.17  $              6.30  0.42% 
Employee Calls DHS 
Employee 2.00  $            89.80  0.14% 
Employer Closes Case 
HR Specialist 0.02  $              0.74  0.69% 
 
Chart 2 represents the final status of total percentage of employees verified through the 
E-Verify program.  In total, slightly less than 95% of the employees are authorized to 
work.  The remaining 5% of the employees were either unable to resolve their case with 
SSA and/or USCIS or did not attempt to resolve the issue. 
 
Chart 2: Final Case Resolution by Percentage (January 2007 – June 2007) 
 
 41 
 
  Cost of Verifying Employees through E-VERIFY    
  
Table 11 details both the employer’s cost of verifying their current employees and new 
hires as well as the cost to the employees that have to resolve their cases with SSA or 
USCIS.  The total cost to the employers over the 10 year period is $184.1 million while 
the total cost for the employees is $5.2 million.  The combined total cost over the 10 year 
period is $189.3 million.     
 
Table 11:  Cost to Verify Each New Hire Through E-Verify 
 
 42 
Employee Replacement (Turnover) Costs 
 
Termination and replacement costs for unauthorized workers are not included in this 
analysis as a cost of complying with the associated E-Verify rulemaking.  Turnover 
associated with employers’ replacement of illegal workers is a cost that follows from the 
INA’s prohibition against hiring or continuing to employ aliens whom the employer 
knows are not authorized to work in the United States.  INA section 274A(a)(1), (a)(2).  
Any employment of aliens whom the employer knows are not authorized to work in the 
United States is a violation of the law. As the INA expressly prohibits employers from 
hiring or continuing to employ aliens whom the employers know are not authorized to 
work in the United States, the costs to an employer that result from a workers 
unauthorized status are attributable to the INA rather than to the E-Verify rulemaking.  
However, to the extent the E-verify rulemaking could result in the termination of a 
worker authorized to work in the United States, such termination and replacement costs 
could be considered costs resulting from the E-Verify rule. 
 
Turnover costs include the direct costs of terminating an employee, such as the 
administrative functions related to the termination, costs of finding an appropriate 
replacement (advertising, interviewing applicants, background checks, etc.), and 
additional overtime by other employees to cover for the loss of the terminated 
employees’ services.  In addition to these direct costs, employers incur indirect costs 
such as lost productivity due to the job vacancy and the learning curve necessary for a 
new employee to learn the job.36   
 
We expect the termination of authorized workers due to the E-Verify rule to happen only 
under very unusual circumstances.  The authorized worker has an economic incentive to 
ensure his/her name, date of birth, and SSN properly match SSA’s records; both to 
preserve his/her job, and to ensure that he or she receives full credit for the contributions 
made into Social Security in order to maximize the amount of Social Security benefits he 
or she will receive in retirement.  In addition, since the accompanying E-Verify rule 
applies to such a large number of federal contractors, the authorized employee who 
chooses not to resolve a tentative non confirmation would in effect be opting out of 
employment in the federal contracting sector. Nevertheless, there may be some 
circumstances in which an authorized employee could be terminated due to a final non 
confirmation.  For example, an authorized worker could simply refuse to visit his/her 
local Social Security office to correct the circumstances causing his/her name and SSN 
not to match SSA’s records.   
 
In order to estimate the cost to the employer of terminating authorized workers, we need 
to know both the rate at which authorized workers would be terminated and the per 
capita termination and replacement costs incurred by the employer.  Unfortunately, we 
do not have empirical data on which to base an authorized worker termination rate.  Due 
                                                
36 There are several internet sites that provide a “cost of turnover” worksheet listing the most common 
types of turnover costs.  Examples of these worksheets are found at 
http://www.uwex.edu/ces/cced/economies/turn.cfm and at http://www.dol.gov/cfbci/turnover.htm. 
 
 43 
to the previously discussed economic incentives for the employee to correct the 
circumstances causing the tentative non-confirmation, we believe the rate would be very 
low.  For the purpose of this analysis, we will assume a termination rate of 2 percent for 
authorized workers.  This 2 percent termination rate represents workers who are: (1) 
authorized to work in the United States, and (2) receive a tentative non confirmation, and 
(3) choose not to take the necessary steps required to correct the tentative non 
confirmation.   
 
This cost analysis uses a SSA tentative non confirmation rate of rate of 5.1% and a DHS 
tentative non confirmation rate of .7% for a total tentative non confirmation rate 5.8%.  
We also use a SSA tentative non confirmation resolution rate (the employee resolves the 
issue) of .4% and a DHS tentative non confirmation resolution rate of .1%, for a total 
resolution rate of .5%.  If we subtract the .5% resolution rate from the 5.8% tentative non 
confirmation rate, we have a rate of 5.3% of the cases where the tentative non 
confirmation is not resolved and the employee is terminated. 
 
Multiplying the 5.3% non confirmation rate by our rough estimate of 2% of authorized 
workers who choose not to resolve the non confirmation yields a rate of .106%.  This 
.106% represents our estimate of the overall percentage of employees that are vetted 
through E-Verify, are authorized to work, but for whatever reason, ignore the economic 
incentive to correct a non confirmation and are consequently terminated. 
 
As we previously stated, we don’t have the empirical data on which to base an 
authorized worker termination rate, but we believe this 2-percent estimate to be a 
reasonable estimate for the purpose of preparing a cost estimate for the E-Verify rule.  
Also, the DHS tentative non confirmation rate of .7% used in this cost analysis is based 
on employees whose employers are presently enrolled in the E-Verify program and is 
likely to be a higher rate than the rate of final non confirmations received by employees 
of contractors enrolled due to the accompanying E-Verify rule as many of the employees 
working on federal contracts are required to be U.S. citizens.  Also, as we previously 
stated, since the accompanying E-Verify rule applies to such a large number of federal 
contractors, the authorized employee who chooses not to resolve a tentative non 
confirmation would in effect be opting out of employment in the federal contracting 
sector. Such differences between the current E-Verify population and the population of 
companies that would be required to be newly enrolled due to the rule may mean a lower 
rate of employees that receive a tentative non-confirmation and ultimately a final non-
confirmation. 
 
Concerning the costs of employee turnover, there are several studies that provide 
estimates of the costs to the employer on which we can base a rough estimate: 
 
• A study conducted by the Cornell Hotel & Restaurant Administration Quarterly 
and published in year 2000 estimated turnover costs in Miami hotels for several 
occupations.  The cost of turnover was estimated to be $1,333 for room service 
wait staff, $2,077 for a line cook, $3,383 for a gift-shop clerk, $5,965 for a front-
office associate, and $7,658 for an administrative assistant (sales and catering). 
The authors also estimated the cost of replacing a front office associate in a New 
 44 
York City hotel.  A front office associate in New York City was estimated to cost 
an average of approximately $12,250 to replace.37 38 This study was a 
comprehensive analysis of both the direct and indirect costs of turnover and 
included such indirect costs as lost productivity.  The authors noted that “the 
direct, easily measurable hard costs associated with turnover account for less 
than half of total costs” and “although over half of turnover’s costs are indirect 
and difficult to measure, they still exist and are felt by the organization.”   
 
• A study conducted by the University of Massachusetts Political Economy 
Research Institute in the year 2000 found that employers located in Santa 
Monica, California estimated their costs to replace an existing non-managerial 
worker with a new worker to be $2,090.39  Workers were predominately from 
hotels, restaurants, and retail establishments.  Replacement costs estimated by 
employers included separation, search, and training costs, but did not include lost 
productivity.  
 
• A study conducted in 2004 suggests that “a minimum direct cost of turnover per 
worker of at least $2,500 is supported by the existing empirical literature on 
frontline turnover costs in long-term care as well as low-wage service 
employment generally.”40  The author also stated “the indirect costs of turnover 
may be substantial and tend to be overlooked because they are less visible and 
harder to measure.” 
 
• A study conducted by the Coca-Cola Research Council in the year 2000 found 
that the turnover costs of replacing a supermarket cashier range from $2,286 to 
$4,313, and the costs of replacing “other hourly personnel” (i.e., baggers and 
stockers) range from $3,372 to $4,291.41 42 This study included both direct costs 
and opportunity costs. 
 
The authors of the studies we reviewed noted the uncertainty in measuring indirect costs, 
which may be a large portion of the overall turnover costs. Given this uncertainty, for the 
purpose of this economic analysis, we will use an estimate of $5,000 to calculate the 
turnover costs of authorized employees terminated due to the E-Verify rule. A $5,000 
estimate is well within the range of turnover costs cited by the literature we reviewed, 
and we believe it is a reasonable number for purposes of our analysis.  However, there 
                                                
37 Hinkin, Timothy R. and J. Bruce Tracey (June 2000) “The Cost of Turnover: Putting a Price on the 
Learning Curve.” Cornell Hotel & Restaurant Administration Quarterly Vol. 41, No. 3, pp. 14-21. 
38 Using the CPI Inflation Calculator from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the factor needed to convert year 
2000 dollars to year 2007 dollars is 1.22.  For example, the cost to replace a gift-shop clerk of $3,383 
found in the study in year 2000 is equivalent to a cost of $4,127 in 2007 dollars.  
39 Pollin Robert and Mark Brenner (2000) “Economic Analysis of the Santa Monica Living Wage 
Proposal.” Amherst, MA: Political Economy Research Institute, University of Massachusetts. 
40 Seavey, Dorie (October 2004) “The Cost of Frontline Turnover in Long-term Care.” Better Jobs Better 
Care Practice & Policy, Institute for the Future of Aging Services. 
41 Frank, Blake (January 2000) “New Ideas for Retaining Store-Level Employees” Coca-Cola Retailing 
Research Council. 
42 Recall that the factor needed to convert year 2000 dollars to year 2007 dollars is 1.22.  Therefore, using 
year 2007 dollars, the turnover cost for replacing a supermarket cashier ranges from $2,789 to $5,262. 
 45 
are two additional factors that should be noted when considering this $5,000 estimate.  
We have previously assumed that the average federal contractor earns a higher salary 
than the overall national average salary.  We considered making an upward adjustment 
to the $5,000 turnover cost estimate, as it reasonable to assume that higher earning 
personnel would represent a higher turnover cost. However, much of the turnover costs 
estimated by the literature are based on the costs an employer incurs by spending many 
months providing on the job training for new personnel.  We do not believe that those 
training costs would be fully incurred by covered contractors or subcontractors for 
certain employees.  As discussed below, some employees will chose to leave the 
contractor’s employment before the training has been completed and consequently, the 
employer would incur less than the full $5,000 in turnover costs. 
 
Under the accompanying E-Verify rulemaking, all new hires of a covered contractor or 
subcontractor are required to be vetted through the E-Verify system.43 When an 
employee is informed of a tentative non-confirmation, that employee is given eight 
federal government work days to contact the appropriate federal agency to contest the 
tentative non-confirmation. To the extent that a newly hired authorized employee 
receives a tentative non-confirmation and decides not to contest it, that employee is not 
spending months of time on the job being trained and the employer would not be 
incurring the cost of fully training a new hire  Accordingly, the upward pressure on the 
$5,000 per person turnover cost estimate due to the relatively higher salaries of federal 
contractors would be offset to a certain extent by the new hires that receive a tentative 
non-confirmation but leave their employer before the on the job training was fully 
completed.  We do not know the full extent that these two offsetting pressures on the 
$5,000 turnover cost estimate counteract each other, but as the effects are offsetting, we 
have decided not to change the $5,000 estimate and use it in our analysis for a proxy of 
the turnover cost of an authorized employee terminated due to the E-Verify rule. 
 
As discussed previously, we do not consider the cost of complying with preexisting 
immigration statutes to be a direct cost of this rulemaking, although complying with 
preexisting immigration statutes will likely impose a cost on covered contractors.  
Employers that have to replace a large number of unauthorized workers may find the 
employee replacement (turnover) costs incurred by replacing employees that are not 
authorized to work in the United States to be fairly significant. 
 
See Table 12 below for the cost calculations.    
                                                
43 Recall that the population of employees the contractor and subcontractor is required to vet through the 
E-Verify system.  The contractor is required to vet:  (1) All new hires of a covered contractor or 
subcontractor, whether working under a federal contract or not; and (2) For existing employees, all 
assigned employees (i.e.; those performing work under a covered contract). 
 
 46 
     Table 12:  Authorized Employee Replacement (Turnover) Costs 
 
 
  Employer & Employee Cost of Using the E-Verify System 
 
Table 13 details both the employer’s cost of verifying their current employees and new 
hires as well as the cost to the employees that have to resolve their cases with SSA or 
USCIS.  The total cost to the employers over the 10 year period is $768.5 million while 
the total cost for the employees is $5.2 million.  The combined total cost over the 10 year 
period is $773.6 million.     
 
         Table 13:  Total Non-Government Cost of the E-Verify -FAR Rule 
 
 
 47 
 
 Government Costs 
 
Government operating costs can be grouped into three main areas, the cost for each 
query run, the cost for DHS to resolve a tentative nonconfirmation, and the cost for SSA 
to resolve a tentative nonconfirmation.   
 
For each query that an employer runs for an employee verification it costs DHS .26 
cents. This is the cost to run the employees information through the databases and to 
verify that the employee is legally able to work in the U.S. 
 
For a DHS tentative nonconfirmation it is estimated that it costs DHS $6.80 to research 
and either authorize or determine that the employee is not authorized to work in the U.S.  
This includes the time and cost for an ISV as well as other operating costs. 
 
Lastly, for an SSA tentative nonconfirmation the cost for SSA to resolve the case is 
$25.00.  This is based on an agreement between SSA and DHS. 
 
In total the 10 year cost to DHS is approximately $11.8 million with an average annual 
cost of $1.2 million.   
 
               Table 14:  Government Costs for E-Verify 
 
 
Overall Costs 
 
Table 15 reflects the total 10 year undiscounted cost of E-Verify for the employers, 
employees and DHS.  Over the 10 year period the total cost for the E-Verify program is 
$785.4 million with the biggest driver being the startup costs and ongoing training costs.   
 48 
Table 15:  Undiscounted 10 Year Cost of E-Verify 
 
 
Tables 16 and 17 are the 10 year costs of E-Verify discounted at 7% and 3% 
respectively.   
 
 
Table 16:  Discounted 10 Year Cost of E-Verify (7% Discount) 
 
 49 
 
Table 17:  Discounted 10 Year Cost of E-Verify (3% Discount) 
 
 
 
Table 18 reflects the total 10 year cost of the E-Verify for the employers, employees and 
DHS at both the 7% and 3% discount rates.  At a 7% discount rate the initial year cost of 
the program is $107.0 million and the total cost is $550.3 million over the 10 year 
period. At a 3% discount rate the initial year cost of the program is $111.2 million and 
the total cost of the E-Verify program over the 10 year period is $668.9 million.   
 
 
 
    Table 18:  Total 10 Year Cost for E-Verify with a 7% and 3% Discount Rate 
(both Federal Government and Non-Government Costs) 
 
 50 
4. Benefits Statement 
 
Because illegal aliens are at risk of being apprehended in immigration enforcement 
actions, contractors who hire illegal aliens will necessarily have a more unstable 
workforce than contractors who do not hire unauthorized workers.  Given the 
vulnerabilities in the paper I-9 system, many employers that do not knowingly employ 
illegal aliens nevertheless have unauthorized workers, undetected, on their workforce.   
 
This rule will promote economy and efficiency in Government procurement.  Stability 
and dependability are important elements of economy and efficiency.  A contractor 
whose work force is unstable will likely be less able to produce goods and services 
economically and efficiently than a contractor whose work force is more stable.  
Because of the Executive Branch’s obligation to enforce the immigration laws, including 
the detection and removal of illegal aliens identified through vigorous worksite 
enforcement, contractors that employ illegal aliens cannot rely on the continuing 
availability and service of those illegal workers, and such contractors inevitably will 
have a less stable and less dependable work force than contractors that do not employ 
such persons.  Where a contractor assigns illegal aliens to work on federal contracts, the 
enforcement of Federal immigration laws imposes a direct risk of disruption, delay, and 
increased expense in Federal contracting.  Therefore, we consider such contractors to be 
less dependable procurement sources, even if they do not knowingly hire or knowingly 
continue to employ unauthorized workers.   
 
Contractors that use E-Verify to confirm the employment eligibility of their workforce 
are much less likely to face immigration enforcement actions, and generally should be 
more efficient and dependable procurement sources than contractors that do not use that 
system to verify the work eligibility of their workforce.  In addition, rigorous 
employment verification through E-Verify will help contractors to confirm the identity 
of the persons working on federal contracts, enhancing national security at less expense 
to the government than it would cost for contractors to undergo more rigorous 
background investigations.  This is likely to be particularly beneficial where contractors 
operate at sensitive national infrastructure sites.   
5. Analysis of Alternative 
 
For this analysis we considered the alternative of only requiring newly hired employees 
of the contractor to be vetted through E-Verify.  That is, any employee that is currently 
working for a covered contractor would not be required to be vetted through E-Verify.  
 
It is important to note that the total number of covered contractors and subcontractors 
that would be required to enroll in E-Verify would not be reduced by this alternative 
(compared to the proposed rule).  Accordingly, the startup costs incurred by covered 
contractors and subcontractors would not be reduced by this alternative. We do not 
expect that training costs would be reduced under this “new hires only” alternative, 
although some small reduction is a possibility.  Over the 10 year period of analysis, the 
total number of employees that are expected to be vetted by E-Verify under this 
 51 
alternative is approximately 25% less than the number required to be vetted by the 
proposed rule.  In the initial year the rule is expected to be effective (2009), there are 
50% fewer employees vetted under the “new hires only alternative” and an increased 
chance that employer may spend less on training for that initial year.  Nevertheless, the 
data we have shows that employers are not currently training very many employees to 
run queries the E-Verify system. 44 Given the relatively small number of individuals that 
are anticipated to receive the E-Verify training at each employer, the extent of reductions 
in training costs strictly from a reduction in the number of queries submitted is unclear.  
All employers enrolled in E-Verify will need at least one trained person to run queries, 
and we anticipate many employers will prefer to have one trained person and a “back-
up” person available.  We request comments on the extent to which the “new hires only” 
alternative would result in reduced training costs. 
 
Assuming startup costs would be unchanged, this alternative would result in a cost 
reduction of approximately $21.2 million (7% NPV) in the initial year and 
approximately $62.4 million (7% NPV) over the 10 year period due to fewer employees 
being vetted through E-verify.  
 
Table 19 shows the reduction in the number of employees that would need to be vetted 
through E-Verify if the proposed rule applied to new hires.45  In the initial year, there is a 
reduction of 2.1 million employees vetted since 100% of the existing employees 
assigned to work directly on a covered contract no longer would need to be vetted.   
 
Table 19:  Reduction in the Number of Employees if Only Newly Hired Employees 
are Vetted Through E-Verify  
 
 
Table 20 shows the reduction in cost of the alternative of only vetting new hires. 
Alternative 1 is estimated to cost $487.9 million over 10 years and a 7% NPV, a $62.4 
million reduction when compared to the proposed rule’s cost of $ 550.3 million at a 7% 
NPV.   
                                                
44 Recall that Table 6 shows the estimated number of human resources personnel per employer that will 
need training.  The average number of personnel per employer that will need training (based on Feb. 2008 
data) is approximately 2.2. 
45 We continued to assume the turnover rate is 40.7 percent annually. 
 52 
 
Table 20:  Reduction in Cost if Only Newly Hired Employees are Vetted Through E-
Verify (7% & 3% NPV) 
 
 
 
 
 
Comparing Covering Only New Hires to Covering New Hires & All Assigned 
Employees 
 
We have tentatively concluded that covering new hires and all assigned 
employees (i.e. those performing work under a covered contract) justifies the cost to 
employers and the government.  Requiring employment eligibility confirmation of all 
workers assigned to a new Government contract is most consistent with the Federal 
government’s own obligation to use E-Verify when hiring Federal employees, and will 
most effectively ensure that the Federal government does not indirectly exploit an illegal 
labor force.  Because of vulnerabilities in the paper-based I-9 system for confirming the 
work authorization of persons employed in the United States, many employers, including 
Federal contractors, may have unwittingly hired unauthorized workers that remain on 
their workforce.  If such persons are assigned to work on federal contracts, both the 
contractor and the contracting Federal agency incur the risk that those persons might be 
detected and apprehended through immigration enforcement actions, or that such 
persons might abandon their post out of fear of being detected and removed from the 
United States.  In either case, the Federal contract to which such persons are assigned 
will be directly affected, likely disrupting work on the contract and imposing costs on 
both the contractor and the Federal contracting agency that would not arise if the 
contract workforce consisted only of legal workers. 
 
Under ordinary turnover rates, however, the use of E-Verify for all new hires will 
eventually reduce the likelihood that federal contracts will be staffed by persons 
unauthorized to work in the United States.  But such a turnover-based approach will take 
many years, and a system aimed only at new hires leaves open the possibility that 
unauthorized workers hired by entities not engaged in Federal contract work could be 
transferred or detailed to a corporate affiliate to work on a Federal contract.  The 
councils concluded that the fastest and most effective way to minimize the risk that 
 53 
Federal contracts might rely on labor provided by unauthorized workers was to require 
that all persons assigned to work on a Federal contract to have their employment 
eligibility confirmed through E-Verify. 
 54 
6. Small Entity Information 
 
In order to further inform our analysis of the economic impact of this rule on small 
entities, we considered the cost impact of the rule on 4 sizes of entities. We estimated the 
compliance cost of the proposed rule on hypothetical contractors with 10, 50, 100, and 
500 employees.  Below, we have presented detailed results of the cost impact of this rule 
on the contractors with 10 and 50 employees and summary results of the compliance 
cost of rule on contractors with 100 and 500 employees.   
Ten Employee Contractor 
 
We estimate the average cost of this rule to a contractor with 10 employees to be $419 in 
the initial year (See Table 21).  The initial year cost is the year with the highest 
compliance cost as the contractor is incurring the start-up costs of enrolling in E-Verify 
in addition to incurring the costs of vetting new employees through the E-Verify system. 
These start-up costs include initial registration, completing the Memorandum of 
Understanding (MOU), training of the personnel designated to run E-Verify queries, and 
a 2% probability that the firm would need to purchase a computer and internet service 
for the hiring site.  
 
   Table 21:  Undiscounted 10 Year Cost for a 10 Employee Firm 
            *Please note that totals may not sum due to rounding. 
 
In order to estimate the cost of this rule on an entity with 10 employees, we are applying 
the same type of compliance cost structure as previously described in this cost analysis.   
Table 22 shows the calculation of the Start-up and E-Verify User Training Costs for the 
initial year, which are estimated to be $234. For this small contractor, we assume that 
only one manager (at a fully loaded hourly cost of $48.33) would be involved with the 
start-up process instead of two managers, as a 10 employee contractor would be 
expected to have fewer management layers than a larger firm.  However, we did 
continue to assume that 25% of contractors would use an attorney to assist with the 
MOU review as some contractors may choose to seek legal assistance. 
 
 
 55 
 
 
   Table22: Total Annual Contractor Startup and E-Verify User Training Costs for a 
10 Employee Firm 
  
*Please note that totals may not sum due to rounding. 
 
The Employer’s Employee Verification costs are shown in Table 23, which are 
estimated to be $111. To account for employee turnover, we continue to use the BLS 
turnover rate for all industries and regions of 40.7%.  As we assume a 40.7% turnover 
rate, we calculate the costs of 14 employees (10 employees and 4 replacements) being 
vetted through E-Verify in the initial year.  Also, we assume that the manager involved 
with the start-up process would be the same person responsible for hiring actions and 
would be responsible for verifying all of the employees through the E-Verify system. 
   
Table 23:  Verification Costs for New Hires for a 10 Employee  
       
 
In addition, we carry forth our estimate of the cost of authorized employee turnover that 
is due to this rule. We multiply our estimate of the rate of authorized employee turnover 
of .106% * $5,000 in estimated per employee turnover costs to get an average cost of 
$5.30 per employee.  This yields an average cost of $74.20 in the first year (14 
employees vetted * $5.30) for authorized employee turnover cost due to E-Verify. 
 56 
 
 Table 24:  Authorized Employee Replacement (Turnover) Costs for a 10 Employee 
Firm 
     *Please note that totals may not sum due to rounding. 
 
In order to better understand the significance of an initial year cost impact of $419 on a 
contractor with 10 employees, we need to have some estimate of the amount of revenue 
a contractor with 10 employees receives.  To determine the average revenue for a firm 
with 10 employees we utilized SBA’s website which includes 2002 data for 
employment, number of firms, and receipts for different employment size classes.46  
 
Using the SBA data, estimates of the total receipts by employment size class were 
divided by estimates of the total number of firms by employment size class. Using this 
data we then extrapolated to determine the revenue for a 10 employee firm. Since the 
SBA data is presented in 2002 dollars we used the Consumer Price Index (CPI) to 
account for inflation.47   
 
Based on this interpolation the average annual revenue of a 10 person contractor is 
approximately $1.4 million dollars.  Certainly, there will be contractors with higher and 
lower annual review, but using data from SBA does give us some understanding of the 
cost impact at an average level. The $419 initial year compliance cost represents 
approximately .03% of the $1.4 million in annual revenue.  This level of cost burden 
does not appear to represent a significant economic impact on a contractor with 10 
employees.  
 
 
                                                
46 www.sba.gov/advo/research/data_uspdf.xls  excel tab “\us02n_mi.”  For the purpose of this analysis it 
is assumed that the average revenues per firm across all firms in the U.S. economy can represent the 
average revenues per firm for E-Verify employers.  
47 For more information regarding the estimation of revenues per firm, please refer to Appendix A. 
 57 
Fifty Employee Contractor 
 
We estimate the average cost of this rule to a contractor with 50 employees to be $1,168 
in the initial year (See Table 25).  The initial year cost is the year with the highest 
compliance cost as the contractor is incurring the set costs of enrolling in E-Verify, in 
addition to incurring the cost of vetting new employees through the E-Verify system. 
These start-up costs include initial registration, completing the Memorandum of 
Understanding (MOU), training of the personnel designated to run E-Verify queries, and 
a 2% probability that the firm would need to purchase a computer and internet service 
for the hiring site.  
 
  Table 25:  Undiscounted 10 Year Cost for a 50 Employee Firm 
 
       *Please note that totals may not sum due to rounding. 
 
In order to estimate the cost of this rule on an entity with 50 employees, we are applying 
the same type of compliance cost structure as previously described in this analysis.   
Table 26 shows the calculation of the Start-up and User Training Costs for the initial 
year, which are estimated to be $325. For this contractor, we assumed 2 levels of 
managers, an HR manager and a general manager, would be involved with the start-up 
process (at fully loaded hourly rates of $48.33 and $60.93). 
 
Assuming that 2 levels of managers would be involved with the start-up process is the 
same assumption as utilized earlier in this analysis when estimating the cost of this 
rulemaking.  We continued to assume that 25% of contractors would use an attorney to 
assist with the MOU review as some contractors may choose to seek legal assistance and 
that 40% of the general managers would review the MOU.   
 
In addition, we also assume that there will be one HR specialist that will be required to 
under go training.  
 58 
     Table 26: Total Annual Contractor Startup and E-Verify User Training 
Costs for a 50 Employee Firm 
Fiscal 
Year 
Employer 
Enrollment 
(Registration 
& MOU) 
Training for 
E-Verify 
Users 
 Computer and 
Internet Costs 
Total Start Up & 
User Training 
Cost 
2009 $                64  $               248  $                    13   $                    325  
2010                                              97                          5                         102  
2011                                               97                          5                         102  
2012                                               97                          5                         102  
2013                                               97                        13                         110  
2014                                               97                          5                         102  
2015                                               97                          5                         102  
2016                                               97                          5                         102  
2017                                               97                        13                         110  
2018                                               97                          5                         102  
Total $                64  $            1,122  $                    72  $                  1,258  
 *Please note that totals may not sum due to rounding. 
 
The Employer’s Employee Verification costs are shown in Table 27, which are 
estimated to be $473. We assumed that this company would use a human resources 
specialist to execute the E-Verify queries.  Utilizing a human resources specialist for this 
task is the same assumption as we assumed in the body of the analysis for estimating the 
cost of the rulemaking. To account for employee turnover, we continue to use the BLS 
turnover rate for all industries and regions of 40.7%.  As we assume a 40.7% turnover 
rate, we calculate the costs of 70 employees (50 employees * 1.407 = 70 employees) 
being vetted through E-Verify in the initial year.  
  
     Table 27:  Verification Costs for New Hires for a 50 Employee Firm 
 
 
In addition, we carry forth our estimate of the cost of authorized Employee turnover that 
is due to this rule. We multiply the rate of authorized employee turnover of .106% * 
$5,000 the estimated per employee turnover costs to get an average cost of $5.30 per 
employee.  This yields an average cost of $371 in the first year (70 employees vetted * 
$5.30) for authorized employee turnover cost due to E-Verify. 
 59 
 
  Table 28:  Authorized Employee Replacement (Turnover) Costs for a 50 
Employee Firm 
 
*Please note that totals may not sum due to rounding. 
 
In order to better understand the economic significance of an initial year cost impact of 
$1,168 on a contractor with 50 employees, we need to have some estimate of the amount 
of revenue a contractor with 50 employees earns.  Using our interpolation based on SBA 
data, we estimate the average annual revenue of a 50 person contractor to be 
approximately $5.6 million dollars. 48   Certainly, there will be contractors with higher 
and lower annual revenue, but using data from SBA does give us some understanding of 
the cost impact at an average level. The $1,168 initial year compliance cost represents 
approximately .021% of the $5.6 million in annual revenue.  This level of cost burden 
does not appear to represent a significant economic impact on the contractor with 50 
employees.  
One Hundred Employee Contractor 
 
We estimate the average cost of this rule to a contractor with 100 employees to be 
$2,102 in the initial year (See Table 29).  The initial year cost is the year with the highest 
compliance cost as the contractor is incurring the set costs of enrolling in E-Verify, in 
addition to incurring the cost of vetting new employees through the E-Verify system. 
These start-up costs include initial registration, completing the Memorandum of 
Understanding (MOU), training of the personnel designated to run E-Verify queries, and 
a 2% probability that the firm would need to purchase a computer and internet service 
for the hiring site.  
 
In order to estimate the cost of this rule on an entity with 100 employees, we are 
applying the same type of compliance cost structure as previously described in this 
analysis.  We assumed 2 levels of managers, an HR manager and a general manager, 
would be involved with the start-up process (at fully loaded hourly rates of $48.33 and 
                                                
48 For more information regarding the estimation of revenues per firm, please refer to Appendix A. 
 60 
$60.93).  We continued to assume that 25% of contractors would use an attorney to 
assist with the MOU review as some contractors may choose to seek legal assistance and 
that 40% of the general managers would review the MOU.   
 
In addition, we also assume that there will be two HR specialists that will be required to 
under go training.  
 
  Table 29:  Undiscounted 10 Year Cost for a 100 Employee Firm 
 
 
In order to better understand the economic significance of an initial year cost impact of 
$2,102 on a contractor with 100 employees, we need to have some estimate of the 
amount of revenue a contractor with 100 employees earns.  Using our interpolation 
based on SBA data, we estimate the average annual revenue of a 100 person contractor 
to be approximately $11.4 million dollars. 49   Certainly, there will be contractors with 
higher and lower annual revenue, but using data from SBA does give us some 
understanding of the cost impact at an average level. The $2,102 initial year compliance 
cost represents approximately .018% of the $11.4 million in annual revenue.  This level 
of cost burden does not appear to represent a significant economic impact on the 
contractor with 100 employees.  
 
Five Hundred Employee Contractor 
 
We estimate the average cost of this rule to a contractor with 500 employees to be 
$8,964 in the initial year (See Table 30).  The initial year cost is the year with the highest 
compliance cost as the contractor is incurring the set costs of enrolling in E-Verify, in 
addition to incurring the cost of vetting new employees through the E-Verify system. 
These start-up costs include initial registration, completing the Memorandum of 
Understanding (MOU), training of the personnel designated to run E-Verify queries, and 
                                                
49 For more information regarding the estimation of revenues per firm, please refer to Appendix A. 
 61 
a 2% probability that the firm would need to purchase a computer and internet service 
for the hiring site.  
 
In order to estimate the cost of this rule on an entity with 500 employees, we are 
applying the same type of compliance cost structure as previously described in this 
analysis.  We assumed 2 levels of managers, an HR manager and a general manager, 
would be involved with the start-up process (at fully loaded hourly rates of $48.33 and 
$60.93).  We continued to assume that 25% of contractors would use an attorney to 
assist with the MOU review as some contractors may choose to seek legal assistance and 
that 40% of the general managers would review the MOU.   
 
In addition, we also assume that there will be three HR specialists that will be required to 
under go training.  
 
  Table 30:  Undiscounted 10 Year Cost for a 500 Employee Firm 
 
 
In order to better understand the economic significance of an initial year cost impact of 
$8,964 on a contractor with 500 employees, we need to have some estimate of the 
amount of revenue a contractor with 500 employees earns.  Using our interpolation 
based on SBA data, we estimate the average annual revenue of a 500 person contractor 
to be approximately $108.1 million dollars. 50   Certainly, there will be contractors with 
higher and lower annual revenue, but using data from SBA does give us some 
understanding of the cost impact at an average level. The $8,964 initial year compliance 
cost represents approximately .008% of the $108.1 million in annual revenue.  This level 
of cost burden does not appear to represent a significant economic impact on the 
contractor with 500 employees.  
 
                                                
50 For more information regarding the estimation of revenues per firm, please refer to Appendix A. 
 62 
Summary of Impact 
In Table 31 below, we present a summary of the initial year compliance cost of the 
proposed rule and compare that cost to our estimate of the annual revenue of the 
hypothetical firms.  We note that the compliance cost in the initial year, which we 
believe is the year with the highest cost, is well below 1% of annual revenue for all 4 of 
the contractor sizes analyzed. To the extent that some small entities incur direct costs 
that are higher than the average estimated costs, however, those employers may 
reasonably be expected to face a more significant economic impact. 
 
In addition, the requirement for entities (both large and small) to enroll in E-Verify only 
applies to contractors and subcontractors who choose to perform certain work for the 
federal government.  If an entity does believe that participating in E-Verify would 
impose a significant economic impact on their operation, the entity would make a 
business decision whether the revenue generated by doing business with the federal 
government provided the financial return required to justify the cost of such participation 
in E-Verify.  Presumably, entities which do not receive the desired return on revenue to 
justify the expense of participating in E-Verify would then choose not to be a federal 
contractor or subcontractor. 
 
Table 31:  Initial Year Compliance Cost Compared to Annual Revenue 
 
 
 
 63 
Appendix A:  Estimation of Revenues per Firm 
 
This appendix describes the procedures used to determine the average revenue for a firm 
given the number of employees.  Table 32 contains data regarding firm size and revenue 
from the Small Business Administration that was used to determine average revenue for 
a given firm size.51  Since the employee sizes of the firms are in ranges, an average for 
the range was taken.  For example, the average the 5 – 9 employee rage was obtained by 
adding 5 – 9 and then dividing by 2.  These averages can be seen in the last row labeled 
Employment per firm.   
 
The receipts per firm were derived by dividing the receipts by the number for firms.  For 
example in the 5 – 9 range the receipts, 888,342,543,000 was divided by 1,010,804 to 
get an average receipts per firm of 878,847.   
 
 
 
Table 32:  2002 Data on Firm Size and Receipts 
 2002  
  1-4 5-9 10-19 20-99 100-499 500+ 
       
Firms 2,695,606 1,010,804 613,880 508,249 82,334 16,845 
Receipts($000) 937,533,365 888,342,543 1,085,595,864 2,884,696,648 2,547,423,855 13,503,796,863 
       
Calculated 
Receipts per Firm 347,801 878,847 1,768,417 5,675,755 30,940,120 801,650,155 
Calculated 
Employment per 
Firm 2.5 7.0 14.5 59.5 299.5 2,750.0 
 
 
Using the data in Table 33 we then derived the average revenue for a 10, 50, 100 and 
500 employee contractor using a linear interpolation. 
 
                                                
51 www.sba.gov/advo/research/data_uspdf.xls  excel tab “\us02n_mi.”  For the purpose of this analysis it 
is assumed that the average revenues per firm across all firms in the U.S. economy can represent the 
average revenues per firm for E-Verify employers.  
 
 64 
 
      Table 33:  Linear Interpolation of SBA Firm Data 
 
 
Since the SBA data is from 2002, we adjusted the expected revenue by 1.15 to account 
for inflation and to put the average into 2007 dollars.52  For example, the expected 
revenue of a firm making 1,234,675 in 2002 would be equivalent to a firm making 
1,419,877 in 2007 (1,234,675 * 1.15 = 1,419,877).    
   
                                                
52 Based on CPI data obtained from BLS at the following website: http://www.bls.gov/bls/inflation.htm.   
 65 
Appendix B: Analysis of Uncertainty 
 
We have conducted a sensitivity analysis in order to determine how changes in 2 key 
variables impact the overall cost of this rule.  First, we vary the number of employees 
that are vetted through E-Verify (holding all else constant) and determine how the 
overall cost of the rule would change and secondly, we then vary the number of covered 
contractors and subcontractors (holding all else constant) that have to be enrolled into 
E-Verify and determine how the overall cost of the rule would be impacted, and finally, 
we vary both the number of employees and the number of contractors simultaneously in 
order to get an overall sense of how uncertainty in these 2 key variables impacts the 
overall cost. 
Number of Employees Vetted Sensitivity Analysis 
 
As discussed earlier in the Affected Population section of this analysis, the estimate of 
the number of employees vetted through E-Verify due to the accompanying rule was 
established by determining the amount of federal contracting dollars to be within the 
scope of the rulemaking and then by a series of assumptions estimating the amount of 
those contract dollars that will be used for the categories of direct labor, overhead, 
materials, and general and administrative (G&A) expenses.  We recognize these 
assumptions are rough estimates and in order to understand the impact of variation in the 
number of employees vetted through E-Verify on the cost, we have performed a Monte 
Carlo analysis assuming up to a 50% increase or decrease in the number of employees 
vetted in each of the 10 years of the period of analysis.  Specifically, we have assumed a 
triangular distribution with the 50th percentile being the point estimate of the number of 
employees previously estimated and shown in Table 3.  For year 2009, the 50th 
percentile is 3,831,992 million employees vetted, while the upper range of the triangular 
distribution is estimated to be 5,747,988 million employees and the lower range is 
estimated to be 1,915,996 employees vetted in year 2009. For example, see Table 34 
below for the year 2009 population of employees vetted used in the sensitivity analysis. 
 
 66 
Table 34: Triangle Distribution of the Number of Employees Verified in 2009 
 
 
Triangular distribution with parameters: 
 Minimum   1,915,996  
 Likeliest   3,831,992  
 Maximum   5,747,988  
Initial Year Employees Only Sensitivity Analysis 
 
In the initial year, varying the number of employees vetted by up to 50% yields a range 
of first year cost from $95,640,616 at the 5th percentile level to $133,374,106 at the 95th 
percentile level.  Recall, that the point estimate of the expected cost the initial year of the 
rule (year 2009) using the 50th percentile is $114,501,212.  Increasing the number of 
employees vetted by 50% results in a less than a 50% increase in costs because 
contractors have to incur a certain amount of fixed costs to enroll into the E-Verify 
program that are not dependent upon the number of employees vetted.  Please see Table 
35 for the summary statistics. 
 
 67 
Table 35: Monte Carlo Simulation Results for Variance in the Number of Employees 
Vetted Through E-Verify in 2009 
 
 
Summary:    
 Certainty level is 95.000%   
 Certainty range is from $95,640,616  to $133,374,106   
 Entire range is from $90,350,891  to $138,642,587   
 Base case is $114,501,212    
 
After 100,000 trials, the std. error of the mean is 
$31,370  
Statistics:  Forecast values 
 Trials  100,000 
 Mean   $114,475,649  
 Median   $114,475,155  
 Mode  --- 
 Standard Deviation  $9,919,910  
 Variance   $98,404,624,098,085  
 Skewness  0.0028 
 Kurtosis  2.40 
 Coeff. of Variability 0.0867 
 Minimum   $90,350,891  
 Maximum   $138,642,587  
 Range Width   $48,291,696  
 Mean Std. Error  $31,370  
 
3% NPV Annualized Employees Only Sensitivity Analysis 
 
The annualized cost (3% NPV) of varying the number of employees vetted by up to 50% 
yields a range of cost from $73,972,218 at the 5th percentile level to $82,841,400 at the 
 68 
95th percentile level.  Recall, that the point estimate of the expected cost the rule using 
the 50th percentile is $78,412,736.53    
 
Table 36: Annualized Monte Carlo Simulation Results for Variance in the Number 
of Employees Vetted through E-Verify (3% NPV) 2009-2018 
 
 
Summary:   
 Certainty level is 95.000%   
 
Certainty range is from $73,972,218  to 
$82,841,400    
 Entire range is from $68,924,917  to $87,371,511   
 Base case is $78,412,736   
 
After 100,000 trials, the std. error of the mean is 
$7,183  
 
 
Statistics:  
Forecast 
values 
 Trials  
 Mean  100,000 
 Median   $78,402,114  
 Mode   $78,397,905  
 
Standard 
Deviation  $2,271,360  --- 
 Variance  
 Skewness   $5,159,074,526,776  
 Kurtosis  0.0038 
 
Coeff. of 
Variability 0.0290 2.90 
 Minimum  
 Maximum   $68,924,917  
 Range Width   $87,371,511  
 Mean Std.  $7,183   $18,446,594  
                                                
53 We include both an annualized and a 10 year NPV estimate in this Appendix.  Both the annualized and 
the 10 year estimates are based on the same Monte Carlo simulation. 
 69 
Error 
   
3% NPV Ten Year Employees Only Sensitivity Analysis 
 
For the 10 year (3% NPV) sensitivity analysis of varying the number of employees 
vetted by up to 50% yields a range of cost from $630,998,026 at the 5th percentile level 
to $706,653,946 at the 95th percentile level.  Recall, that the point estimate of the 
expected cost the rule using the 50th percentile is $668,876,539.  
 
Table 37: 10 Year Monte Carlo Simulation Results for Variance in the Number of 
Employees Vetted through E-Verify (3% NPV) 2009-2018 
 
Summary:    
 Certainty level is 95.000%   
 Certainty range is from $630,998,026  to $706,653,946  
 Entire range is from $587,943,525  to $745,296,710   
 Base case is $668,876,539    
 After 100,000 trials, the std. error of the mean is $61,270  
Statistics:  Forecast values  
 Trials  100,000  
 Mean   $668,785,934   
 Median   $668,750,031   
 Mode  ---  
 Standard Deviation  $19,375,158   
 Variance   $375,396,758,385,315   
 Skewness  0.0038  
 Kurtosis  2.90  
 Coeff. of Variability 0.0290  
 Minimum   $587,943,525   
 Maximum   $745,296,710   
 Range Width   $157,353,185   
 Mean Std. Error  $61,270   
 
 70 
 
 
7% NPV Annualized Employees Only Sensitivity Analysis 
 
The annualized cost (7% NPV) of varying the number of employees vetted by up to 50% 
yields a range of cost from $73,831,999 at the 5th percentile level to $82,864,121 at the 
95th percentile level.  Recall, that the point estimate of the expected cost the rule using 
the 50th percentile is $78,351,184.  
 
Table 38: Annualized Monte Carlo Simulation Results for Variance in the Number 
of Employees Vetted through E-Verify (7% NPV) 2009-2018 
 
Summary:    
 Certainty level is 95.000%   
 Certainty range is from $73,831,999  to $82,864,121   
 Entire range is from $68,740,713  to $87,361,182   
 Base case is $78,351,184    
 After 100,000 trials, the std. error of the mean is $7,325  
Statistics:  Forecast values 
 Trials  100,000 
 Mean   $78,340,223  
 Median   $78,342,731  
 Mode  --- 
 Standard Deviation  $2,316,229  
 Variance   $5,364,918,571,445  
 Skewness  0.0046 
 Kurtosis  2.88 
 Coeff. of Variability 0.0296 
 Minimum   $68,740,713  
 Maximum   $87,361,182  
 Range Width   $18,620,469  
 Mean Std. Error  $7,325  
 71 
 
7% NPV Ten Year Employees Only Sensitivity Analysis 
 
For the 10 year (7% NPV) sensitivity analysis of varying the number of employees 
vetted by up to 50% yields a range of cost from $518,565,064 at the 5th percentile level 
to $582,002,908 at the 95th percentile level.  Recall, that the point estimate of the 
expected cost the rule using the 50th percentile is $550,305,932.  
 
Table 39: 10 Year Monte Carlo Simulation Results for Variance in the Number of 
Employees Vetted through E-Verify (7% NPV) 2009-2018 
 
Summary:    
 Certainty level is 95.000%   
 Certainty range is from $518,565,064  to $582,002,908  
 Entire range is from $482,806,004  to $613,588,388   
 Base case is $550,305,932    
 After 100,000 trials, the std. error of the mean is $51,445  
Statistics:  Forecast values 
 Trials  100,000 
 Mean   $550,228,946  
 Median   $550,246,560  
 Mode  --- 
 Standard Deviation  $16,268,226  
 Variance   $264,655,176,029,885  
 Skewness  0.0046 
 Kurtosis  2.88 
 Coeff. of Variability 0.0296 
 Minimum   $482,806,004  
 Maximum   $613,588,388  
 Range Width   $130,782,384  
 Mean Std. Error  $51,445  
 
 72 
 
Number of Contractors and Subcontractors Sensitivity Analysis 
 
As discussed earlier in the Affected Population section of this analysis, the estimate of 
the number of contractors required to enroll in E-Verify was based on information from 
the Federal Procurement Data System (FPDS).  However, the FPDS was not able to 
estimate the number of subcontractors and an educated guess was made to estimate the 
number of subcontractors, which was estimated to be 20% of the number of unique 
prime contractors.   
 
We have performed a Monte Carlo analysis assuming up to a 25% increase or decrease 
in the total number of contractors and subcontractors required to enroll into E-Verify due 
to the rule in each of the 10 years of the period of analysis.  Specifically, we have 
assumed a triangular distribution with the 50th percentile being the point estimate of the 
number of covered contractors and subcontractors previously estimated and shown in 
Table 1.  For year 2009, the 50th percentile is 168,624 covered contractors and 
subcontractors, while the high range of the triangular distribution is estimated to be 
210,780 and the low range is estimated to be 126,468 covered contractors and 
subcontractors required to enroll in year 2009. For example, see Table 40 below for the 
year 2009 population of contractors and subcontractors required to enroll used in the 
sensitivity analysis. 
 
Table 40: Triangle Distribution of the Number of Contractors & Subcontractors 
Verified in 2009 
 
Triangular distribution with parameters: 
 Minimum   126,468  
 Likeliest   168,624  
 Maximum   210,780  
 
 
 
 
 
 73 
 
Initial Year Contractors and Subcontractors Sensitivity Analysis 
 
In the initial year, varying the number of covered contractors and subcontractors by up to 
25% yields a range of first year cost from $101,639,975 at the 5th percentile level to 
$127,262,933 at the 95th percentile level.  Recall, that the point estimate of the expected 
cost the initial year of the rule (year 2009) using the 50th percentile is $114,501,212   
 
Table 41: Monte Carlo Simulation Results for Variance in the Number of 
Contractors & Subcontractors Vetted Through E-Verify in 2009 
 
Summary:     
 Certainty level is 95.000%    
 Certainty range is from $101,639,975  to $127,262,933   
 Entire range is from $98,124,265  to $130,930,206    
 Base case is $114,501,212     
 After 100,000 trials, the std. error of the mean is $21,300  
Statistics:  Forecast values 
 Trials  100,000 
 Mean   $114,491,237  
 Median   $114,521,969  
 Mode  --- 
 Standard Deviation  $6,735,801  
 Variance   $45,371,018,015,810  
 Skewness  -0.0107 
 Kurtosis  2.40 
 Coeff. of Variability 0.0588 
 Minimum   $98,124,265  
 Maximum   $130,930,206  
 Range Width   $32,805,941  
 Mean Std. Error  $21,300  
 
 74 
3% NPV Annualized Contractors and Subcontractors Sensitivity 
Analysis 
 
The annualized cost (3% NPV) of varying the number of covered contractors and 
subcontractors vetted by up to 25% yields a range of cost of $76,122,251 at the 5th 
percentile level to $80,681,224 at the 95th percentile level.  Recall, that the point estimate 
of the expected cost the rule using the 50th percentile is $78,412,736.   
 
Table 42: Annualized Monte Carlo Simulation Results for Variance in the Number 
of Contractors & Subcontractors Vetted through E-Verify (3% NPV) 2009-2018 
 
Summary:    
 Certainty level is 95.000%   
 
Certainty range is from $76,122,251  to 
$80,681,224   
 Entire range is from $73,842,481  to $83,733,828   
 Base case is $78,412,736    
 
After 100,000 trials, the std. error of the mean is 
$3,692  
Statistics:  Forecast values 
 Trials  100,000 
 Mean   $78,410,320  
 Median   $78,413,058  
 Mode  --- 
 Standard Deviation  $1,167,582  
 Variance   $1,363,247,753,849  
 Skewness  -0.0050 
 Kurtosis  2.87 
 Coeff. of Variability 0.0149 
 Minimum   $73,842,481  
 Maximum   $83,733,828  
 Range Width   $9,891,347  
 Mean Std. Error  $3,692  
 75 
 
 
3% NPV Ten Year Contractors and Subcontractors Sensitivity 
Analysis 
 
For the 10 year (3% NPV) sensitivity analysis of varying the number of contractors and 
subcontractors vetted by up to 25% yields a range of cost from $649,338,241 at the 5th 
percentile level to $688,227,207 at the 95th percentile level.  Recall, that the point 
estimate of the expected cost the rule using the 50th percentile is $668,876,539.  
 
Table 43: 10 Year Monte Carlo Simulation Results for Variance in the Number of 
Contractors & Subcontractors Vetted through E-Verify (3% NPV) 2009-2018 
 
Summary:     
 Certainty level is 95.000%    
 Certainty range is from $649,338,241  to $688,227,207   
 Entire range is from $629,891,339  to $714,266,536    
 Base case is $668,876,539     
 After 100,000 trials, the std. error of the mean is $31,495  
Statistics:  Forecast values 
 Trials  100,000 
 Mean   $668,855,938  
 Median   $668,879,293  
 Mode  --- 
 Standard Deviation  $9,959,711  
 Variance   $99,195,850,925,337  
 Skewness  -0.0050 
 Kurtosis  2.87 
 Coeff. of Variability 0.0149 
 Minimum   $629,891,339  
 Maximum   $714,266,536  
 Range Width   $84,375,196  
 Mean Std. Error  $31,495  
 76 
 
 
7% NPV Annualized Contractors and Subcontractors Sensitivity 
Analysis 
 
The annualized cost (7% NPV) of varying the number of covered contractors and 
subcontractors vetted by up to 25% yields a range of cost of $75,940,649 at the 5th 
percentile level to $80,751,987 at the 95th percentile level.  Recall, that the point estimate 
of the expected cost the rule using the 50th percentile is $78,351,184.   
 
Table 44: Annualized Monte Carlo Simulation Results for Variance in the Number 
of Contractors and Subcontractors Vetted through E-Verify (7% NPV) 2009-2018 
 
Summary:    
 Certainty level is 95.000%   
 Certainty range is from $75,940,649  to $80,751,987   
 Entire range is from $73,678,727  to $83,792,723   
 Base case is $78,351,184    
 After 100,000 trials, the std. error of the mean is $3,909  
Statistics:  Forecast values  
 Trials  100,000  
 Mean   $78,349,135   
 Median   $78,350,578   
 Mode  ---  
 Standard Deviation  $1,236,002   
 Variance   $1,527,699,949,191   
 Skewness  -0.0039  
 Kurtosis  2.82  
 Coeff. of Variability 0.0158  
 Minimum   $73,678,727   
 Maximum   $83,792,723   
 77 
 Range Width   $10,113,996   
 Mean Std. Error  $3,909   
 
7% NPV Ten Year Contractors and Subcontractors Sensitivity 
Analysis 
 
For the 10 year (7% NPV) sensitivity analysis of varying the number of contractors and 
subcontractors vetted by up to 25% yields a range of cost from $533,375,338 at the 5th 
percentile level to $567,168,166 at the 95th percentile level.  Recall, that the point 
estimate of the expected cost the rule using the 50th percentile is $550,305,932.  
 
Table 45: 10 Year Monte Carlo Simulation Results for Variance in the Number of 
Contractors & Subcontractors Vetted through E-Verify (7% NPV) 2009-2018 
 
Summary:     
 Certainty level is 95.000%    
 Certainty range is from $533,375,338  to $567,168,166   
 Entire range is from $517,488,544  to $588,525,023    
 Base case is $550,305,932     
 After 100,000 trials, the std. error of the mean is $27,452  
Statistics:  Forecast values 
 Trials  100,000 
 Mean   $550,291,541  
 Median   $550,301,674  
 Mode  --- 
 Standard Deviation  $8,681,158  
 Variance   $75,362,504,311,987  
 Skewness  -0.0039 
 Kurtosis  2.82 
 Coeff. of Variability 0.0158 
 Minimum   $517,488,544  
 Maximum   $588,525,023  
 78 
 Range Width   $71,036,478  
 Mean Std. Error  $27,452  
 
 
Overall Sensitivity Analysis 
 
In the below tables, we show both the initial year cost and the 10-year cost of the rule 
assuming a simultaneous variance in both the number of employees vetted by E-Verify 
(up to a 50% increase or decrease) and the number of covered contractors and 
subcontractors (up to a 25% increase or decrease) required to enroll. 
Initial Year Overall Sensitivity Analysis 
 
In the initial year, the cost of the rule has a range of $91,286,170 to $137,662,971 at the 
5th and 95th percentile levels, respectively.  
 
Table 46: Monte Carlo Simulation Results for Variance in the Number of Employees 
Vetted Through E-Verify and the Number of Contractors & Subcontractors Enrolled 
in E-Verify in 2009 
 
Summary:    
 Certainty level is 95.000%   
 
Certainty range is from $91,286,170  to 
$137,662,971   
 Entire range is from $77,314,506  to $153,368,113   
 Base case is $114,501,212    
 
After 100,000 trials, the std. error of the mean is 
$37,925  
Statistics:  Forecast values 
 Trials  100,000 
 Mean   $114,511,432  
 Median   $114,527,895  
 Mode  --- 
 79 
 Standard Deviation  $11,992,864  
 Variance   $143,828,783,600,113  
 Skewness  -0.0081 
 Kurtosis  2.67 
 Coeff. of Variability 0.1047 
 Minimum   $77,314,506  
 Maximum   $153,368,113  
 Range Width   $76,053,606  
 Mean Std. Error  $37,925  
3% NPV Annualized Overall Sensitivity Analysis 
 
The annualized cost (3% NPV) ranges from $73,385,048 to $83,422,758 at the 5th and 
95th percentile levels, respectively. 
 
Table 47: Annualized Monte Carlo Simulation Results for Variance in the Number 
of Employees Vetted Through E-Verify & the Number of Firms Enrolled over the 
Ten Year Period (3% NPV) 2009-2018 
 
Summary:    
 Certainty level is 95.000%   
 Certainty range is from $73,385,048  to $83,422,758   
 Entire range is from $67,686,237  to $88,510,805   
 Base case is $78,412,736    
 After 100,000 trials, the std. error of the mean is $8,088  
Statistics:  Forecast values 
 Trials  100,000 
 Mean   $78,403,408  
 Median   $78,404,311  
 Mode  --- 
 Standard Deviation  $2,557,758  
 Variance   $6,542,128,171,904  
 Skewness  -0.0078 
 80 
 Kurtosis  2.95 
 Coeff. of Variability 0.0326 
 Minimum   $67,686,237  
 Maximum   $88,510,805  
 Range Width   $20,824,568  
 Mean Std. Error  $8,088  
3% NPV Ten Year Overall Sensitivity Analysis 
 
The ten year cost (3% NPV) ranges from $625,989,348 to $711,613,044 at the 5th and 
95th percentile levels, respectively. 
 
Table 48: 10 Year Monte Carlo Simulation Results for Variance in the Number of 
Employees Vetted Through E-Verify & the Number of Firms Enrolled in E-Verify 
(3% NPV) 2009-2018 
 
Summary:    
 Certainty level is 95.000%   
 
Certainty range is from $625,989,348  to 
$711,613,044  
 Entire range is from $577,377,332  to $755,015,119   
 Base case is $668,876,539    
 
After 100,000 trials, the std. error of the mean is 
$68,995  
Statistics:  Forecast values 
 Trials  100,000 
 Mean   $668,796,977  
 Median   $668,804,674  
 Mode  --- 
 Standard Deviation  $21,818,198  
 Variance   $476,033,772,322,454  
 Skewness  -0.0078 
 Kurtosis  2.95 
 Coeff. of Variability 0.0326 
 81 
 Minimum   $577,377,332  
 Maximum   $755,015,119  
 Range Width   $177,637,787  
 Mean Std. Error  $68,995  
 
 
7% NPV Annualized Overall Sensitivity Analysis 
 
The annualized cost (7% NPV) ranges from $73,175,062 to $83,504,483 at the 5th and 
95th percentile levels, respectively. 
 
Table 49: Annualized Monte Carlo Simulation Results for Variance in the Number 
of Employees Vetted Through E-Verify & the Number of Firms Enrolled over the 
Ten Year Period (7% NPV) 2009-2018 
 
Summary:    
 Certainty level is 95.000%   
 Certainty range is from $73,175,062  to $83,504,483   
 Entire range is from $67,674,191  to $88,896,395   
 Base case is $78,351,184    
 After 100,000 trials, the std. error of the mean is $8,318  
Statistics:  Forecast values 
 Trials  100,000 
 Mean   $78,341,923  
 Median   $78,344,637  
 Mode  --- 
 Standard Deviation  $2,630,448  
 Variance   $6,919,256,522,574  
 Skewness  -0.0077 
 Kurtosis  2.94 
 Coeff. of Variability 0.0336 
 82 
 Minimum   $67,674,191  
 Maximum   $88,896,395  
 Range Width   $21,222,203  
 Mean Std. Error  $8,318  
 
7% NPV Ten Year Overall Sensitivity Analysis 
 
The ten year cost (7% NPV) ranges from $513,951,018 to $586,500,545 at the 5th and 
95th percentile levels, respectively. 
 
Table 50: 10 Year Monte Carlo Simulation Results for Variance in the Number of 
Employees Vetted Through E-Verify & the Number of Firms Enrolled in E-Verify 
(7% NPV) 2009-2018 
 
 
Summary:     
 Certainty level is 95.000%    
 
Certainty range is from $513,951,018  to 
$586,500,545   
 
Entire range is from $475,315,202  to 
$624,371,077    
 Base case is $550,305,932     
 After 100,000 trials, the std. error of the mean is $58,424  
Statistics:  Forecast values 
 Trials  100,000 
 Mean   $550,240,885  
 Median   $550,259,944  
 Mode  --- 
 Standard Deviation  $18,475,166  
 Variance   $341,331,751,561,803  
 Skewness  -0.0077 
 Kurtosis  2.94 
 Coeff. of Variability 0.0336 
 83 
 Minimum   $475,315,202  
 Maximum   $624,371,077  
 Range Width   $149,055,875  
 Mean Std. Error  $58,424  
 
