	Impact Analysis: Changes to Renewable Fuel Standard Program Assessment and Standards Division Office of Transportation and Air Quality U.S. Environmental Protection Agency October 21,	Module 4: Introduction to Harvesting, Transportation, and Processing :: Fact Sheet 4.7 Osamu Sakamoto, The Financial Feasibility Analysis of Municipal Solid Waste to Ethanol Conversion, Michigan State University, Plan B Master Research Paper in partial fulfillment of the requirement for the degree of Master of Science, Department of Agricultural Economics,	Logging and agricultural residue supply curves for the Pacific Northwest. Washington State University Energy Publication;	Biomass as Feedstock for a Bioenergy and Bioproducts Industry: the Technical Feasibility of a Billion-ton Annual Supply. Report prepared for the U.S. Department of Energy and the U.S. Department of Agricutlure.	The Conservation Reserve Program (CRP) has a minimum limit of 32 million acres enrolled in the program at any given time Bureau of Economic Affairs:	Transportation Energy Data Book: 25th Edition,	The Energy Security Benefits of Reduced Oil Use, 2006-2015,&quot; produced for the Renewable Fuel Standard (RFS) Rule of 2007, ORNL has updated and applied the method used in the 1997 report &quot;Oil Imports: An Assessment of Benefits and Costs&quot;, by Leiby, Jones, Curlee and Lee.239,240 A draft of this updated report was included as part of the record in the final	Estimating the Energy Security Benefits of Reduced U.S. Oil Imports: Final Report”,	Uncertainty Analysis of Climate Change and Policy Response,	Structural Uncertainty and the Statistical Life in the Economics of Catastrophic Climate Change,” Working	On avoiding dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system: Formidable challenges ahead.	Paul Samuelson and Global Public Goods,”	Locational Competition and the Environment: Should Countries Harmonize Their Environmental Policies?”	Environmental Protection Agency),	Discounting the distant future: how much do uncertain rates increase valuations?	Regulatory Impact Analysis of the Proposed Revisions to the National Ambient Air Quality Standards for Ground-Level Ozone. Prepared by: Office of Air and Radiation.	Final Regulatory Impact Analysis (RIA) for the Proposed National Ambient Air Quality Standards for Particulate Matter. Prepared by: Office of Air and Radiation.	Control of Hazardous Air Pollutants from Mobile Sources – Regulatory Impact Analysis. Assessment and Standards Division. Office of Transportation and Air Quality.	Biodiesel Effects on Heavy-Duty Highway Engines and Vehicles Appendix to Biodiesel Effects on Heavy-Duty Highway Engines and Vehicles Studies included in database Aako	Characterization of Biodiesel Exhaust Emissions for EPA 211(b),&quot; Southwest Research Institute report no.	Evaluation of the Effects of Biodiesel Fuel on Emissions from Heavy-Duty NonRoad Engines,&quot; University of California Final Report submitted to South Coast Air Quality Management District,	Impact of Biodiesel Source Material and Chemical Structure on Emissions of Criteria Pollutants from a Heavy-Duty Engine,&quot; Environ.	Dynamometer Emissions test Comparisons on a 5.9L Direct Injected Diesel Powered Pickup,&quot; BioEnergy &apos;98: Expanding BioEnergy Partnerships	A Study of the Effects of Fuel Type and Emission Control Systems on Regulated Gaseous Emissions from Heavy-Duty Diesel Engines,&quot; SAE paper no. 2004-01-1085 Reason: Effect of oxycat & CRDPF greater than effect of B20.	Comparison Study of NOx and CO2 Emissions from an Off-Road Diesel Compactor Running on Regular Diesel, Biodiesel and Ultra-Low Sulfur Diesel,&quot; University of Kansas draft report,	Evaluation of Biodiesel Fuel and Oxidation Catalyst in an Underground Metal Mine,&quot;	Sugarcane Industry in Brazil: Ethanol, Sugar, Bioelectricity” brochure from UNICA FAO Statistics. Sugarcane selected as Commodity. http://www.fao.org/es/ess/top/commodity.html?lang=en&item=156&year=2005 Agra FNP.	Up the Ethanol Program in Brazil, n.d. as quoted in Rothkopf, Garten.	Biofuel Feedstock Assessment for Selected Countries. Oak Ridge National Laboratory.	An Evaluation of the Economics of Biomass Feedstocks: A Synthesis of the Literature. Prepared for the Biomass Research and Development Board.	U.S. Cellulosic Biomass Feedstock Supplies and Distribution. Unpublished Manuscript.	Supplies. American Society of Agronomy 99:1-11	Resource Assessment and Removal Analysis for Corn Stover and Wheat Straw in the Eastern and Midwestern United States—Rainfall and Wind-induced Soil Erosion Methodology,	Enersol Resources, Manhattan, KS 66502, USA, Resource Assessment and Removal Analysis for Corn Stover and Wheat Straw	National Soil Survey; Corn Stover to Sustain Soil Organic Carbon Further Constrains Biomass Supply,	Soil Quality National Technology Development Team USDA-Natural Resource Conservation Service Crop, White Paper: Residue Removal for Biomass Energy Production: Effects on Soils and Recommendations,	Environmental Sciences Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory; Stokes, B.J., Forest Service, USDA.; Erbach, D.C., Agricultural Research Service, USDA, “Biomass as Feedstock for a Bioenergy & Bioproducts Industry: The Technical Feasibility of a Billion-Ton Annual Supply (A Joint Study Sponsored by DOE and USDA, Prepared by Oak Ridge National Laboratory),”	Logging and Agricultural Residue Supply Curves for the Pacific Northwest. Washington State University Energy Program for U.S.	Forest Residues Bundling Project-New Technology for Residue Removal. USDA Forest Service, Southern Research Station	Estimating cost for integrated harvesting and related forest management activities.	Environmental Sciences Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory; Stokes, B.J., Forest Service, USDA.; Erbach, D.C., Agricultural Research Service, USDA, “Biomass as Feedstock for a Bioenergy & Bioproducts Industry: The Technical Feasibility of a Billion-Ton Annual Supply (A Joint Study Sponsored by DOE and USDA, Prepared by Oak Ridge National Laboratory),”	USDA, Forest Service, personal communication as noted in the “Billion-ton Study” by	Wood fuel supply as a function of forest owner preferences and management styles,	Effects on Biodiversity of Forest Fuel Extraction, Governed by Processes Working on a Large Scale. Biomass and Bioenergy,	Soil Compaction and Growth of Woody Plants.	Forest Residues Bundling Project-New Technology for Residue Removal. USDA Forest Service, Southern Research Station Perlack, Robert D.; Biomass as Feedstocks for a Bioenergy and Bioproducts Industry: The Technical Feasibility of a Billion Ton Annual Supply; Sponsored by the U.S. Department of Energy and the U.S. Department of Agriculture;	Cellulosic Biomass Feedstock Supplies and Distribution;	Solid Waste Generation, Recycling, and Disposal in the United States: Facts and figures for	The State of Garbage in	Statewide MSW Composition Study: A Study of Discards in the State of Minnesota.	Statewide Waste Composition Study: Pennsylvania State-wide Waste Composition.	Washington State Waste Characterization Study.	California Biomass and Biofuels Production Potential.	U.S. Cellulosic Biomass Feedstock Supplies and Distribution. Unpublished Manuscript.	Urban tree residues: Results of the first national inventory. (Final Report).	Secondary Mill Residues and Urban Wood Waste Quantities in the United States-Final Report,” Northeast Regional Biomass Program	Urban Wood Waste Resource Assessment, Appel Consultant,	of Energy. Breaking the Biological Barriers to Cellulosic Ethanol: A Joint Research Agenda.	Switchgrass (Panicum vigratum, L.) delivery to a biorefinergy using integrated biomass supply analysis and logistics (IBSAL) model. Bioresource Technology.	Development of switchgrass (Panicum virgatum) as a bioenergy feedstock in the United States. Biomass and Bioenergy.	Switchgrass (Panicum vigratum, L.) delivery to a biorefinergy using integrated biomass supply analysis and logistics (IBSAL) model. Bioresource Technology.	Development of switchgrass (Panicum virgatum) as a bioenergy feedstock in the United States. Biomass and Bioenergy.	Miscanthus: European experience with a novel energy crop. Biomass and Bioenergy.	Growing giant miscanthus in Illinois. University of Illinois.	Growing giant miscanthus in Illinois. University of Illinois.	Growing giant miscanthus in Illinois. University of Illinois.	of Energy. Breaking the Biological Barriers to Cellulosic Ethanol: A Joint Research Agenda.	Services Agency. Conservation Reserve Program Summary and Enrollment Statistics. FY	Services Agency. Conservation Reserve Program Statistics: Monthly Summary	of Energy and United States Department of Agriculture. Biomass as Feedstock for a Bioenergy and Bioproducts Industry: The Technical Feasibility of a Billion Ton Supply.	Growing giant miscanthus in Illinois. University of Illinois.	An analysis of the projected energy use of future dry mill corn ethanol plants (2010-2030).	Available at http://www.nyserda.org/publications/biodieselreport.pdf	Case Study &quot;Jatropha Curcas&quot; Rep.No. Global Facilitation Unit for Underutilized Species.	Jatropha harmful for kids, soil and aquatic life: scientist.&quot;	Claims and Facts on Jatropha curcas L. Plant Research International. Vers. Report 158.	The little shrub that could - maybe.&quot;	A concept for simultaneous wasteland reclamation, fuel production, and socio-economic development in degraded areas in India: need, potential and perspectives of Jatropha plantations.&quot;	Size does matter. Expertise Centrum voor Duurzame Ontwikkeling (ECDO).	Claims and Facts on Jatropha curcas L. Plant Research International. Vers. Report 158.	Claims and Facts on Jatropha curcas L. Plant Research International. Vers. Report 158.	The little shrub that could - maybe.&quot;	Claims and Facts on Jatropha curcas L. Plant Research International.	Claims and Facts on Jatropha curcas L. Plant Research International. Vers. Report 158.	Changes in soil characteristics and foliage nutrient content in Jatropha curcas plantations in relation to stand density in Indian wasteland. Expert seminar on Jatropha curcas L. Agronomy and Genetics.	Claims and Facts on Jatropha curcas L. Plant Research International. Vers. Report 158.	A concept for simultaneous wasteland reclamation, fuel production, and socio-economic development in degraded areas in India: need, potential and perspectives of Jatropha plantations.&quot;	Claims and Facts on Jatropha curcas L. Plant Research International. Vers. Report 158.	Jatropha harmful for kids, soil and aquatic life: scientist.&quot;	Claims and Facts on Jatropha curcas L. Plant Research International. Vers. Report 158.	Plantation management: activities/labour costs. Expert seminar on Jatropha curcas L. Agronomy and Genetics.	Claims and Facts on Jatropha curcas L. Plant Research International. Vers. Report 158.	The little shrub that could - maybe.&quot;	A concept for simultaneous wasteland reclamation, fuel production, and socio-economic development in degraded areas in India: need, potential and perspectives of Jatropha plantations.&quot;	Claims and Facts on Jatropha curcas L. Plant Research International. Vers. Report 158.	Case Study &quot;Jatropha Curcas&quot; Rep.No. Global Facilitation Unit for Underutilized Species.	Size does matter. Expertise Centrum voor Duurzame Ontwikkeling (ECDO).	Claims and Facts on Jatropha curcas L. Plant Research International. Vers. Report 158.	Case Study &quot;Jatropha Curcas&quot; Rep.No. Global Facilitation Unit for Underutilized Species.	Claims and Facts on Jatropha curcas L. Plant Research International. Vers. Report 158.	A concept for simultaneous wasteland reclamation, fuel production, and socio-economic development in degraded areas in India: need, potential and perspectives of Jatropha plantations.&quot;	Seed oil content variation in Jatropha curcas Linn. in different altitudinal ranges and site conditions in H.P. India.&quot;	Seed oil content variation in Jatropha curcas Linn. in different altitudinal ranges and site conditions in H.P. India.&quot;	Claims and Facts on Jatropha curcas L. Plant Research International. Vers. Report 158.	Size does matter. Expertise Centrum voor Duurzame Ontwikkeling (ECDO).	Bio-diesel from Jatropha: the life-cycle perspective. Expert seminar on Jatropha curcas L. Agronomy and Genetics.	Life cycle inventory of biodiesel production from Jatropha. Expert seminar on Jatropha curcas L. Agronomy and Genetics.	Claims and Facts on Jatropha curcas L. Plant Research International. Vers. Report 158.	The little shrub that could - maybe.&quot;	A concept for simultaneous wasteland reclamation, fuel production, and socio-economic development in degraded areas in India: need, potential and perspectives of Jatropha plantations.&quot;	Claims and Facts on Jatropha curcas L. Plant Research International. Vers. Report 158.	Oregon Climate Service.&quot;	Second-generation biodiesel.&quot; Automotive Engineering	A concept for simultaneous wasteland reclamation, fuel production, and socio-economic development in degraded areas in India: need, potential and perspectives of Jatropha plantations.&quot;	Case Study &quot;Jatropha Curcas&quot; Rep.No. Global Facilitation Unit for Underutilized Species.	A Look Back at the U.S. Department of Energy’s Aquatic Species Program—Biodiesel from Algae. National Renewable Energy Laboratory. Office of Fuels Development.	National Renewable Energy Laboratory. &quot;Chevron and NREL to Collaborate on Research to Produce Transportation Fuels using Algae.&quot; Press release.	Biodiesel from Microalgae.&quot;	Grow Your Own?&quot; American Scientist Sept.-Oct.	Biodiesel: Algae as a Renewable Source for Liquid Fuel.&quot;	Biodiesel from Microalgae.&quot;	The Potential for Biofuels from Algae.&quot; Algae Biomass Summit.	Biodiesel: Algae as a Renewable Source for Liquid Fuel.&quot;	The Potential for Biofuels from Algae.&quot; Algae Biomass Summit.	Biodiesel: Algae as a Renewable Source for Liquid Fuel.&quot;	A Look Back at the U.S. Department of Energy’s Aquatic Species Program—Biodiesel from Algae. National Renewable Energy Laboratory. Office of Fuels Development.	The Potential for Biofuels from Algae.&quot; Algae Biomass Summit.	Biodiesel: Algae as a Renewable Source for Liquid Fuel.&quot;	Algae as a Biodiesel Feedsock.	A Look Back at the U.S. Department of Energy’s Aquatic Species Program—Biodiesel from Algae. National Renewable Energy Laboratory. Office of Fuels Development.	Algae Bloom Again.&quot;	As planet swelters, are algae unlikely saviour?&quot;	A Look Back at the U.S. Department of Energy’s Aquatic Species Program—Biodiesel from Algae. National Renewable Energy Laboratory. Office of Fuels Development.	Algae Corrals Carbon Dioxide.&quot; EnergyBiz Magazine Mar.-Apr.	Biodiesel from Microalgae.&quot;	A Look Back at the U.S. Department of Energy’s Aquatic Species Program—Biodiesel from Algae. National Renewable Energy Laboratory. Office of Fuels Development.	Biodiesel from Microalgae.&quot;	Grow Your Own?&quot; American Scientist Sept.-Oct.	Biodiesel: Algae as a Renewable Source for Liquid Fuel.&quot;	The Potential for Biofuels from Algae.&quot; Algae Biomass Summit.	Algae as a Biodiesel Feedsock.	Biodiesel from Microalgae.&quot;	Biodiesel: Algae as a Renewable Source for Liquid Fuel.&quot;	Biodiesel from Microalgae.&quot;	Biodiesel: Algae as a Renewable Source for Liquid Fuel.&quot;	The Potential for Biofuels from Algae.&quot; Algae Biomass Summit.	Biodiesel from Microalgae.&quot;	Low Cost Algae Production System Introduced.&quot;	Biodiesel from Microalgae.&quot;	Low Cost Algae Production System Introduced.&quot;	Biodiesel from Microalgae.&quot;	The Potential for Biofuels from Algae.&quot; Algae Biomass Summit.	Radiation. Digital image. National Renewable Energy Laboratory.	Algae Corrals Carbon Dioxide.&quot; EnergyBiz Magazine Mar.-Apr.	Biodiesel from Microalgae.&quot;	Grow Your Own?&quot; American Scientist Sept.-Oct.	Biodiesel: Algae as a Renewable Source for Liquid Fuel.&quot;	The Potential for Biofuels from Algae.&quot; Algae Biomass Summit.	Biodiesel from Microalgae.&quot;	The Potential for Biofuels from Algae.&quot; Algae Biomass Summit.	World Ethanol and Biofuels Report.	EU Biodiesel Feedstock Challenge. http://www.dtnethanolcenter.com/index.cfm?show=10&mid=66&pid=27 World Biofuels: FAPRI 2007 Agricultural Outlook.	Release: 1/31/07, “Stricter fuel standards to combat climate change and reduce air pollution”	Ministry of Mines and Energy. 6/1/2007 Presentation by Ricardo de Gusmao Dornelles. The Brazilian Experience with Biofuels.	Plano National de Energia	Biofuels Policies in Asia: Trade effects on World Agricultural and Biofuels Trade. Presentation to USDA Agricultural Outlook Forum,	Report. Indonesia Bio-Fuels Biofuels Annual	Palm oil continues to dominate global consumption in 2006/2007.	Malaysian Palm Oil Board. Presentation: Technological Progress and Commercialization of Biodiesel in Malaysia.	Gain Report. India Bio-fuels Annual	The little shrub that could – maybe.	Comparative Economics of Biorefineries Based on the Biochemical and Thermochemical Platforms.	National Renewable Energy Laboratory estimate based on biomass portion available at $45-$55/dry ton.. Using POLYSYS Policy Analysis System, Agricultural Policy Analysis	Geographic Perspective on the Current Biomass Resource Availability in the United States.” 70 pp.;	37830, Stochastic Modeling of Costs of Corn Stover Costs Delivered to an Intermediate Storage Facility, Paper Number: 024190, Presented at: 2002 ASAE Annual International Meeting / CIGR XVth World Congress, Sponsored by ASAE and CIGR, Hyatt Regency Chicago,	Accessed at: http://www.news.com/8301-11128_3-9811702-54.html DOE. “Biomass Program: ABC’s of Biofuels”. Accessed at: http://www1.eere.energy.gov/biomass/abcs_biofuels.html#content BlueFire Ethanol. “Review of Competing Processes,”	Challenges in Engineering Microbes for Biofuels Production,” Science,	Outlook for Biomass Ethanol Production and Demand,”	Accessed at: http://www.ethanol-gec.org/information/briefing/6.pdf 255A.	National Renewable Energy Laboratory	National Renewable Energy Laboratory	(Genencor International) at the World Congress on Industrial Biotechnology and Bioprocessing,	Thermochemical Versus Biochemical”.	Department of Agricultural and Biological Engineering, Mississippi State University, MS 39762, USA, Ethanol Production from Wood: Comparison of Hydrolysis Fermentation and Gasification Biosynthesis, Paper Number: 076036, Written for presentation at the	National Renewable Energy Laboratory,	F.O. Licht World Ethanol Markets: The Outlook to	Sugar and Ethanol in Brazil: A Study of the Brazilian Sugar Cane, Sugar and Ethanol Industries.	Ministry of Mines and Energy. Presentation from Ricardo de Gusmao Dornelles, Director of Renewable Fuels Department. “The Brazilian Experience with Biofuels”.	Sugar and Ethanol in Brazil: A Study of the Brazilian Sugar Cane, Sugar and Ethanol Industries.	Ministry of Mines and Energy. Presentation from Ricardo de Gusmao Dornelles, Director of Renewable Fuels Department. “The Brazilian Experience with Biofuels”.	http://www.agricultura.gov.br/ EPM. Pipeline Projects on Hold.	Agricultural Outlook; OECD-FAO Agricultural Outlook 2007-2016 (note: this was interpreted from a graph); Bioenergia	Sugar Gains Capped by Brazil Ethanol Expansion, Czarnikow Says.	World Ethanol &	Sugar and Ethanol in Brazil: A Study of the Brazilian Sugar Cane, Sugar and Ethanol Industries.	Ethanol: From Brazil to the World World Energy: Global New Summary.	note: only	Reference Case Projections by End-Use Sector and Region Data Table F6. BP Statistical Review of World Energy	Perspectives on fuel ethanol consumption and trade. Biomass and Bioenergy (2008), doi:10.106/j.biombioe.2008.01.026 Ayoub PM. Biofuels for Shell-biomass based blending components for transport fuels (gasoline and diesel). In: World biofuels symposium-China,	Japan Bio-fuels Production Report” (2006) http://www.fas.usda.gov/gainfiles/200605/146197881.pdf Rothkopf, Garten.	Annual World Ethanol Production by Country. http://www.ethanolrfa.org/industry/statistics/ Ohga K. & Tatsuji K. Biofuels Policies in Asia: Trade effects on World Agricultural and Biofuels Trade. Presentation to USDA Agricultural Outlook Forum,	OECD-FAO Agricultural Outlook 2007-2016 (note: this was interpreted from a graph) Ohga K. & Tatsuji K. Biofuels Policies in Asia: Trade effects on World Agricultural and Biofuels Trade. Presentation to USDA Agricultural Outlook Forum,	A Blueprint for Green Energy in the Americas: Strategic Analysis of Opportunities for Brazil and the Hemisphere” (2006) Forbes. China to freeze approvals for corn processing projects for 3 years.	A Blueprint for Green Energy in the Americas: Strategic Analysis of Opportunities for Brazil and the Hemisphere”	The Australian. Rees scraps biofuel mandates.	Accessed Oct.	Canadian government passess renewable fuels standard	Basin Initiative http://www.ustr.gov/Trade_Development/Preference_Programs/CBI/Section_Index.html Ethanol Producer Magazine. Entering Tariff-Free.	Ethanol Producer Magazine. Entering Tariff-Free.	Loophole Helps US Import Ethanol ‘Duty Free’- ED&F.	Version 6124 of the Farm Bill.	California Energy Commission. Ethanol Supply Outlook for California.	http://www.energy.ca.gov/2005publications/CEC-600-2005-037/CEC-600-2005-037.PDF Official Opening of Petrojam Ethanol Limited. http://www.pcj.com/petrojam/whats_new.htm 375Petrojam Limited. http://www.petrojambunkering.com/petrojam_aboutb.htm F.O.	Email Correspondence with Jeffrey Tuite, ED&F Man Ethanol Producer Magazine. Ethanol dehydration facility to be built in Trinidad.	Ethanol Tariff Loophole Sparks a Boom in Caribbean Islands Build Plants To Process Brazil’s Fuel; Farm Belt Cries Foul.	Another Energy Sector Stimulus. http://www.petroleumworldtrinidad.com/storytrini06112606.htm The Wall Street Journal. Ethanol Tariff Loophole Sparks a Boom in Caribbean Islands Build Plants To Process Brazil’s Fuel; Farm Belt Cries Foul.	The Trinidad Guardian. Angostura launches US$11m ethanol plant. http://www.guardian.co.tt/archives/2004-08-06/business1.html Email Correspondence with Jeffrey Tuite, ED&F Man Caribbean Net News.	US$36m ethanol plant for Barbados. http://www.jamaica-gleaner.com Email Correspondence with Jeffrey Tuite, ED&F Man Ethanol Producer Magazine. Entering Tariff-Free.	Ethanol Tariff Loophole Sparks a Boom in Caribbean Islands Build Plants To Process Brazil’s Fuel; Farm Belt Cries Foul.	Email Correspondence with Jeffrey Tuite, ED&F Man The Wall Street Journal. Ethanol Tariff Loophole Sparks a Boom in Caribbean Islands Build Plants To Process Brazil’s Fuel; Farm Belt Cries Foul.	historical ethanol import data as reported by the Renewable Fuels Association,	An Evaluation of the Economics of Biomass Feedstocks: A Synthesis of the Literature. Prepared for the Biomass Research and Development Board.	Forest Resources of the United States,	Timber Products Output Mapmaker Version 1.0.” NASS database. http://www.nass.usda.gov/ USDA WGA Bioenergy Strategic Assessment project findings upcoming as noted in report WGA.	Industry data for 2008 taken from National Biodiesel Board fact sheets at http://www.biodiesel.org/buyingbiodiesel/producers_marketers/Producers%20MapExisting091708.pdf, accessed 10/17/08.	ConocoPhillips Venture in Jeopardy.” The Morning News, article dated 9/26/08. http://www.nwaonline.net/articles/2008/09/26/business/092708fuelcredits.txt “Ethanol Transportation Backgrounder, Expansion of U.S. Corn-based Ethanol from the Agricultural Transportation Perspective”,	Hazardous Liquid Pipelines Transporting Ethanol, Ethanol Blends, and Other Biofuels”, Notice of policy statement and request for comment, Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration, Department of Transportation,	Article on Kinder Morgan investigations re the shipment of ethanol by pipeline: http://www.kindermorgan.com/news/0328BizJournal.pdf “Ethanol Transportation Backgrounder”,	Energy Information Administration (EIA) historical company level ethanol and gasoline import data: http://www.eia.doe.gov/oil_gas/petroleum/data_publications/company_level_imports/cli_historic al.html “The U.S. Truck Driver Shortage: Analysis and Forecasts”, Prepared by Global Insights for the American Trucking Association,	http://www.truckline.com/NR/rdonlyres/E2E789CF-F308-463F-8831-0F7E283A0218/0/ATADriverShortageStudy05.pdf “Renewable Fuel Standard Challenges Faced by Terminals”, Andrea Grant, Independent Fuel Terminal Operators Association,	Infrastructure Requirements for an Expanded Fuel Ethanol Industry”, Downstream Alternative Incorporated,	Standard Challenges Faced by Terminals”, Andrea Grant, Independent Fuel Terminal Operators Association,	Standard Challenges Faced by Terminals”, Andrea Grant, Independent Fuel Terminal Operators Association,	Summary Data on Diesel Fuel Retailers”, Memorandum to the Docket,	Diesel Throughput Volume by Percentage of Diesel Fuel Retailers”, Memorandum to the Docket,	The National Ethanol Vehicle Coalition estimate of E85 refueling facilities is located at	Federal Times, Special Report: Fleet Management.	Ethanol Producer Magazine, “View From the Hill.”	EIA Annual Energy Outlook	Efficiency and Renewable Energy Transportation Energy Book, Vol 26, Table 2.5: Domestic Consumption of Transportation Energy by Moe and Fuel Type	National Ethanol Vehicle Coalition,	3303 can be found at: http://thomas.loc.gov/cgi-bin/query/z?c110:S.3303: House Rule 6559 can be found at: http://thomas.loc.gov/cgi-bin/bdquery/z?d110:H.R.6559: NEVC FYI Newsletter: Volume 14, Issue 14:	Marketing Annual	Survey Evidence on the Importance of Fuel Availability to Choice of Alternative Fuels and Vehicles, Oak Ridge National Laboratory,	Marketing Annual	Associates under subcontract with ICF Consulting Inc; Work Assignment 1-7 and 1-7.1, EPA Contract 68-C-01-164 for MSAT2, Legislative and Regulatory Developments: Effects on Gasoline Supply, Subtasks 3.2, 4.1 and 4.2; benzene, toxics and sulfur control;	Energy, Alternative Fuels & Advanced Vehicles Data Center, Biodiesel Incentives and Laws. Accessed	http://tonto.eia.doe.gov/dnav/pet/pet_cons_prim_a_EPD2D_P00_Mgalpd_a.htm Energy Information Administration, Fuel Oil and Kerosene Sales 2006, Table 16. 2005 data column used. http://www.eia.doe.gov/pub/oil_gas/petroleum/data_publications/fuel_oil_and_kerosene_sales/c urrent/pdf/table16.pdf Clean Air Act Section 211(o)(1)	Natural Assessment of Oil and Gas Fact Sheet: Natural Bitumen Resources of the United States,” Fact Sheet 2006-3133; USGS	Statistical Handbook for Canada’s Upstream Petroleum Industry.	Working Document of the NPC Global Oil & Gas Study&quot;	An Analysis of EPA Biofuel Scenarios with the CARD International Models,	Update of Distillers Grains Displacement Ratios for Corn Ethanol Life-Cycle Analysis,&quot;	Old-growth forests as global carbon sinks.	On Discounting Regulatory Benefits: Risk, Money, and Intergenerational Equity, Chicago Law Review Technical Support Document on Benefits of Reducing GHG Emissions, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,	On avoiding dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system: Formidable challenges ahead.	Old-growth forests as global carbon sinks.	System delimitation in agricultural consequential LCA,” Int J Life Cycle Assess,	Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Sinks (EPA 430-R-08-005), Tables 3-23 and3-24 http://www.epa.gov/climatechange/emissions/usinventoryreport.html U.S. EPA	Regulatory Impact Analysis: Renewable Fuel Standard Program; EPA420-R-07-004; Office of Transportation and Air Quality,	Comparison of Emissions from Conventional and Flexible Fuel Vehicles Operating on Gasoline and E85 Fuels. ERM Report No. 05-039, Emissions Research Division. Available in Docket	Information System. http://www.epa.gov/otaq/cfeis.htm Southwest Research Institute.	Emissions from light duty gasoline vehicles operating on low blend ethanol gasoline and E85.	Comparison of Emissions from Conventional and Flexible Fuel Vehicles Operating on Gasoline and E85 Fuels. ERM Report No. 05-039, Emissions Research Division. Available in Docket	Auto/Oil Air Quality Improvement Research Program.	Biodiesel Effects on Heavy-Duty Highway Engines and Vehicles; Office of Transportation and Air Quality,	A Comprehensive Analysis of Biodiesel Impacts on Exhaust Emissions: Draft Technical Report (EPA420-P-02-001) Memo on MOVESHC, CO & NOx emission rates	Control of Emissions of Air Pollution from Locomotives and Marine Compression-Ignition Engines Less Than 30 Liters per Cylinder (published May 6,	Final Regulatory Impact Analysis: Control of Hazardous Air Pollutants from Mobile Sources; EPA420-R-07-002; Office of Transportation and Air Quality,	Regulatory Impact Analysis: Renewable Fuel Standard Program; EPA420-R-07-004; Office of Transportation and Air Quality,	CRC Project No. E-65. http://www.crcao.com. This document is available in Docket	Review of Data on HAP Content in Gasoline. Memorandum from MACTEC to	Fuel Permeation from Automotive Systems.	Prepared for California Air Resources Board and Coordinating Research Council. http://www.crcao.org/ United States Department of Agriculture, Amber Waves,	Part 63 National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants for Source Categories: Gasoline Distribution Bulk Terminals, Bulk Plants, Pipeline Facilities, and Gasoline Dispensing Facilities; Proposed Rule, Thursday,	Documentation For The Final	Product Supplied, Petroleum Supply Reporting System. http://tonto.eia.doe.gov/dnav/pet/pet_cons_psup_dc_nus_mbbl_a.htm EPA.	Final Rule: Control of Air Pollution From New Motor Vehicles: Heavy-Duty Engine and Vehicle Standards and Highway Diesel Fuel Sulfur Control Requirements,	Final Rule: Control of Emissions of Air Pollution from Locomotives and Marine Compression-Ignition Engines Less than 30 Liters per Cylinder, Regulatory Impact Analysis,	National-Scale Air Toxics Assessment for	Approach for Developing	National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants From Petroleum Refineries.	Product Supplied, Petroleum Supply Reporting System. http://tonto.eia.doe.gov/dnav/pet/pet_cons_psup_dc_nus_mbbl_a.htm	Prevention of Significant Deterioration Construction Permit Application. Prepared for Verasun Fort Dodge,	Control of Hazardous Air Pollutants from Mobile Sources; Final Rule.	Regulation of Fuels and Fuel Additives: Renewable Fuel Standard Program; Final Rule.	Final Regulatory Impact Analysis: Control of Hazardous Air Pollutants from Mobile Sources; EPA420-R-07-002; Office of Transportation and Air Quality, Ann Arbor, MI. http://www.epa.gov/otaq/toxics.htm Energy Information Adminstration.	Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Air Quality Planning and Standards, Research Triangle Park, NC. http://www.epa.gov/ttn/chief/net/2002inventory.html HDD Trucks --	Environmental Protection Agency,	Review of the Governing Equations, Computational Algorithms,	The next generation of integrated air quality modeling: EPA’s Models-3, Atmos Environ 30:1925-1938.	Regulatory Impact Analysis of the Proposed Revisions to the National Ambient Air Quality Standards for Ground-Level Ozone. EPA document number	Final Report: Third Peer Review of the CMAQ Model.	A Description of the Fifth-Generation Penn State/NCAR Mesoscale Model (MM5), NCAR/TN-398+STR., 138 pp, National Center for Atmospheric Research,	GEOS-CHEMv7-01-02 User’s Guide, Atmospheric Chemistry Modeling Group,	Atmospheric Chemistry: Fundamentals and Experimental Techniques,	Atmospheric Degradation of Volatile Organic Compounds.	Evaluated Kinetic and Photochemical Data for Atmospheric Chemistry - IUPAC Subcommittee on Gas Kinetic Data Evaluation for Atmospheric Chemistry.	Evaluated Kinetic and Photochemical Data for Atmospheric Chemistry - IUPAC Subcommittee on Gas Kinetic Data Evaluation for Atmospheric Chemistry.	Evaluated Kinetic and Photochemical Data for Atmospheric Chemistry - IUPAC Subcommittee on Gas Kinetic Data Evaluation for Atmospheric Chemistry.	Evaluated Kinetic and Photochemical Data for Atmospheric Chemistry - IUPAC Subcommittee on Gas Kinetic Data Evaluation for Atmospheric Chemistry.	Evaluated Kinetic and Photochemical Data for Atmospheric Chemistry - IUPAC Subcommittee on Gas Kinetic Data Evaluation for Atmospheric Chemistry.	Chemical Kinetics and Photochemical Data for use in Atmospheric Studies, Evaluation Number 14. NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory http://jpldataeval.jpl.nasa.gov/index.html.	Chemical Kinetics and Photochemical Data for use in Atmospheric Studies, Evaluation Number 14. NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory http://jpldataeval.jpl.nasa.gov/index.html.	Evaluated Kinetic and Photochemical Data for Atmospheric Chemistry - IUPAC Subcommittee on Gas Kinetic Data Evaluation for Atmospheric Chemistry.	Atmospheric Chemistry: Fundamentals and Experimental Techniques,	Chemical Kinetics and Photochemical Data for use in Atmospheric Studies, Evaluation Number 14. NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory.	Updates to the Carbon Bond Chemical Mechanism:	Final Report to the US EPA, RT-0400675,	Evaluated Kinetic and Photochemical Data for Atmospheric Chemistry - IUPAC Subcommittee on Gas Kinetic Data Evaluation for Atmospheric Chemistry.	Effects of Using Oxygenated Fuels on Carbon Monoxide, Formaldehyde and Acetaldehyde Concentrations	Potential Air Quality Effects of Using Ethanol-Gasoline Fuel Blends: A Field Study in Albuquerque,	Ambient levels of peroxyacetyl nitrate in southern California, Report from DGA,	Analysis of the Air Quality Impacts of the Use of Ethanol in Gasoline. California Air Resources Board,	Carvalho LRF (2001) Measurements of Atmospheric Carboxylic Acids and Carbonyl Compounds in Sao Paulo City,	Atmospheric Chemistry of Aldehydes, Enhanced Peroxyacetyl Nitrate Formation from Ethanol-Fueled Vehicles.	Peroxyacetyl nitrate and peroxypropionyl nitrate in Porto Alegre,	Speciated Ambient Carbonyls in Rio de	Computer modeling study of ethanol and aldehyde reactivities in Rio de Janeiro urban air.	Source Contributions to the Mutagenicity of Urban Particulate Air Pollution.	Source Apportionment of PM2.5 in the Southeastern United States Using Solvent-Extractable Organic Compounds as Tracers.	Primary and secondary contributions to ambient PM in the midwestern United States, Environ Sci Technol 42(9):3303-3309. http://pubs.acs.org/cgi-bin/article.cgi/esthag/2008/42/i09/html/es0720412.html Kleindienst TE,	Contributions of Toluene and -pinene to SOA Formed in an Irradiated Toluene/-pinene,NOx/Air Mixture: Comparison of Results Using 14C Content and SOA Organic Tracer Methods,	Review of the Governing Equations, Computational Algorithms,	Secondary organic aerosol formation and transport.	Jianjun Chen, Simon Clegg	Rethinking organic aerosol: Semivolatile emissions and photochemical aging.	National Air Quality and Emissions Trends Report,	Identification of Secondary Organic Aerosol Episodes and Quantitation of Primary and Secondary Organic Aerosol Concentrations During SCAQS.	Estimation of the Monthly Average Ratios of Organic Mass to Organic Carbon for Fine Particulate Matter at an Urban Site,	Estimates of the contributions of biogenic and anthropogenic hydrocarbons to secondary organic aerosol at a southeastern U.S. location.	Contributions of Toluene and -pinene to SOA Formed in an Irradiated Toluene/-pinene,NOx/Air Mixture: Comparison of Results Using 14C Content and SOA Organic Tracer Methods,	Hydroxydicarboxylic acids: Markers for secondary organic aerosol from the photooxidation of -pinene.	Formation of 2-methyl tetrols and 2-methylglyceric acid in secondary organic aerosol from laboratory irradiated isoprene/NOX/SO2/air mixtures and their detection in ambient PM2.5 samples collected in the Eastern United States.	Identification and quantification of aerosol polar oxygenated compounds bearing carboxylic or hydroxyl groups. 2. Organic tracer compounds from monoterpenes.	Determination of secondary organic aerosol products from the photooxidation of toluene and their implications in ambient PM2.5.	Determination of secondary organic aerosol products from the photooxidation of toluene and their implication in ambient PM2.5,	Photochemical aerosol formation from aromatic hydrocarbons in the presence of NOx,	Is benzene a precursor for secondary organic aerosol?	Primary and secondary contributions to ambient PM in the midwestern United States, Environ Sci Technol 42(9):3303-3309.	Estimates of the contributions of biogenic and anthropogenic hydrocarbons to secondary organic aerosol at a southeastern U.S. location.	Global secondary organic aerosol from isoprene oxidation.	β -Caryophyllinic acid: An atmospheric tracer for β-caryophyllene secondary organic aerosol.	Organic aerosol formation from oxidation of biogenic hydrocarbons,	Review of the National Ambient Air Quality Standard for Particulate Matter:	This document is available	Provisional Assessment of Recent Studies on Health Effects of Particulate Matter Exposure. EPA/600/R-06/063.	This document is available	Association of fine particulate matter from different sources with daily mortality in six U.S.	The concentration-response relation between PM(2.5) and daily deaths.”	Air conditioning and source-specific particles as modifiers of the effect of PM10 on hospital admissions for heart and lung disease.” Environ Health Perspect 110(1):43-49.	An association between air pollution and mortality in six U.S.	Lung cancer, cardiopulmonary mortality, and long-term exposure to fine particulate air pollution.”	Reanalysis of the Harvard Six Cities study and the American Cancer Society study of particulate air pollution and mortality. A special report of the Institute&apos;s Particle Epidemiology Reanalysis Project.”	Spatial Analysis of Air Pollution and Mortality in Los Angeles.” Epidemiology.	W.J.; et al.(2004) Ambient air pollution and atherosclerosis in Los Angeles. Environ Health Perspect doi:10.1289/ehp.7523 [Available at http://dx.doi.org/].	Particulate matter exposure in cars is associated with cardiovascular effects in healthy young men.&quot;	Mortality risk associated with short-term exposure to traffic particles and sulfates.	A comparison of proximity and land use regression traffic exposure models and wheezing in infants.	Respiratory health and individual estimated expousure to traffic-related air pollutant in a cohort of young children.	Association of black carbon with cognition among children in a prospective birth cohort study.	Air Quality Criteria for Ozone and Related Photochemical Oxidants (Final).	This document is contained	Review of the National Ambient Air Quality Standards for Ozone: Policy Assessment	This document is available	Estimating Mortality Risk Reduction and Economic Benefits from Controlling Ozone Air Pollution. The National Academies Press:	Respiratory hospital admissions and summertime haze air pollution in Toronto, Ontario: consideration of the role of acid aerosols.	Temporal patterns in air pollution and hospital admissions.	Effects of low ambient levels of ozone and sulfates on the frequency of respiratory admissions to Ontario hospitals.	Air Quality Criteria for Ozone and Related Photochemical Oxidants (Final).	This document is contained	Air Quality Criteria for Ozone and Related Photochemical Oxidants (Final).	This document is contained	Exposure of humans to ambient levels of ozone for 6.6 hours causes cellullar and biochemical changes in the lung.	Time-dependent changes of markers associated with inflammation in the lungs of humans exposed to ambient levels of ozone.	Ozone-induced inflammation in the lower airways of human subjects.	Time course of ozone-induced neutrophilia in normal humans.	COPD prevalence in nonsmokers in high and low photochemical air pollution areas.	Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease symptom effects of long-term cumulative exposure to ambient levels of total oxidants and nitrogen dioxide in California Seventh-day Adventist residents.	Long-term ambient concentrations of total suspended particulates, ozone, and sulfur dioxide and respiratory symptoms in a nonsmoking population.	Review of the National Ambient Air Quality Standards for Ozone: Policy Assessment	This document is available	Air Quality Criteria for Ozone and Related Photochemical Oxidants (Final).	This document is contained	Air Quality Criteria for Ozone and Related Photochemical Oxidants (Final).	This document is contained	Ozone exposure and lung function in children attending a southern California summer camp. Presented at: 83rd annual meeting and exhibition	Acute lung function responses to ambient acid aerosol exposures in children.	Acute respiratory function and transported air pollutants: observational studies. Presented at: 80th annual meeting of the Air Pollution Control Association; June;	Tropospheric ozone and the environment: papers from an international conference;	Effects of single- and multiday ozone exposures on respiratory function in active normal children.	Effects of ambient ozone on respiratory function in active, normal children.	Air Quality Criteria for Ozone and Related Photochemical Oxidants (Final).	This document is contained	Effects of steady-state and variable ozone concentration profiles on pulmonary function.	Ozone concentration and pulmonary response relationships for 6.6-hour exposures with five hours of moderate exercise to 0.08, 0.10, and 0.12 ppm.	Air Quality Criteria for Carbon Monoxide.	Air Quality Criteria for Carbon Monoxide.	Cerebrovascular effects of carbon monoxide.	Behavioral effects of carbon monoxide: meta analyses and extrapolations.	Air Quality Criteria for Carbon Monoxide.	Air Quality Criteria for Carbon Monoxide.	Air Quality Criteria for Carbon Monoxide.	Air Quality Criteria for Carbon Monoxide.	Protecting Visibility in National Parks and Wilderness Areas.	National Ambient Air Quality Standards for Particulate Matter; Proposed Rule; January 17, 2006, Vol71 p 2676. This document is available in Docket EPA-HQ-OAR-2005-0161. This information is available electronically at: http://epa.gov/fedrgstr/EPA-AIR/2006/January/Day-17/a177.pdf final Integrated Review Plan for secondary NoxSox review Environmental Protection Agency	Winter Deposition of Nitrogen and Sulfur in the Eastern Columbia River Gorge National Scenic Area, USDA Forest Service.	Reactive nitrogen and the world: 200 years of change.	National Estuarine Eutrophication Assessment, Effects of Nutrient Enrichment	Absorption of air pollution by plants, and consequences for growth.”	Air Quality Criteria for Ozone and Related Photochemical Oxidants (Final).	This document is contained	Variation in plant response to ozone: a conceptual model of physiological events.” In:	Air Quality Criteria for Ozone and Related Photochemical Oxidants (Final).	This document is contained	Air Quality Criteria for Ozone and Related Photochemical Oxidants (Final).	Air Quality Criteria for Ozone and Related Photochemical Oxidants (Final).	Air Quality Criteria for Ozone and Related Photochemical Oxidants (Final).	Simulating ozone effects on forest productivity: interactions between leaf canopy and stand level processes.”	Mechanistic analysis of plant responses to air pollution.”	Air Quality Criteria for Ozone and Related Photochemical Oxidants (Final).	Air Quality Criteria for Ozone and Related Photochemical Oxidants (Final).	Impact of Air Pollutants on Southern Pine Forests.	Air Pollution Damage to U.S.	Impact of ozone on the growth and yield of trees: A review.”	Air Quality Criteria for Ozone and Related Photochemical Oxidants (Final).	Air Quality Criteria for Ozone and Related Photochemical Oxidants (Final).	Effects of oxidant air pollutants on forest succession in the mixed conifer forest type of southern California.” In: Air Pollutants Effects On Forest Ecosystems,	Oxidant air pollution effects on a western coniferous forest ecosystem.	Air Quality Criteria for Ozone and Related Photochemical Oxidants (Final).	Implications of environmental policy for U.S. agriculture: the case of ambient ozone standards.”	The benefits of pollution control: the case of ozone and U.S. agriculture.”	A reassessment of the economic effects of ozone on U.S.	Urban ornamental plants: sensitivity to ozone and potential economic losses. U.S. EPA, Office of Air Quality Planning and Standards, Research Triangle Park. Under contract to RADIAN Corporation, contract no. 68-D3-0033,	Integrated Risk Information System File of Acrolein. National Center for Environmental Assessment,	National-Scale Air Toxics Assessment for 1999. This material is available electronically at http://www.epa.gov/ttn/atw/nata1999/risksum.html.	National-Scale Air Toxics Assessment for 1999. http://www.epa.gov/ttn/atw/nata1999. 745 U.S. EPA .	Integrated Risk Information System File for Benzene. This material is available electronically at:	Agency for Research on Cancer, IARC monographs on the evaluation of carcinogenic risk of chemicals to humans, Volume 29, Some industrial chemicals and dyestuffs, International Agency for Research on Cancer, World Health Organization,	Synergistic action of the benzene metabolite hydroquinone on myelopoietic stimulating activity of granulocyte/macrophage colony-stimulating factor in vitro,	Monographs on the evaluation of carcinogenic risk of chemicals to humans, Volume 29, Supplement 7, Some industrial chemicals and dyestuffs, World Health Organization,	Hematotoxicity and carcinogenicity of benzene.	Benzene toxicity. Occupational medicine.	Hematotoxicity among Chinese workers heavily exposed to benzene.	EPA	HEI Report 115, Validation & Evaluation of Biomarkers in Workers Exposed to Benzene in China.	Hematological changes among Chinese workers with a broad range of benzene exposures.	Hematotoxically in Workers Exposed to Low Levels of Benzene.	Benzene metabolism in rodents at doses relevant to human exposure from Urban Air. Research Reports Health Effect Inst.	Health Assessment of 1,3-Butadiene. Office of Research and Development, National Center for Environmental Assessment,	Full IRIS Summary for 1,3-butadiene (CASRN 106-99-0)” Environmental Protection Agency,	for Research on Cancer (IARC)	Subchronic toxicity of 4-vinylcyclohexene in rats and mice by inhalation.	Assessment of Health Risks to Garment Workers and Certain Home Residents from Exposure to Formaldehyde, Office of Pesticides and Toxic Substances,	Mortality from lymphohematopoetic malignancies among workers in formaldehyde industries.	Mortality from solid cancers among workers in formaldehyde industries.	Mortality among a cohort of garment workers exposed to formaldehyde: an update.	Extended follow-up of a cohort of British chemical workers exposed to formaldehyde.	Biologically motivated computational modeling of formaldehyde carcinogenicity in the F344 rat.	Human respiratory tract cancer risks of inhaled formaldehyde: Dose-response predictions derived from biologically-motivated computational modeling of a combined rodent and human dataset.	770 Chemical Industry Institute of Toxicology (CIIT).1999. Formaldehyde: Hazard characterization and dose-response assessment for carcinogenicity by the route of inhalation.	for Research on Cancer	Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR).	Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service. http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxprofiles/tp111.html WHO (2002) Concise International Chemical Assessment Document 40: Formaldehyde. Published under the joint sponsorship of the United Nations Environment Programme, the International Labour Organization, and the World Health Organization, and produced within the framework of the Inter-Organization Programme for the Sound Management of Chemicals.	Integrated Risk Information System File of Acetaldehyde. Research and Development, National Center for Environmental Assessment,	for Research on Cancer (IARC).	Integrated Risk Information System File of Acetaldehyde. This material is available electronically at http://www.epa.gov/iris/subst/0290.htm.	Integrated Risk Information System File of Acrolein. Research and Development, National Center for Environmental Assessment, Washington, DC. This material is available electronically at http://www.epa.gov/iris/subst/0364.htm.	Inhalation toxicity of acetaldehyde in rats. I. Acute and subacute studies.	Aerosolized acetaldehyde induces histamine-mediated bronchoconstriction in asthmatics.	Integrated Risk Information System File of Acrolein. Research and Development, National Center for Environmental Assessment, Washington, DC. This material is available at http://www.epa.gov/iris/subst/0364.htm International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC).	Experimentelle reizwirkungen von Acrolein auf den Menschen. Int Arch Occup Environ Hlth 40(2):117-130. In	Immediate sensory nerve-mediated respiratory responses to irritants in healthy and allergic airway-diseased mice.	Effect of possible smog irritants on human subjects JAMA165: 1980-2010,	Toxicological Review of Naphthalene (Reassessment of the Inhalation Cancer Risk), Environmental Protection Agency, Integrated Risk Information System, Research and Development, National Center for Environmental Assessment, Washington, DC. This material is available electronically at http://www.epa.gov/iris/subst/0436.htm.	External Peer Review for the IRIS Reassessment of the Inhalation Carcinogenicity of Naphthalene.	790 International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC). (2002). Monographs on the Evaluation of the Carcinogenic Risk of Chemicals for Humans.	Toxicological Review of Naphthalene, Environmental Protection Agency, Integrated Risk Information System, Research and Development, National Center for Environmental Assessment,	This material is available electronically at http://www.epa.gov/iris/subst/0436.htm 792 International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC).	Department of Health and Human Services.	Department of Health and Human Services.	Alcohol teratogeniesis: mechanisms of damage and strategies for intervention.	Fetal alcohol spectrum disorders: an overview with emphasis on changes in brain and behavior.	Prenatal alcohol exposure and fetal programming: effects on neuroendocrine and immune function.	Teratogenic effects of alcohol: a decade of brain imaging.	National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism report on moderate drinking.	Global status report on alcohol 2004. Geneva, Switzerland: Department of Mental Health and Substance Abuse. Available: http://www.who.int/substance_abuse/publications/global_status_report_2004_overview.pdf 801	Prenatal alcohol exposure comparability of effects in humans and animal models.	Full IRIS Summary for n-Hexane (CASRN 11054-3). Integrated Risk Information System (IRIS),	Air quality criteria for ozone and related photochemical oxidants (Ozone CD). Research Triangle Park, NC: National Cetner for Environmental Assesssment; report no.	EPA Air Quality Criteria for Ozone and Related Photochemical Oxidants (Final). U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, D.C., EPA 600/R-05/004aF-cF, 2006. page 5-63. This document is available in Docket EPA-HQ-OAR-2005-0161. This document may be accessed electronically at: http://www.epa.gov/ttn/naaqs/standards/ozone/s_o3_cr_cd.html 806 U.S. EPA Air Quality Criteria for Ozone and Related Photochemical Oxidants (Final). U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,	A physiological and morphological study on the injury caused by exposure to the air pollutant, peroxyacetyl nitrate (PAN), based on the quantitative assessment of the injury.	Detection of peroxyacetyl nitrate at phytotoxic level and its effects on vegetation in Taiwan.	Inhibitory effect of peroxyacetyl nitrate on cyclic photophosphorylation by chloroplasts from black valentine bean leaves. Plant Physiol.	Effects of ambient concentrations of peroxyacetyl nitrate on navel orange trees.	Nitrogen deposition in California forests:	Effects of organic chemicals in the atmosphere on terrestrial plants.	Effects of VOCs on herbaceous plants in an open-top chamber experiment.	Effects of VOCs on herbaceous plants in an open-top chamber experiment.	Epicuticular wax of Norway spruce needles as indicator of traffic pollutant deposition.	Uptake and transformation of benzene and toluene by plant leaves.	A copy of the current USDA model can be obtained by contacting the corresponding author.	Plant Size: Capital Cost Relationships in	XXXX of this DRIA for biomass costs; coal costs taken from EIA Annual Energy Outlook	Oak Ridge National Laboratories, available at http://bioenergy.ornl.gov/papers/misc/biochar_factsheet.html (accessed October 1, 2008) EIA Annual Energy Outlook 2008, Tables 8 and 13. Available at http://www.eia.doe.gov/oiaf/aeo/aeoref_tab.html Corn Stover Collection	National Renewable Energy Laboratory Golden, Colorado, .Innovative Methods for Corn Stover Collecting, Handling, Storing and Transporting,	Department of Applied Economics, College of Food, Agriculture, and Natural Resources Sciences, University of Minnesota, The Economics of Harvesting and Transporting Corn Stover for Conversion to Fuel Ethanol: A Case Study for Minnesota, Staff Paper P06-12	Biological Systems Engineering Dept(MS 0303), Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061, Hosein Shapouri, Senior Agricultural Economist, U.S.D.A., Office of Energy Policy and New Uses, Washington DC 20250-3815, Economic Analysis of two Receiving Facility Designs for a Bioenergy Plant, Paper Number: 076051,2007 ASABE Annual International Meeting, Sponsored by ASABE,	37830, Stochastic Modeling of Costs of Corn Stover Costs Delivered to an Intermediate Storage Facility, Paper Number: 024190, Presented at: 2002 ASAE Annual International Meeting / CIGR XVth World Congress, Sponsored by ASAE and CIGR, Hyatt Regency	American Society of Agricultural and Biological Engineers (ASABE), ASABE Standards, 2007, 54th Edition, Standards, Engineering Practices,	extension economist, Machinery Management: Estimating Farm Machinery Costs,	Estimating the Field Capacity of Farm Machines, File A3-24,	Extension Agricultural Economist, Kansas State University Agricultural Experiment Station and Cooperative Extension Service, Farm Machinery Operation Cost Calculations,	United States, Department of Agriculture National Agricultural Statistics Service, Pr 1-3 (07) National Agricultural Statistics Service, Quick Stats (Agricultural Statistics Data Base, State and County	Graduate Research Assistant, Department of Biological Systems Engineering,	Supplies, Agronomy Journal 99:1–11, American Society of Agronomy, Madison, WI 53711 USA; doi:10.2134/agronj2005.0222 prepared 2005; published online 1	Extension Economist, Estimating Farm Machinery Costs, PM710,	Extension Engineer, Biological Systems Engineering Department,	Biological Systems Engineering Department, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061-0303, Comparison between Two Policy Strategies for Scheduling in a Biomass Logistic System, Paper Number: 071095, Presented at the 2007 ASABE Annual International Meeting, Sponsored by ASABE,	Agronomy Department, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907-1150; Questions Relative to Harvesting	The Great Biomass Inquisition, Ethanol Producer Magazine.	Mich.; ASAE Publication Number 701P1103e	ISSN 0001−2351; Publication of this article approved by the Director of the Kentucky Agricultural Experiment Station and designated Paper No. 04-05-066. Graeme R Quick, Single-pass Corn and Stover Harvesters: Development and Performance.	Mich.; ASAE Publication Number 701P1103e	Professor of Agricultural Engineering, Garrit	The University of Tennessee, Dept. of Biosystems Engineering and Environmental Science,	Format Feedstock Supply System Design for Lignocellulosic Biomass, Western Region Biomass Workshop August 27,	ORNL, Energy Efficiency and Renewable	ITF Round Tables No. 138. Biofuels: Linking Support to Performance.; Unicamp	Powerpoint presentation at Ethanol Seminar in BNDES Smeets	Comparative Economics of Biorefineries based on the Biochemical and Thermochemical Platforms,	Infrastructure Requirements for an Expanded Fuel Ethanol Industry, Downstream Alternatives Inc.,	Tables ES-9 and ES 10, Infrastructure Requirements for an Expanded Fuel Ethanol Industry, Downstream Alternatives Inc,	Model of the National Energy Modeling System,	News, fuel retail facility station count,	Modeling the Effect of Renewable Fuels Standards 2, Prepared for the Environmental Protection Agency by Jacobs Consultancy under contract with Southwest Research Associates,	Department of Agriculture, “Acreage report”,	Tight Supply and Strong Demand May Raise U.S. Nitrogen Fertilizer Prices”, Amber Waves,	Environmental Protection Agency,	Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service, “U.S. Fertilizer Use and Price”,	Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service, “Farm Income and Costs:	Raising the Stakes”,	Effects of the Conservation Reserve Program on Priority Mixed-grass Prairie Birds: A Conservation Effects Assessment Project,	Iowa Land Value Survey,	Corn Stover to Sustain Soil Organic Carbon Further Constrains Biomass Supply”, Agronomy Journal, Volume 99,	Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Water, Wadeable Streams Assessment: A Collaborative Survey of the Nation&apos;s Streams,	Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Water, National Water Quality Inventory: Report to Congress	Atmospheric Deposition of Nitrogen: Implications for Nutrient Over-Enrichment of Coastal Waters”, Estuaries, Volume 25, Number 4B,	Environmental Conservation and Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection, A Total Maximum Daily Load Analysis to Achieve Water Quality Standards for Dissolved Oxygen in Long Island Sound,	DRAFT Lake Tahoe Total Maximum Daily Load Technical Report: California and Nevada, California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Lahontan Region and Nevada Division of Environmental Protection,	Science and Technical Advisory Committee, Workshop on Atmospheric Deposition of Nitrogen: Media Brief,	Dead Zone’ Again Rivals Record Size,	Differences in Phosphorus and Nitrogen Delivery to the Gulf of Mexico from the Mississippi River Basin”, Environmental Science and Technology, Volume 42, Number 3,	Corn-based Ethanol Production Compromises Goal of Reducing Nitrogen Export by the Mississippi River”, PNAS,	Agriculture and Trade Policy, Staying home: How ethanol will change U.S. corn exports,	Streamflow and Nutrient Fluxes of the Mississippi-Atchafalaya River Basin and Subbasins for the Period of Record Through	The Soil and Water Assessment Tool: Historical Development, Applications, and Future Research Directions”,	Regional Estimation of Base Flow and Groundwater Recharge in the Upper Mississippi Basin”,	Development of a 2001 National Landcover Database for the United States”. Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing, Volume 70, Number 7,	Renewable Fuels Association, “Ethanol Biorefinery Locations,” http://www.ethanolrfa.org/industry/locations,	Commission, Biofuels and the Bay: Getting It Right to Benefit Farms, Forests and the Chesapeake,	State of the Bay,	Environmental Protection Agency, Region 7, Environmental Laws Applicable to Construction and Operation of Ethanol Plants,	Forum: A Comparison of Benzene and Toluene Plume Lengths for Sites Contaminated with Regular vs. Ethanol-amended Gasoline”, Ground Water Monitoring and Remediation,	Ground-Water Availability in the United States: U.S. Geological Survey Circular 1323, 2008, page 33, available online at http://pubs.usgs.gov/circ/1323/ McGuire,	Environmental Protection Agency, Consumer Fact Sheet on Nitrates/Nitrites, available online at: http://www.epa.gov/safewater/dwh/c-ioc/nitrates.html U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Water, FACTOIDS: Drinking Water and Ground Water Statistics for 2007, EPA 816-K-07-004, 2008, available online at: http://www.epa.gov/safewater/data/pdfs/data_factoids_2007.pdf U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Consumer Fact Sheet on Atrazine, available online at: http://www.epa.gov/safewater/contaminants/dw_contamfs/atrazine.html U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,	Environmental Protection Agency, Safe Drinking Water Information System (SDWIS) End of Year data for FY	The Quality of Our Nation&apos;s Waters Pesticides in the Nation&apos;s Streams and Ground Water, 1992-2001: U.S. Geological Survey Circular 129, 2006, Tables 7A-1 to 7A-4, available online at: http://water.usgs.gov/nawqa/pnsp/pubs/circ1291/appendix7/7a.html Great Lakes Commission, The Potential Impacts of Increased Corn Production for Ethanol in the Great Lakes-St. Lawrence River Region,
ADM Plans Entry Into Sugar-Cane Ethanol in Brazil	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.72	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.49	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.7	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.73	0.7	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.72	0.74	0.64	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.71	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.62	0.72	0.74	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.64	0.72	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.74	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.75	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.44999999999999996	0.6	0.44999999999999996	0.6	0.72	0.62	0.54	0.4	0.44999999999999996	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.74	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.47	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.54	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.78	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.55	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.64	0.52	0.7	0.6	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.74	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.64	0.54	0.6	0.72	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.56	0.73	0.62	0.73	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.56	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.65	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.54
ADM Press Release	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.77	0.53	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.48	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.48	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.53	0.71	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.77	0.77	0.77	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.77	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.53	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.24	0.65	0.71	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.53	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.53	0.71	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.53	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.8	0.71	0.71	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.77	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.53	0.53	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.71	0.53	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.77	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.77	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.71	0.77	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.77	0.71	0.76	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.48	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.52	0.53	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.48	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.71	0.65	0.71	0.83	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.71	0.53	0.65	0.77	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.71	0.77	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.77	0.65	0.71	0.53	0.65	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.77	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.77	0.5900000000000001	0.77	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65
ADM Press Release	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.77	0.53	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.48	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.48	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.53	0.71	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.77	0.77	0.77	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.77	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.53	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.24	0.65	0.71	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.53	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.53	0.71	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.53	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.8	0.71	0.71	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.77	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.53	0.53	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.71	0.53	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.77	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.77	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.71	0.77	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.77	0.71	0.76	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.48	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.52	0.53	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.48	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.71	0.65	0.71	0.83	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.71	0.53	0.65	0.77	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.71	0.77	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.77	0.65	0.71	0.53	0.65	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.77	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.77	0.5900000000000001	0.77	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65
Algae Corrals Carbon Dioxide	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.72	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.72	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5	0.61	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5	0.47	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.0	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.61	0.47	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.0	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.54	0.65	0.54	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.77	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.72	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.54	0.54	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.47	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.47	0.72	0.65	0.4	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.47	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.65	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.4	0.4	0.47	0.43000000000000005	0.4	0.4	0.4	0.4	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.54	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.72	0.61	1.0	0.61	0.54	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.65	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.75	0.54	0.7	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001
Angostura launches US $11m ethanol plant	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.73	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.44999999999999996	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.5	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.72	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.63	0.71	0.65	0.5	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.53	0.47	0.5	0.65	0.5	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.55	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.030000000000000027	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.55	0.63	0.73	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.73	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.73	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.71	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.73	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.75	0.65	1.0	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.73	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.75	0.65	0.75	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.73	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.55	0.55	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.65	0.72	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.73	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.5	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6
Article on Kinder Morgan investigations re: the shipment of ethanol by pipeline	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.55	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.4	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.73	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.62	0.64	0.55	0.63	0.54	0.62	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.020000000000000018	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.52	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.55	0.49	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.51	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.51	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.52	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.51	0.51	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.62	0.55	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.63	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.55	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.62	0.61	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	1.0	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.5	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.53	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.54	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.52	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.48	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001
Barbados to build $72 million ethanol dehydration plant	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.51	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.64	0.5	0.71	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.53	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.64	0.62	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.56	0.64	0.53	0.6	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.4	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.77	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.45999999999999996	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.51	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.7	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.51	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.69	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.71	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.64	1.0	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.75	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.71	0.64	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.65	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001
Brazil priming ethanol initiative to supply fuel-thirsty Japan	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.55	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.47	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.85	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.55	0.73	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.71	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	1.0	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001
Brazil says biofuel production not to blame for food crisis	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.51	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.51	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.51	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.51	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.5	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.51	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.51	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.7	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.4	0.6	0.56	0.55	0.55	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.55	0.53	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.53	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.51	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	1.0	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.55	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.56	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.72	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.54	0.5	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.53	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.55
BRAZIL: Loophole Hurt U.S. Ethanol Prices	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.71	0.69	0.69	0.71	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.74	0.71	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.74	0.74	0.74	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.64	0.74	0.64	0.74	0.64	0.71	0.61	0.69	0.64	0.71	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.71	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.71	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.71	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.72	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.71	0.72	0.61	0.72	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.71	0.74	0.71	0.72	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.72	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.75	0.75	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.76	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.71	0.64	0.4	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.71	0.64	0.74	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.7	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.43999999999999995	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.69	0.61	0.74	0.74	0.71	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.71	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.71	0.75	0.64	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.74	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.74	0.69	0.69	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.64	0.71	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.71	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.72	0.71	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.7	0.64	0.7	0.69	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.74	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.64	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.71	0.71	0.64	0.69	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.61	0.69	0.71	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.64	0.74	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.71	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.69	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.71	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.71	0.54	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.71	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.71	0.71	0.69	0.71	0.69	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.78	0.64	0.78	0.74	0.69	0.69	0.73	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.71	0.64	0.76	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.69	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.69	0.69	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.61
Chevron and NREL to Collaborate on Research to Produce Transportation Fuels using Algae	0.56	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.55	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.55	0.65	0.5	0.55	0.56	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.63	0.55	0.65	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.55	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.0	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.64	0.65	0.5	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.77	0.62	0.6	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.71	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.52	0.6	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.61	0.63	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.49	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.44999999999999996	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.31999999999999995	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.43999999999999995	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.55	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001
China to freeze approvals for corn processing projects for 3 years	0.6	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.72	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.69	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.0	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.72	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.48	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.54	0.52	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.54	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	1.0	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.73	0.5800000000000001	0.73	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.71	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001
Entering Tariff-Free	0.65	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.5	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.75	0.55	0.65	0.55	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.75	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.7	0.55	0.7	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.75	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.75	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.75	0.55	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.75	0.55	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.55	0.65	0.55	0.55	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.55	0.6	0.7	0.7	0.55	0.8	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.7	0.55	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.75	0.65	0.5	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.44999999999999996	0.7	0.65	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.75	0.55	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.8	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.65	0.85	0.6	0.0	0.0	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.5	0.5	0.6	0.0	0.5	0.5	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.5	0.7	0.75	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.55	0.6	0.65	0.75	0.75	0.6	0.6	0.75	0.55	0.6	0.75	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.7	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.75	0.75	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.55	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.55	0.7	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.75	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.65	0.55	0.55	0.7	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.7	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.5	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.5	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.5	0.44999999999999996	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.44999999999999996	0.5	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.55	0.75	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.5	0.6	0.55	0.77	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.65
Ethanol dehydration facility to be built in Trinidad	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.62	0.54	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.54	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.56	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.54	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.69	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.47	0.5800000000000001	0.47	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.47	0.54	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.7	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.63	0.56	0.53	0.71	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.0	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.49	0.65	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.49	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.54	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.54	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.52	0.52	0.6	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.56	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.72	0.54	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.72	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.73	0.6	0.73	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.56	0.69	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.62	0.64	0.56	0.52	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.52	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001
Ethanol Giants Struggle to Crack Brazil Market	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.53	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.72	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.74	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.45999999999999996	0.5900000000000001	0.45999999999999996	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.45999999999999996	0.55	0.6	0.64	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.77	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.5	0.5	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.55	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.72	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.7	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.7	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.72	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.55	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.73	0.61	0.73	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.55
Ethanol Tariff Loophole Sparks a Boom in Caribbean Islands Build Plants to Process Brazil's Fuels: Farm Belt Cries Foul	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.54	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.52	0.63	0.54	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.61	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.74	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.64	0.040000000000000036	0.040000000000000036	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.040000000000000036	0.040000000000000036	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.53	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.61	0.64	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.56	0.6	0.73	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.73	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.55	0.7	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.55	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62
Ethanol: From Brazil to the World	0.61	0.55	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.52	0.4	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.73	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.7	0.52	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.7	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.48	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.49	0.64	0.49	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.33999999999999997	0.5800000000000001	0.33999999999999997	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.55	0.6	0.33999999999999997	0.0	0.5	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.49	0.49	0.64	0.85	0.6699999999999999	0.49	0.45999999999999996	0.64	0.6	0.52	0.61	0.45999999999999996	0.52	0.52	0.61	0.55	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.52	0.49	0.49	0.49	0.55	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.52	0.52	0.55	0.64	0.49	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.55	0.75	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.7	0.64	0.61	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.55	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.45999999999999996	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.52	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.61	0.64	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.49	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.43000000000000005	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.73	0.5800000000000001	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.73	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.55	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.7	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.55	0.52	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.61	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.55
Fuel Retail facility station count	0.62	0.5	0.56	0.5	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.53	0.56	0.56	0.5	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5	0.53	0.56	0.56	0.65	0.5	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.48	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.44999999999999996	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.44999999999999996	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.44999999999999996	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.53	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.56	0.44999999999999996	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.53	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.53	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.53	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.48	0.65	0.56	0.56	0.53	0.53	0.65	0.7	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.74	0.65	0.65	0.44999999999999996	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.53	0.5	0.53	0.5	0.53	0.53	0.56	0.53	0.53	0.48	0.48	0.48	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.42000000000000004	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.53	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.62	0.56	0.48	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.56	0.62	0.53	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.53	0.53	0.53	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.72	0.56	0.53	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.7	0.56	0.7	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.53	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.7	0.53	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.53	0.7	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.53	0.53	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.48	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5	0.5900000000000001	1.0	0.53	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.65	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.53	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.53	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.5	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.53	0.53	0.62	0.06000000000000005	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.74	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.53	0.56	0.56	0.65	0.56	0.56	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53
FYI Newsletter Volume 13, Issue 10	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.77	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.74	0.71	0.79	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.62	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.77	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.71	0.65	0.71	0.74	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.8	0.74	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.76	0.71	0.62	0.74	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.74	0.62	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.74	0.71	0.71	0.62	0.71	0.77	0.72	0.71	0.72	0.74	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.72	0.62	0.72	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.77	0.72	0.74	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.74	0.77	0.74	0.74	0.65	0.77	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.71	0.71	0.62	0.71	0.62	0.74	0.71	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.74	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.74	0.71	0.74	0.74	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.72	0.65	0.77	0.06000000000000005	0.75	0.65	0.75	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.71	0.79	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.74	0.79	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.74	0.74	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.71	0.76	0.65	0.74	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.74	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.74	0.65	0.56	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.62	0.71	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.74	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.8	0.74	0.65	1.0	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.62	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.71	0.74	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.74	0.74	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.71	0.74	0.74	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.74	0.71	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.65	0.65	0.77	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.79	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.53	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.53	0.74	0.65	0.53	0.71	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999
Genencor Launches First Ever Commercial Enzyme Product for Cellulosic Ethanol	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.51	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.51	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.73	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.36	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.69	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.56	0.71	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.75	0.62	0.75	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.72	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.48	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.69	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.55	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.73	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.52
Groundbreaking Initiated for Unique Renewable Fuels Plant in Louisiana	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.74	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.65	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.56	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.76	0.53	0.53	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.5	0.7	0.69	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.7	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.5	0.56	0.5	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.7	0.62	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.53	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.53	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.56	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.65	0.65	0.56	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.73	0.63	0.73	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.62
Investor Vinod Khosla: Advanced biofuels are closer than you think	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.53	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.53	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.71	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.71	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.42000000000000004	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.5	0.52	0.64	0.61	0.52	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.69	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.4	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5	0.5	0.61	0.63	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.7	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.52	0.61	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.53	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6
Jatropha harmful for kids, soil and aquatic life: scientist	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.6	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.7	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.0	0.56	0.65	0.56	0.7	0.56	0.56	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.53	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.0	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.65	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.65	0.56	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.7	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.75	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.63	1.0	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.53	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.72	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.73	0.5800000000000001	0.73	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.71	0.62	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62
MarketFacts 2007	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.75	0.75	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.5	0.75	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.75	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.75	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.8200000000000001	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.75	0.75	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.8200000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.75	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.69	0.63	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.69	0.69	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.69	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.5	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.69	0.74	0.69	0.75	0.8	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.5	0.63	0.69	0.75	0.77	0.63	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.75	0.8200000000000001	0.63	0.75	0.75	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.5	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.75	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.75	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.69	0.63	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.8200000000000001	0.75	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.75	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.69	0.75	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.75	0.75	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.75	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.75	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.75	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	1.0	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.75	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.5	0.5	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.75	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.63	0.8200000000000001	0.75	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.8200000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.69	0.75	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.63
NEVC FYI Newsletter: Volume 14, Issue 14	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.78	0.63	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.78	0.6799999999999999	0.76	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.65	0.73	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.73	0.7	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.65	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.78	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.73	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.73	0.63	0.78	0.73	0.73	0.65	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.73	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.73	0.65	0.73	0.65	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.73	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.73	0.65	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.76	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.73	0.65	0.72	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.74	0.7	0.71	0.65	0.7	0.8	0.72	0.7	0.72	0.73	0.65	0.7	0.74	0.72	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.7	0.72	0.7	0.72	0.7	0.72	0.7	0.73	0.8	0.72	0.73	0.65	0.7	0.72	0.7	0.74	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.72	0.7	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.7	0.75	0.8	0.73	0.73	0.65	0.78	0.7	0.71	0.73	0.73	0.65	0.73	0.65	0.75	0.7	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.65	0.4	0.73	0.7	0.78	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.73	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.78	0.73	0.7	0.75	0.73	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.73	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.73	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.0	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.73	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.73	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.73	0.79	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.73	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.73	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.73	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.76	0.7	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.73	0.73	0.76	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.73	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.73	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.75	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.75	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.73	0.75	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.65	0.63	0.73	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.73	0.7	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.73	0.7	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.8	0.75	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.73	0.7	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.75	0.65	0.73	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.64	0.7	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.63	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.75	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.7	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.73	0.7	0.75	0.73	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.78	0.73	0.7	0.75	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.73	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.75	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.79	0.73	0.7	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.7	0.75	0.55	0.73	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.55	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.53	0.73	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.7
Pipeline Projects on Hold	0.48	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.48	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.48	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.43999999999999995	0.6	0.64	0.48	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.48	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.52	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.52	0.56	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.52	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.56	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.52	0.56	0.56	0.52	0.56	0.71	0.6	0.52	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.7	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.48	0.6	0.56	0.52	0.64	0.56	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.48	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.0	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.5	0.48	0.52	0.48	0.48	0.48	0.43999999999999995	0.64	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.52	0.64	0.56	0.43999999999999995	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.56	0.72	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.43999999999999995	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.52	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.72	0.52	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.48	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.4	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.48	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.52	0.52	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.52	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.52	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.52	0.52	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.52	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.48	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.52	0.64	0.48	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.56	0.6	0.48	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.48	0.52	0.52	0.6	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.48	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.48	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.48	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.56	0.79	0.64	0.48	0.48	0.6	0.48	0.52	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.52	0.56	0.71	0.48	0.6	0.64	0.48	0.48	0.52
Purdue yeast makes ethanol from agricultural waste more effectively	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.71	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.72	0.5	0.6	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.5	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.64	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.64	0.64	0.72	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.5	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.47	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.74	0.54	0.54	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.54	0.39	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.55	0.69	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.54	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.73	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.69	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	1.0	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.56	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.54	0.65	0.6	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.56	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001
Rees scraps biofuel mandates	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.75	0.54	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.65	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.5	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.75	0.61	0.54	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.54	0.65	0.54	0.65	0.61	0.54	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.54	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.54	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.54	0.65	0.54	0.6	0.65	0.5	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.54	0.5	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.54	0.72	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5	0.0	0.77	0.47	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.54	0.54	0.65	0.65	0.54	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.5	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.76	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.75	0.54	0.75	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.54	0.54	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.65	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.72	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.72	0.65	0.61	0.5	0.65	0.65	0.75	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.72	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.54	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5	0.54	0.65	0.54	0.65	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.65	0.54	0.65	0.61	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.65	0.65	0.54	0.54	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.54	0.65	0.61	0.54	0.65	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.65	0.72	0.61	0.54	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.5	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	1.0	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.54	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.54	0.54	0.61	0.65	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.54	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.65	0.54	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.75	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.7	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.54	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.47	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001
Senate Finance May Take Up Drawback Loophole As Part of Energy Bill	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.53	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.48	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.72	0.74	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.62	0.72	0.74	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.74	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.72	0.7	0.62	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.52	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.74	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.69	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.77	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.53	0.69	0.72	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.49	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.72	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.7	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.72	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.72	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.7	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.48	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63
Special Report: Fleet Management	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.69	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.72	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.47	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.47	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.75	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.6	0.71	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.72	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.77	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.0	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.54	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.69	0.54	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.47	0.63	0.69	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.47	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	1.0	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.47	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.47	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.75	0.6	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.43999999999999995	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999
Sugar Gains Caped by Brazilian Ethanol Expansion	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.42000000000000004	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.71	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.71	0.69	0.71	0.69	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.53	0.56	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.48	0.53	0.48	0.53	0.69	0.65	0.06999999999999995	0.33999999999999997	0.48	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.61	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.53	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.53	0.55	0.55	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.72	0.61	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.73	0.55	0.63	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.73	0.65	0.55	0.71	0.71	0.63	0.61	0.73	0.7	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.72	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.73	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.75	0.61	0.65	0.55	0.61	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.55	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.73	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.61	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.53	0.55	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.71	0.63	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.5700000000000001
Sugarcane Industry in Brazil: Ethanol, Sugar, Bioelectricity	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.0	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.42000000000000004	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.69	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.52	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.47	0.6	0.47	0.6	0.72	0.63	0.49	0.33999999999999997	0.47	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.52	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.7	0.69	0.6	0.7	0.55	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.69	0.65	0.64	0.74	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.55	0.63	0.72	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.7	0.65	0.72	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.72	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.71	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.74	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.75	0.64	0.75	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.55	0.62	0.55	0.55	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001
Tax Loophole Helps US Import Ethanol 'Duty Free'	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.69	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.61	0.69	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.61	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.73	0.61	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.76	0.69	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.75	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.75	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.75	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.73	0.65	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.27	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.69	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.72	0.77	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.13	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.55	0.69	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.71	0.72	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.61	0.69	0.72	0.69	0.71	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.71	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.71	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.73	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.69	0.69	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.74	0.74	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.74	0.74	0.74	0.73	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.69	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.73	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.73	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.71	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.71	0.69	0.71	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.75	0.65	0.75	0.72	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.55	0.55	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.69	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001
The Great Biomass Inquisition	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.52	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.52	0.44999999999999996	0.52	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.44999999999999996	0.69	0.49	0.56	0.63	0.53	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.52	0.56	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.44999999999999996	0.52	0.44999999999999996	0.49	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.56	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.44999999999999996	0.63	0.63	0.52	0.44999999999999996	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.73	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.44999999999999996	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.76	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.52	0.52	0.63	0.52	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.72	0.56	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.49	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.49	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.76	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.52	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.52	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	1.0	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.52	0.73	0.52	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.69	0.56	0.63	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.52	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.0	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.56	0.52	0.76	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.75	0.56	0.78	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.56	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.44999999999999996
Thermochemical Versus Biochemical	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.76	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.73	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.55	0.55	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.55	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.61	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.64	0.61	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.71	0.7	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.64	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.45999999999999996	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.69	0.69	0.61	0.0	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.73	0.5700000000000001	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.52	0.64	0.61	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.73	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.73	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.45999999999999996	0.45999999999999996	0.52	0.61	0.45999999999999996	0.52	0.79	0.52	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.52	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.45999999999999996	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.52	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.52	0.62	0.52	0.62	0.49	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.49	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.52	0.62	0.52	0.62	0.64	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.76	0.52	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.62	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.7	0.64	0.52	0.52	0.7	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.52	0.61	0.61	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.64	0.45999999999999996	0.61	0.64	0.61	1.0	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.49	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.74	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.45999999999999996	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.55	0.52	0.52	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.45999999999999996	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.75	0.64	0.7	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.55
Tyson ConocoPhillips Venture in Jeopardy	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.53	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.55	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.65	0.75	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.77	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.15000000000000002	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.6	0.75	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.75	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.55	0.63	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.77	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5	0.53	0.6	0.7	0.7	0.73	0.6	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.73	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.55	0.65	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63
Tyson's Fats to Fuel Plant on Schedule	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.72	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.53	0.61	0.5	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.53	0.64	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.53	0.64	0.53	0.53	0.56	0.53	0.56	0.53	0.64	0.53	0.61	0.53	0.64	0.56	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.53	0.64	0.56	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.53	0.72	0.69	0.64	0.72	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.64	0.64	0.72	0.72	0.64	0.72	0.69	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.64	0.72	0.64	0.61	0.72	0.61	0.72	0.61	0.72	0.61	0.64	0.72	0.72	0.69	0.64	0.61	0.72	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.73	0.56	0.71	0.61	0.73	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.5	0.61	0.56	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.56	0.53	0.53	0.64	0.64	0.53	0.53	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.48	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.56	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.72	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.53	0.61	0.54	0.5	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.48	0.64	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.53	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.53	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.53	0.64	0.64	0.72	0.64	0.72	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.71	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.56	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61
US $36m ethanol plant for Barbados	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.56	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.56	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.71	0.74	0.65	0.71	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.7	0.62	0.71	0.65	0.62	0.71	0.71	0.62	0.71	0.74	0.65	0.62	0.7	0.71	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.62	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.62	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.74	0.65	0.62	0.71	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.71	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.56	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.74	0.53	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.47	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.85	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.44999999999999996	0.030000000000000027	0.56	0.56	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.62	0.5	0.56	0.5	0.53	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.74	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.56	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.74	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.53	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.56	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.77	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.56	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.69	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.71	1.0	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.53	0.53	0.65	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.53	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.53	0.65	0.71	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.77	0.5900000000000001	0.77	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.56	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.62	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.53
View From the Hill	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.5	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.5	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.44999999999999996	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.73	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.73	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.56	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.73	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.73	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.73	0.62	0.5	0.56	0.5	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.5	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.85	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.44999999999999996	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5	0.5	0.62	0.5	0.39	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.0	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.5	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.44999999999999996	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.44999999999999996	0.62	0.5	0.44999999999999996	0.5	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.56	0.5	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.44999999999999996	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.5	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.5	0.56	0.73	0.56	0.5	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.39	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.39	0.62	0.5	0.5	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.39	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.5	0.5	0.56	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.5	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.73	0.73	0.56	1.0	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5	0.5	0.73	0.73	0.56	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.39	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.5	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.56	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.73	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.73	0.5	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.73	0.39	0.62	0.5	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.53	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56
World Energy: Global New Summary	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.72	0.5	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.72	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.6	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.77	0.5700000000000001	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.77	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.72	0.63	0.4	0.6	0.0	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.6	0.69	0.54	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.85	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.79	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.76	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.77	0.63	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.77	0.6599999999999999	0.77	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.77	0.6599999999999999	0.77	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.77	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.69	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.77	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.77	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.72	0.72	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.51	0.72	0.6	0.72	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.69	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63
A Blueprint for Green Energy in the Americas: Strategic Analysis of Opportunities for Brazil and the Hemisphere	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.72	0.63	0.56	0.52	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.73	0.62	0.62	0.0	0.0	0.6	0.7	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.7	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.71	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.72	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.53	0.6	0.71	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.54	0.64	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.47	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.73	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.69	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.5	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.55	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.53	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001
A reassessment of the economic effects of ozone on U.S. agriculture	0.54	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.51	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.53	0.56	0.64	0.54	0.63	0.7	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.56	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.53	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.56	0.56	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.74	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.54	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.6	0.62	0.72	0.53	0.53	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.5	0.56	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.54	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.72	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.72	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.56	0.54	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.56	0.62	0.42000000000000004	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.54	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.51	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.51	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.49	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.51	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.51	0.35	0.0	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	1.0	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.56	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.54	0.55	0.65	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.71	0.5	0.51	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.53	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.53	0.5	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.73	0.51	0.73	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.48	0.54	0.55	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.53	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.48	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001
Atmospheric Chemistry: Fundamentals and Experimental Techniques	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.65	0.69	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.71	0.64	0.62	0.69	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.71	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.74	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.54	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.69	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.7	0.62	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.0	0.54	0.44999999999999996	0.44999999999999996	0.44999999999999996	0.44999999999999996	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.56	0.44999999999999996	0.0	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.75	0.44999999999999996	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.53	0.42000000000000004	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.5	0.64	0.5	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5	0.64	0.5	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.5	0.62	0.64	0.5	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.72	0.62	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.54	0.54	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.56	0.7	0.65	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.61	0.56	0.56	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.54	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.71	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.62
Economic Analysis of Land Use in Global Climate Change Policy	0.56	0.51	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.39	0.44999999999999996	0.6	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.73	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.72	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.72	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.63	0.72	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.55	0.55	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.71	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.4	0.6	0.6	0.73	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.71	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.53	0.6	0.51	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.7	0.61	0.56	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.51	0.61	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.56	0.56	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.71	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.55	0.56	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.56	0.43000000000000005	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.55	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.53	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001
Effects of oxidant air pollutants on forest succession in the mixed conifer forest type of southern California	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.51	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.55	0.64	0.6	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.63	0.5	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.54	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.43000000000000005	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.55	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.5	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.53	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.56	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5	0.51	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.48	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.55	0.54	0.51	0.55	0.5	0.43999999999999995	0.61	0.54	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.61	0.54	0.56	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.43000000000000005	0.5	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.0	0.37	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.53	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.48	0.51	0.5	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.55	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.42000000000000004	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001
Estimating Mortality Risk Reduction and Economic Benefits from Controlling Ozone Air Pollution	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.55	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.52	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.52	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.52	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.71	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.73	0.64	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.71	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.71	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.56	0.53	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.0	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.52	0.52	0.61	0.56	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.53	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.6	0.54	0.61	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.48	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.72	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001
Impact of Air Pollutants on Southern Pine Forests	0.54	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.43000000000000005	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.47	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.65	0.64	0.69	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.62	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.53	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.72	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.54	0.62	0.64	0.5	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.77	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.71	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.69	0.54	0.69	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.43000000000000005	0.43000000000000005	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.39	0.49	0.62	0.47	0.49	0.63	0.61	0.41000000000000003	0.62	0.6	0.43000000000000005	0.6	0.43000000000000005	0.56	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.63	0.62	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.49	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.54	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.54	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.44999999999999996	0.52	0.62	0.6	0.54	0.49	0.56	0.62	0.54	0.54	0.62	0.47	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.47	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.56	0.62	0.54	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.62	0.54	0.56	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.0	0.47	0.41000000000000003	0.62	0.62	0.41000000000000003	0.47	0.62	0.56	0.54	0.61	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.54	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.52	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.48	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.52
Machinery Cost Estimates: Forage Field Operations	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.7	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.43999999999999995	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.52	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.52	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.52	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.52	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.52	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.49	0.5800000000000001	0.49	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.72	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.54	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.7	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.71	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.52	0.6	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.49	0.64	0.47	0.62	0.49	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.54	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.56	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.54
Protecting Visibility in National Parks and Wilderness Areas	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.64	0.54	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.69	0.64	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.69	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.69	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.69	0.64	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.55	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.6	0.43999999999999995	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.53	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.52	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.54	0.56	0.69	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.74	0.6	0.69	0.54	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.54	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.55	0.69	0.62	0.74	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.72	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.0	0.64	0.55	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.54	0.72	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.52	0.6	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.54	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.52
Variation in plant response to ozone: a conceptual model of physiological events	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.54	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.5	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.73	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.53	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.53	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.0	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.47	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.61	0.55	0.56	0.56	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.63	1.0	0.56	0.62	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.52	0.55	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.74	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.63	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.73	0.5800000000000001	0.73	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6
Water Implications of Biofuels Production in the United States	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.64	0.55	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.61	0.6	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.39	0.61	0.52	0.55	0.61	0.38	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.45999999999999996	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.42000000000000004	0.55	0.42000000000000004	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.49	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.52	0.65	0.49	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.49	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.49	0.55	0.55	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.52	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.49	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.49	0.63	0.49	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.55	0.52	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.64	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.43999999999999995	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.41000000000000003	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.5	0.54	0.54	0.55	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.31999999999999995	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.7	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.52	0.45999999999999996	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.49	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.65	0.7	0.62	0.65	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5	0.64	0.6	0.49	0.64	0.54	0.73	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.47	0.42000000000000004	0.54	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.54	0.6	0.47	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.5	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.42000000000000004	0.55	0.62	0.63	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.54	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.49	0.64	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.48	0.5	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.45999999999999996	0.52	0.6	0.49	0.54	0.64	0.62	0.54	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.53	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.52	0.65	0.52	0.6	0.54	0.55	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.52	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.5	0.62	0.63	0.4	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.47	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5	0.54	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.49	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.45999999999999996
2005 Prime Supplier Sales Values for No.2 Diesel	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.69	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.61	0.73	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.73	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.69	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.7	0.72	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.74	0.73	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.53	0.71	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65
2005-2007 Historical ethanol import data as reported by the Renewable Fuels Asssociation	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.48	0.72	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5	0.5	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.51	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.53	0.63	0.53	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.33999999999999997	0.63	0.62	0.5	0.65	0.61	0.71	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.49	0.71	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.020000000000000018	0.6	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.53	0.56	0.65	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.62	0.55	0.72	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.54	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.72	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.69	0.63	0.7	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.71	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.72	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.65	0.73	0.5800000000000001	0.73	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.69	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.63
Energy Information Administration historical gasoline and ethanol import data	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.55	0.61	0.55	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.6	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.56	0.62	0.51	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.51	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.62	0.69	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.48	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.56	0.63	0.62	0.56	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.73	0.56	0.56	0.52	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.4	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.56	0.56	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.55	0.51	0.25	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.55	0.55	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.38	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.55	0.63	0.54	0.55	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.49	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.62	0.65	0.5	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.48	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.55	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.54	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.54	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.54	0.56	0.54	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.54	0.56	0.54	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.56	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.54	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.55	0.61	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.55	0.62	0.52	0.52	0.6	0.54	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.65	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.61	0.54	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.56	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.55	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001
Historical company level ethanol and gasoline import data	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.6	0.64	0.69	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.7	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.42000000000000004	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.52	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.62	0.56	0.4	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.51	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.56	0.7	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.48	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.020000000000000018	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.53	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.72	0.43999999999999995	0.5	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.45999999999999996	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.54	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.62	1.0	0.62	0.53	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.55	0.62	0.64	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.53	0.6	0.6	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.53	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.75	0.55	0.75	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.51	0.51	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.51	0.53	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.5	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001
NASS Database	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.54	0.77	0.62	0.7	0.77	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.77	0.77	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.39	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.85	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.77	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.54	0.77	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.77	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.77	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.77	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.77	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.77	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.77	0.77	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.54	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.54	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.54	0.77	0.54	0.54	0.7	0.7	0.54	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.77	0.7	0.77	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.77	0.62	0.77	0.62	0.7	0.85	0.7	0.7	0.85	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.77	0.77	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.85	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.77	0.7	0.7	0.77	0.7	0.7	0.8	0.47	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.77	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.77	0.77	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.07999999999999996	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.77	0.62	0.7	0.85	0.7	0.85	0.7	0.54	0.7	0.54	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.77	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.77	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.77	0.62	0.62	0.77	0.77	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.77	0.62	0.77	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.77	0.54	0.77	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.77	0.62	0.77	0.7	0.7	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.77	0.54	0.77	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.77	0.77	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.54	0.7	0.77	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.77	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.54	0.7	0.62	0.77	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.77	0.7	0.77	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.77	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.77	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.77	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.77	0.7	0.7	0.77	0.54	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.77	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.77	0.7	0.77	0.77	0.7	0.7	1.0	0.77	0.62	0.77	0.62	0.62	0.77	0.77	0.7	0.7	0.77	0.77	0.7	0.77	0.7	0.54	0.7	0.77	0.7	0.77	0.62	0.77	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.77	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.77	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.77	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.54	0.77	0.77	0.7	0.39	0.62	0.7	0.77	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.77	0.77	0.7	0.7	0.77	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.77	0.7	0.77	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.77	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.77	0.7	0.7	0.77	0.77	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.31000000000000005	0.7	0.7	0.77	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.62
Official Statistics of the US Department of Commerce	0.62	0.49	0.6	0.43000000000000005	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.52	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.43000000000000005	0.7	0.6	0.53	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.64	0.54	0.74	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.43000000000000005	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.43000000000000005	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.43000000000000005	0.71	0.72	0.43000000000000005	0.74	0.72	0.43000000000000005	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.7	0.72	0.7	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.74	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.75	0.64	0.6	0.69	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.74	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.69	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.74	0.62	0.62	0.52	0.52	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.64	0.71	0.71	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.56	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.44999999999999996	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.73	0.72	0.64	0.63	0.74	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.64	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.72	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	1.0	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.6	0.52	0.54	0.54	0.56	0.64	0.53	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.72	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.56	0.65	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.48	0.54	0.7	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.52	0.65	0.72	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.36	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6
Product Supplied, Petroleum Supply Reporting System	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.55	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.73	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.73	0.63	0.71	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.74	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.69	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.73	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.7	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.72	0.61	0.63	0.72	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.49	0.65	0.61	0.71	0.0	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.0	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.7	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.61	0.69	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.69	0.7	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.71	0.63	0.65	0.73	0.73	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.74	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.69	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.69	0.71	0.69	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.53	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61
Production Data	0.54	0.27	0.54	0.47	0.6	0.47	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.4	0.47	0.6	0.47	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.4	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.27	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.4	0.54	0.54	0.47	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.19999999999999996	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.27	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.47	0.6	0.47	0.6	0.27	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.47	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.27	0.6	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.27	0.47	0.47	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.33999999999999997	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.27	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.27	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.47	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.19999999999999996	0.6699999999999999	0.19999999999999996	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.54	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.47	0.47	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.27	0.19999999999999996	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.27	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.47	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.4	0.47	0.27	0.27	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.4	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.4	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.4	0.54	0.54	0.4	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.4	0.74	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.74	0.54	0.54	0.47	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.47	0.47	0.47	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.47	0.47	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.4	0.4	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.47	0.6	0.4	0.54	0.54	0.47	0.74	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.47	0.54	0.4	0.4	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.4	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.47	0.4	0.54	0.47	0.4	0.4	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.4	0.54	0.47	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.4	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.4	0.6	0.4	0.4	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.47	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.47	0.47	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.47	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.27	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.47	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.47	0.74	0.47	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	1.0	0.54	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.4	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.47	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.4	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.4	0.6	0.54	0.4	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.47	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.47	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.47	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.54	0.47	0.47	0.47	0.47	0.47	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.4	0.74	0.54	0.4	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.8	0.6	0.4	0.4	0.6	0.4	0.47	0.54	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.27	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.47	0.47	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.4	0.54	0.6	0.4	0.4	0.54
Quick Stats (Agricultural Statistics Data Base, State and County Data)	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.56	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.53	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.53	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.72	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.73	0.56	0.7	0.64	0.53	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.69	0.72	0.65	0.76	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.55	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.76	0.53	0.53	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.69	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.74	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.73	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.49	0.050000000000000044	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.65	0.73	0.52	0.73	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.7	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.48	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6
10th Special Report to the US Congress on Alcohol and Health	0.6	0.52	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.55	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.54	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.47	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.62	0.6	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.69	0.69	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.54	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.5	0.43999999999999995	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.55	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.54	0.54	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.49	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.69	0.62	0.55	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.64	0.6	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.75	0.5700000000000001	0.75	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.55	0.48	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001
1992 Washington State Waste Characterization Study	0.6	0.56	0.41000000000000003	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.72	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.45999999999999996	0.62	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.43999999999999995	0.62	0.56	0.020000000000000018	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.75	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.7	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.69	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.75	0.62	0.6	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.72	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.71	0.71	0.72	0.6	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.7	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.73	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	1.0	0.62	0.64	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.45999999999999996	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.73	0.6	0.73	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.4	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.42000000000000004	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001
2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Inventories, Chapter 11: N2) Emissions from Managed Soils, and CO2 Emissions from Lime and Urea Applications	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.53	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.54	0.65	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.4	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.53	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.6	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.54	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.7	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.52	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.7	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.56	0.7	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.47	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.53	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.69	0.7	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.5	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.63
30x30 A Scenario for Supplying 30% of 2004 Motor Gasoline with Ethanol by 2030: A Production Scenario for Cellulosic Ethanol from Corn Stover	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.51	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.7	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.52	0.63	0.52	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.53	0.71	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.33999999999999997	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.7	0.64	0.69	0.48	0.63	0.64	0.55	0.69	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.5	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.52	0.7	0.62	0.63	0.55	0.53	0.61	0.69	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.52	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.53	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.54	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.54	0.63	0.63	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.72	0.73	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63
A Comprehensive Analysis of Biodiesel Impacts on Exhaust Emissions: Draft Technical Report	0.63	0.55	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.48	0.48	0.52	0.54	0.6	0.56	0.55	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.54	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.54	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.55	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.62	0.55	0.61	0.55	0.62	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.65	0.63	0.54	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.47	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.47	0.5	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.56	0.72	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.48	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.74	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.69	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.73	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.71	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.73	0.5	0.62	0.5	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.52	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.0	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.56	0.53	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.43000000000000005	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.54	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.53	0.55	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.52	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.73	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.55	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.71	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.48	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001
A Description of the Fifth-Generation Penn State/NCAR Mesoscale Model (MM5)	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.62	0.64	0.55	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.72	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.72	0.63	0.72	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.64	0.72	0.64	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.72	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.73	0.5	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.53	0.64	0.7	0.63	0.62	0.7	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.69	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.49	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.0	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.56	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.63	0.71	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6
A Look Back at the US Department of Energy's Aquatic Species Program - Biodiesel from Algae	0.63	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.48	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.49	0.62	0.64	0.48	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.56	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.050000000000000044	0.5900000000000001	0.41000000000000003	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.41000000000000003	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.050000000000000044	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.050000000000000044	0.63	0.63	0.050000000000000044	0.65	0.41000000000000003	0.050000000000000044	0.41000000000000003	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5	0.41000000000000003	0.6599999999999999	0.41000000000000003	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.41000000000000003	0.64	0.41000000000000003	0.64	0.41000000000000003	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.41000000000000003	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.41000000000000003	0.61	0.62	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5	0.65	0.63	0.74	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.64	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.62	0.55	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.74	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.55	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.4	0.4	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.69	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.69	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.54	0.64	0.61	0.45999999999999996	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.48	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63
A Review of Contaminant Occurance in Public Water Systems	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.62	0.55	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.69	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.72	0.71	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.53	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.64	0.65	0.53	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.51	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.51	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.74	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.6	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.55	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.71	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.53	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001
A Study of How to Decrease the Costs of Collecting, Processing and Transporting Slash	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.53	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.69	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.73	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.72	0.5	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.62	0.56	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.44999999999999996	0.48	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.55	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.64	0.65	0.5700000000000001
A Total Maximum Daily Load Analysis to Achieve Water Quality Standards for Dissolved Oxygen in Long Island Sound	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.51	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.64	0.5	0.51	0.53	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.71	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.56	0.73	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.73	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.72	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.69	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.71	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.71	0.65	0.61	0.55	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.63	0.5	0.62	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.54	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.63	0.52	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.47	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.49	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.49	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.49	0.49	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.49	0.49	0.49	0.49	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.72	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.71	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.0	0.47	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.69	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.63
Acerage report	0.5	0.43000000000000005	0.5	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.43000000000000005	0.5	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.79	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5	0.65	0.43000000000000005	0.5	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.36	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.43000000000000005	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.5	0.5	0.5	0.65	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.43000000000000005	0.65	0.72	0.43000000000000005	0.72	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.43000000000000005	0.43000000000000005	0.72	0.65	0.43000000000000005	0.5	0.43000000000000005	0.5	0.43000000000000005	0.72	0.43000000000000005	0.65	0.43000000000000005	0.72	0.5	0.43000000000000005	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.43000000000000005	0.65	0.43000000000000005	0.5	0.65	0.65	0.43000000000000005	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.43000000000000005	0.72	0.5	0.43000000000000005	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.65	0.5	0.43000000000000005	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5	0.5	0.5	0.5	0.5	0.65	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5	0.65	0.5	0.65	0.5	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.72	0.79	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.5	0.65	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.43000000000000005	0.43000000000000005	0.5800000000000001	0.43000000000000005	0.5	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.65	0.43000000000000005	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.79	0.5800000000000001	0.79	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.43000000000000005	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.43000000000000005	0.65	0.5	0.5	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.72	0.65	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.43000000000000005	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.65	0.5	0.65	0.5	0.79	0.65	0.43000000000000005	0.5800000000000001	0.43000000000000005	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.79	0.5800000000000001	0.79	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.36	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.43000000000000005	0.5	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.72	0.79	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5	0.72	0.79	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.36	0.65	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.65	0.65	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.72	0.5800000000000001	1.0	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.65	0.43000000000000005	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.65	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.43000000000000005	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.43000000000000005	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5	0.5	0.5	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.43000000000000005	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5	0.07999999999999996	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.43000000000000005	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5	0.65	0.65	0.43000000000000005	0.43000000000000005	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65
Agentina Bio-Fuels Report 2007	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.5	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.51	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.43999999999999995	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.43999999999999995	0.43999999999999995	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.43999999999999995	0.6	0.43999999999999995	0.6	0.43999999999999995	0.7	0.43999999999999995	0.64	0.43999999999999995	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.43999999999999995	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.43999999999999995	0.6699999999999999	0.43999999999999995	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.43999999999999995	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.43999999999999995	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.43999999999999995	0.69	0.5	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.74	0.6	0.6	0.74	0.47	0.6	0.47	0.6	0.6	0.47	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6	0.74	0.6	0.6	0.47	0.5700000000000001	0.74	0.6	0.74	0.6	0.47	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.47	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6	0.6	0.47	0.74	0.47	0.37	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.47	0.6	0.64	0.53	0.7	0.64	0.6	0.54	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.47	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.47	0.6	0.6	0.47	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.47	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.64	1.0	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.73	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.74	0.64	0.6	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.53	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.74	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.74	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64
Agricultural Prices 2006 Summary	0.69	0.5	0.41000000000000003	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.79	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.43999999999999995	0.41000000000000003	0.63	0.63	0.43999999999999995	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.75	0.63	0.72	0.69	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.54	0.72	0.69	0.72	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.72	0.6	0.72	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.75	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.74	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.75	0.69	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.74	0.75	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.6	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.75	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.75	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.43999999999999995	0.69	0.63	0.54	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.41000000000000003	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5	0.72	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.43999999999999995	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.54	0.8	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.43999999999999995	0.41000000000000003	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.75	0.77	0.72	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.72	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.72	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.69	0.72	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.72	0.75	0.63	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.72	0.63	0.63	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.72	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.6	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.7	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.7	0.69	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.75	0.6	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.73	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.74	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.72	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.75	0.69	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.72	0.47	0.47	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.75	0.72	0.41000000000000003	0.43999999999999995	0.69	0.63	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.41000000000000003	0.69	0.43999999999999995	0.72	0.63	0.75	0.72	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.72	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.54	0.69	0.47	0.47	0.7	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.69	0.69	0.47	0.63	0.63	0.72	0.69	0.69	0.72	0.71	0.69	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999
Air Quality Criteria for Carbon Monoxide	0.53	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.4	0.44999999999999996	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.73	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.71	0.6	0.63	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.75	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.63	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.77	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.53	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.4	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.63	0.4	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.5	0.55	0.53	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.53	0.55	0.43000000000000005	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.22999999999999998	0.6599999999999999	0.4	0.7	0.5	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.22999999999999998	0.6599999999999999	0.22999999999999998	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.4	0.7	0.22999999999999998	0.6599999999999999	0.22999999999999998	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.22999999999999998	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.0	0.0	0.48	0.44999999999999996	0.0	0.0	0.0	0.0	0.53	0.43000000000000005	0.55	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.22999999999999998	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.22999999999999998	0.6599999999999999	0.22999999999999998	0.22999999999999998	0.22999999999999998	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.22999999999999998	0.22999999999999998	0.6	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.22999999999999998	0.22999999999999998	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.22999999999999998	0.55	0.63	0.65	0.5	0.53	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.7	0.63	1.0	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.55	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.28	0.22999999999999998	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.74	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.48	0.6	0.48	0.44999999999999996	0.55	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.55
Air Quality Criteria for Ozone and Related Photochemical Oxidants	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.51	0.54	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.51	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.7	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.54	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.54	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.54	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.54	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.73	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.6	0.62	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.56	0.69	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.51	0.62	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.52	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.0	0.62	0.51	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.54	0.0	0.62	0.0	0.62	0.54	0.6	0.65	0.56	0.51	0.51	0.5700000000000001	0.51	0.6599999999999999	0.0	0.62	0.0	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.0	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.25	0.25	0.63	0.62	0.25	0.25	0.25	0.25	0.63	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.0	0.62	0.54	0.0	0.62	0.0	0.0	0.0	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.0	0.0	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.0	0.0	0.6	0.64	0.0	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.09999999999999998	0.0	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.51	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.53	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001
Ambient levels of peroxyacetyl nitrate in southern California	0.61	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.61	0.5	0.64	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.7	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.72	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.56	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.0	0.5	0.56	0.43000000000000005	0.48	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.6	0.61	0.53	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.53	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.55	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.43000000000000005	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.48	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.38	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.41000000000000003	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.51	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.55	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.51	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.51	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.4	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.53	0.64	0.69	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.64	1.0	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.61	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.41000000000000003	0.41000000000000003	0.4	0.31999999999999995	0.5	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.53	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.48	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56
An Analysis of EPA Biofuel Scenarios with the CARD International Models	0.6	0.53	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.7	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.47	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.48	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.65	0.62	0.69	0.53	0.53	0.65	0.55	0.53	0.61	0.53	0.62	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.62	0.53	0.64	0.69	0.53	0.64	0.53	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.53	0.69	0.65	0.61	0.53	0.65	0.62	0.53	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.56	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.72	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.7	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.5	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.71	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.0	0.64	0.65	0.54	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.53	0.61	0.55	0.62	0.71	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.7	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.47	0.6	0.53	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.55	0.54	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.7	0.62	0.55	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.0	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.72	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.55	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.55
An Analysis of the Effects of an Expansion in Biofuel Demand on US Agriculture	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.63	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.54	0.52	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.61	0.61	0.42000000000000004	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.53	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.53	0.65	0.7	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.48	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.56	0.49	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.52	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.49	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.69	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.71	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.63	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.49	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.72	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.72	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.53	0.62	0.62	0.73	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.47	0.62	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.55	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.49	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.54	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.49	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.56	0.61	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.53	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.48	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001
An Evaluation of the Economics of Biomass Feedstocks: A Synthesis of the Literature	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.49	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.0	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.52	0.43999999999999995	0.61	0.53	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.55	0.63	0.61	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.47	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.47	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.52	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.52	0.63	0.54	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.75	0.64	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.64	0.61	0.73	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.5	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.0	0.45999999999999996	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.55	0.73	0.69	0.55	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.52	0.7	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.56	0.61	0.65	0.56	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.55	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.69	0.63	0.51	0.61	0.54	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.72	0.69	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.54	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.73	0.54	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.42000000000000004	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001
Analysis of Particulate Matter Emissions from Light-Duty Vehicles in Kansas City	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.53	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.55	0.6	0.43999999999999995	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.65	0.56	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.62	0.73	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.72	0.65	0.6	0.72	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.6	0.7	0.61	0.7	0.6	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.54	0.62	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.48	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.52	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.7	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001
Analysis of the Air Quality Impacts of the Use of Ethanol in Gasoline	0.5800000000000001	0.47	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.56	0.51	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.47	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.51	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.48	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.47	0.71	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.53	0.63	0.53	0.63	0.71	0.64	0.62	0.33999999999999997	0.53	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.56	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.51	0.5	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.54	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.52	0.7	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.56	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.53	0.54	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.6	0.5	0.61	0.48	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.53	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.54	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.47	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.41000000000000003	0.5800000000000001	0.0	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.54	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5	0.53	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.53	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.52	0.52	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.61	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.55	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.54	0.56	0.54	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.69	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.53	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.54	0.54	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.51	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.48	0.53	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.42000000000000004	0.56	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.44999999999999996
Annual Energy Outlook 2007 with Projections to 2030	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.55	0.61	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.65	0.7	0.69	0.69	0.64	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.71	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.7	0.71	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.7	0.73	0.72	0.69	0.73	0.69	0.73	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.73	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.5700000000000001	0.73	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.7	0.73	0.69	0.7	0.72	0.73	0.72	0.73	0.69	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.72	0.7	0.73	0.69	0.72	0.69	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.51	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.73	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.75	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.51	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.53	0.51	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.7	0.73	0.65	0.73	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.73	0.71	0.16000000000000003	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.73	0.71	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.7	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.55	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.53	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.73	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.74	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.73	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.4	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.73	0.71	0.7	0.65	0.74	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.7	0.61	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.71	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61
Annual Energy Outlook 2008	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.43000000000000005	0.62	0.54	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.74	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.74	0.74	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.79	0.7	0.74	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.74	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.74	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.74	0.7	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.74	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5	0.5	0.77	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.77	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.77	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.5	0.62	0.77	0.5	0.77	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.77	0.77	0.6599999999999999	0.77	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.77	0.7	0.77	0.7	0.77	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.77	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.77	0.62	0.7	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.6	0.5	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.74	0.74	0.7	0.47	0.7	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.5	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.74	0.39	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.43000000000000005	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.74	0.77	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.77	0.62	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.74	0.16000000000000003	0.47	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.7	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.74	0.62	0.7	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.62	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.77	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.77	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.74	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.77	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.85	0.6599999999999999	0.85	0.7	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.81	0.6599999999999999	0.85	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.81	0.62	0.81	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.85	0.62	0.81	0.62	0.81	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.81	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.81	0.62	0.62	0.81	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.74	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.77	0.74	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.77	0.74	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.74	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.10999999999999999	0.0	0.47	0.7	0.62	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.5	0.7	0.62	0.74	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.77	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62
Assessment of Health Risks to Garment Workers and Certain Home Residents from Exposure to Formaldehyde	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.61	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.64	0.54	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.63	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.54	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.55	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.71	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.5	0.62	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.51	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.73	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.54	0.55	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.65	0.0	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.51	0.53	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.53	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.61	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.7	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.73	0.5800000000000001	0.73	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.62
Assessment of Options for the Collection, Handling, and Transport of Corn Stover	0.54	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.72	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.55	0.64	0.63	0.51	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.65	0.64	0.54	0.62	0.63	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.69	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.49	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.49	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.53	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.44999999999999996	0.69	0.62	0.55	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.64	0.62	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.54	0.55	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.55	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.55	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.55	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	1.0	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.49	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.53	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5	0.62	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.39	0.38	0.62	0.55	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.55	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.55
Biodiesel Effects on Heavy-Duty Highway Engines and Vehicles	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.0	0.6	0.42000000000000004	0.54	0.62	0.49	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.65	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.62	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.73	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5	0.7	0.6	0.5	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.5	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.64	0.5	0.7	0.5	0.7	0.5	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.5	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.64	0.65	0.71	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.72	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.69	0.54	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.72	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.7	0.0	0.43999999999999995	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.39	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.64	0.69	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.75	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.54	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.55	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.55	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.64	0.75	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.61	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.71	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.64
Bioenergy Strategic Assessment project findings upcoming as noted in report WGA	0.56	0.56	0.61	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.51	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.56	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.4	0.61	0.56	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.55	0.63	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.0	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.48	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.55	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.52	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.5	0.65	0.5	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5	0.65	0.5	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.5	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.52	0.64	0.65	0.5	0.63	0.65	0.5	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.54	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.54	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.61	0.7	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001
Biofuel Feedstock Assessment for Selected Countries	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.51	0.63	0.72	0.48	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.51	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.0	0.48	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.53	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.51	0.54	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.44999999999999996	0.61	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.51	0.71	0.61	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.71	0.65	0.63	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.69	0.73	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.69	0.65	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.5	0.65	0.55	0.63	0.53	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.48	0.5800000000000001	0.51	0.61	0.65	0.53	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.69	0.72	0.65	0.63	0.71	0.75	0.5900000000000001	0.75	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.73	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.73	0.69	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.48	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.72	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.43999999999999995	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.51	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.51	0.5	0.69	0.51	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.51	0.53	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.48	0.48	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.55	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.61	0.73	0.71	0.61	0.53	0.73	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.61	0.51	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.51	0.65	0.55	0.63	0.61
Biomass as Feedstock for a Bioenergy & Bioproducts Industry: The Technical Feasibility of a Billion-Ton Annual Supply	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.050000000000000044	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.0	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.0	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.050000000000000044	0.51	0.61	0.53	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.06999999999999995	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.73	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.54	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.54	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.49	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.53	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.61	0.74	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.73	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.43999999999999995	0.65	0.43999999999999995	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.75	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.75	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.69	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.71	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.64	0.73	0.63	0.73	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.52	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63
Breaking the Biological Barriers to Cellulosic Ethanol: A Joint Research Agenda	0.61	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.0	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.0	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.69	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.53	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.52	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.71	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.33999999999999997	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.73	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.69	0.7	0.56	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.54	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.56	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.52	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.41000000000000003	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.73	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.56	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.55	0.63	0.74	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.56
California Biomass and Biofuels Production Potential	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.47	0.56	0.64	0.52	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.49	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.52	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.54	0.52	0.7	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.39	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.52	0.53	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.0	0.52	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.49	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.49	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.49	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.49	0.5	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.49	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.49	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.5	0.56	0.63	0.69	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.56	0.5	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.56	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.42000000000000004	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.49	0.49	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.49	0.7	0.56	0.54	0.52	0.6	0.54	0.41000000000000003	0.39	0.72	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.65	0.56	0.65	0.69	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.5	0.62	0.52	0.49	0.49	0.49	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.74	0.63	0.5	0.64	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.61	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.56	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.49	0.56	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.47	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.56	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.54	0.52	0.6	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.54	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.52	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.54	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.54	0.54	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.71	0.62	0.47	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.49	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.54	0.56	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.54
Colombia Biofuels Annual 2007	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.52	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.76	0.52	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.56	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.52	0.69	0.52	0.69	0.63	0.52	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.52	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.52	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.52	0.69	0.52	0.52	0.38	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.52	0.38	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.32999999999999996	0.69	0.56	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.56	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.56	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.77	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.73	0.5	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.73	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.72	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.73	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.73	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.44999999999999996	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56
Committee on Water Implications of Biofuels Production in the United States	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.55	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.54	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.45999999999999996	0.61	0.52	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.38	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.47	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.47	0.5900000000000001	0.47	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.49	0.6599999999999999	0.49	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.55	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.64	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.45999999999999996	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.43000000000000005	0.5	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.52	0.31999999999999995	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.71	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.48	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.49	0.6	0.65	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.49	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.63	0.7	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.64	0.62	0.73	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.47	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.48	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.51	0.54	0.65	0.47	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.63	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.55	0.55	0.64	0.54	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.62	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.5	0.5	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.48	0.55	0.64	0.55	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.53	0.56	0.6	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.7	0.51	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.51	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5	0.64	0.64	0.4	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.55	0.55	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.51	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.48	0.54	0.56	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.48
Concise International Chemical Assessment Document 40: Formaldehyde	0.56	0.56	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.71	0.69	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.69	0.65	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.72	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.72	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.72	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.56	0.56	0.51	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.69	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.72	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.72	0.54	0.54	0.72	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.44999999999999996	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.43000000000000005	0.74	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.55	0.7	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.47	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.47	0.63	0.47	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5	0.63	0.47	0.63	0.47	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.47	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.47	0.62	0.63	0.47	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.51	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.48	0.54	0.56	0.56	0.5	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.69	0.0	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.6	0.69	0.53	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.71	0.65	0.73	0.6	0.73	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6
Conservation Reserve Program Statistis: Monthly Summary	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.35	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.73	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.64	0.31000000000000005	0.020000000000000018	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.64	0.69	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.51	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.7	0.53	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.71	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.4	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.71	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.73	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.51	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.73	0.6	0.73	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.73	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.55	0.35	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6
Conservation Reserve Program Statistis: Monthly Summary	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.35	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.73	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.64	0.31000000000000005	0.020000000000000018	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.64	0.69	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.51	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.7	0.53	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.71	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.4	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.71	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.73	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.51	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.73	0.6	0.73	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.73	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.55	0.35	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6
Cost of Adding E85 Fueling Capability to Existing Gasoline Stations: NREL Survey and Literature Search	0.63	0.55	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.71	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.56	0.56	0.65	0.72	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.74	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.7	0.63	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.55	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.69	0.61	0.56	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.53	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.64	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.73	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.44999999999999996	0.64	0.53	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6
Diesel Locomotives, Marine Distillate, Residual Boiler	0.65	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.54	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.72	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.73	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.71	0.65	0.73	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.71	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.64	0.65	0.69	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.72	0.65	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.7	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.47	0.6	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.47	0.62	0.47	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.62	0.47	0.62	0.47	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.47	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.47	0.6	0.62	0.47	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.73	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	1.0	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.73	0.63	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.71	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.62	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.7	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001
Documentation for the Final 2002 Nonpoint Sector National Emission Inventory for Criteria and Hazardous Air Pollutants, Appendix A	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.55	0.54	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.56	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.56	0.7	0.56	0.65	0.48	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.7	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.48	0.48	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.49	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.47	0.62	0.63	0.5	0.64	0.6	0.72	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.54	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.55	0.07999999999999996	0.7	0.63	0.61	0.53	0.61	0.36	0.71	0.56	0.49	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.62	0.55	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.61	0.52	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.55	0.56	0.6	0.54	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.55	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.51	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.62	0.53	0.63	0.55	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.55	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.52	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.52	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.42000000000000004	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61
Effect of Biodiesel on Diesel Engine Nitrogen Oxide and Other Regulated Emissions	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.51	0.5700000000000001	0.45999999999999996	0.47	0.61	0.42000000000000004	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.51	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.47	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.47	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.47	0.5700000000000001	0.47	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.5	0.47	0.6	0.47	0.6	0.63	0.47	0.62	0.47	0.62	0.47	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.47	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.47	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.55	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.73	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.76	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.64	0.65	0.7	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.71	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.55	0.56	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.53	0.52	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.5	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.5	0.55	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.5	0.65	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.73	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.56	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.56	0.65	0.61	0.56	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.53	0.55	0.51	0.54	0.54	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.54	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001
Effects of Methyl Esters of Tallow and Grease on Exhaust Emissions and Performance of a Cummins L10 Engine	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.51	0.6599999999999999	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.56	0.56	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.53	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.74	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.72	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.54	0.64	0.56	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.5	0.51	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.54	0.53	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.61	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.6	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.51	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.56	0.53	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001
Effects of organic chemicals in the atmosphere on the terrestrial plants	0.62	0.56	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.55	0.63	0.62	0.55	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.63	0.55	0.53	0.63	0.52	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.53	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.55	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.71	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.49	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.74	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.55	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.56	0.53	0.53	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.55	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.5	0.5	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.53	0.65	0.55	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.48	0.52	0.62	0.62	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.52	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.71	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.55	0.55	0.5	0.62	0.06000000000000005	0.47	0.47	0.55	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.56	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.49	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.44999999999999996	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.55
Effects of the Conservation Reserve Program on Priority Mixed-grass Prairie Birds: A Conservation Effects Assessment Project, 2007	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.44999999999999996	0.43000000000000005	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.7	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.7	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.64	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.69	0.48	0.48	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.49	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.73	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.65	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.65	0.6	0.48	0.61	0.61	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.53	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.55	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.64	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.71	0.69	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.5	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.0	0.7	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.48	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.63
Environmental Laws Applicable to Construction and Operation of Ethanol Plants	0.55	0.54	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.54	0.45999999999999996	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.52	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.52	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.51	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.51	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.42000000000000004	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.52	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.52	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.65	0.52	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.52	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.52	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.52	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.54	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.51	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.33999999999999997	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.54	0.55	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.52	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.51	0.69	0.55	0.51	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.69	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.56	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.5	0.47	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.55	0.62	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.6	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.54	0.63	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.54	0.55	0.54	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.54	0.55	0.54	0.55	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.54	0.55	0.54	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.54	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.55	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.52	0.62	0.64	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.56	0.61	0.54	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.62	0.65	0.47	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.51	0.51	0.44999999999999996	0.55	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.48	0.0	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.55	0.5
Estimating Emissions Associated with Portable Fuel Containers (PFCs)	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.5	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.74	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.62	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.71	0.63	0.62	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.71	0.7	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.54	0.56	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.55	0.73	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.7	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.55	0.56	0.71	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.72	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.55	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.5	0.48	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5	0.61	0.54	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.5	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5	0.61	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.52	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.53	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001
Ethanol Expansion in the United States How Will the Agricultural Sector Adjust?	0.6	0.54	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.56	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.52	0.48	0.63	0.64	0.55	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.7	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.52	0.55	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.7	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.47	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.73	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.4	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.45999999999999996	0.54	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.69	0.69	0.65	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.61	0.7	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.54	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.54	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.73	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.65	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.51	0.52	0.65	0.7	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.73	0.51	0.73	0.51	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.7	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.44999999999999996	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.54	0.6	0.63	0.48	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.61	0.65	0.61
Ethanol Process Design and Economics Utilizing Co-Current Dilute Acid Prehydrolysis and Enzymatic Hydrolysis for Corn Stover	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.73	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.54	0.64	0.7	0.48	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.71	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.63	0.72	0.56	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.73	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.72	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.5	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.5	0.64	0.5	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5	0.64	0.5	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.5	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5	0.62	0.64	0.5	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.55	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.55	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.63	0.64	0.63
Ethanol Supply Outlook for California	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.73	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.52	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.52	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.49	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.73	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.71	0.71	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.73	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.77	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.77	0.72	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.73	0.72	0.73	0.72	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.72	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.52	0.55	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.73	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.52	0.5	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.77	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.74	0.0	0.65	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.52	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.48	0.63	0.55	0.71	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.73	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.75	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.73	0.63	0.73	0.71	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.71	0.63	0.65	0.76	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.52	0.43999999999999995	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.72	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.49	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.52	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.49	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.71	0.63	0.6	0.74	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.52	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.49	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.71	0.62	0.73	0.65	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.52	0.76	0.55	0.65	0.65	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.75	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.52	0.65	0.73	0.63	0.52	0.6	0.65	0.71	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.55	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6
Ethanol Transportation Backgrounder	0.4	0.38	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.49	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.4	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.49	0.5800000000000001	0.45999999999999996	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.69	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.52	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.69	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.76	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.45999999999999996	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.45999999999999996	0.52	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.72	0.49	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6	0.49	0.6	0.55	0.52	0.6	0.63	0.45999999999999996	0.6	0.45999999999999996	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.85	0.6599999999999999	0.49	0.49	0.63	0.7	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.49	0.52	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.52	0.52	0.49	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.55	0.0	0.45999999999999996	0.0	0.52	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.4	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.72	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.4	0.6	0.69	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.4	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.4	0.4	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.4	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.6	0.52	0.63	0.55	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.52	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.52	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.49	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.52	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.55	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.63	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.52	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.45999999999999996	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.43000000000000005	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.69	0.55	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.51	0.55	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.69	0.69	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.52	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.49	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.45999999999999996	0.72	0.52	0.55	0.5800000000000001
Ethanol Transportation Backgrounder, Expansion of U.S. Corn-based Ethanol from the Agricultural Transportation Perspective	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.55	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.55	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.55	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.55	0.64	0.62	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.33999999999999997	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.71	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.0	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.53	0.55	0.71	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.71	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.55	0.64	0.55	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.55	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.47	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.48	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001
External Peer Review for the IRIS Reassessment of the Inhalation Carcinogenicity of Naphthalene	0.56	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.55	0.64	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.62	0.71	0.65	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.5	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.54	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.55	0.71	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.63	0.64	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.7	0.56	0.5	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.45999999999999996	0.63	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.41000000000000003	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5	0.6	0.69	0.55	0.54	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.63	0.62	0.54	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.37	0.0	0.51	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5	0.5	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.73	0.6	0.73	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.54	0.54	0.56	0.62	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.42000000000000004	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001
Farm Income and Costs: 2008 Farm Sector Income Forecast	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.7	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.69	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.69	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.71	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.72	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	1.0	0.64	0.62	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.7	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.75	0.6	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.71	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.55	0.7	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6
Final Rule: Control of Emissions of Air Pollution from New Nonroad Spark-Ignition Engines, Equipment, and Vessels	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.52	0.61	0.64	0.54	0.44999999999999996	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.72	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.72	0.65	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.72	0.55	0.64	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.72	0.55	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.69	0.63	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.62	0.61	0.69	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.69	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.69	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.73	0.65	0.64	0.52	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.55	0.73	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.69	0.56	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.62	0.69	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.55	0.71	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.35	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.7	0.41000000000000003	0.27	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.51	0.7	0.61	0.45999999999999996	0.64	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.56	0.7	0.73	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.54	0.64	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.54	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.56	0.63	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.53	0.64	0.54	0.63	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.52	0.36	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.71	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.56	0.63	0.64	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.55	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.69	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001
Forest Residues Bundling Project-New Technology for Residue Removal	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.74	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.0	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.0	0.71	0.65	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.69	0.56	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.6	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.65	0.69	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.62	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.7	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.62	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.7	0.6	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.72	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.72	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.72	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.71	0.63	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.65	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.73	0.65	0.73	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.54	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.62
Forest Resources of the United States, 2002 General Technical Report	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.63	0.7	0.53	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.52	0.48	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.43999999999999995	0.48	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.49	0.64	0.49	0.64	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.61	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.61	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.75	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.55	0.64	0.49	0.55	0.65	0.7	0.69	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.75	0.65	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.53	0.0	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.71	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.42000000000000004	0.71	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.54	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.5	0.53	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.49	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.72	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.55	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.55	0.56	0.64	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	1.0	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.56	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.5	0.64	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.69	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.52	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.62	0.69	0.73	0.5800000000000001	0.73	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.44999999999999996	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.56	0.61	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.49	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.48	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001
Formaldehyde, 2-Butoxyethanol and 1-tert Butoxypropan-2-ol	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.65	0.64	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.64	0.69	0.71	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.71	0.73	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.71	0.56	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.72	0.72	0.73	0.72	0.69	0.73	0.69	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.73	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.72	0.73	0.69	0.7	0.72	0.73	0.72	0.73	0.69	0.72	0.7	0.72	0.7	0.72	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.72	0.72	0.73	0.69	0.72	0.69	0.53	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.71	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.71	0.65	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.47	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.71	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.72	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.7	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.76	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.69	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.69	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.69	0.71	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	1.0	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.54	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.56	0.54	0.6	0.7	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.7	0.64	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.72	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001
Freight-Rail Bottom-Line Report, 2003	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.79	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.73	0.71	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.55	0.52	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.71	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.71	0.69	0.71	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.7	0.7	0.63	0.72	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.71	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.71	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.49	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.77	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.74	0.71	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.76	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.76	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.76	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.71	0.74	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.73	0.6	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.72	0.65	0.54	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.73	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.7	0.65	1.0	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.71	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.78	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.65
Full IRIS Summary for n-Hexane	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.8	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.77	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.7	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.74	0.7	0.74	0.74	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.79	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.7	0.64	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.77	0.64	0.77	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.77	0.77	0.77	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.77	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.85	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.8	0.6	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.7	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.7	0.64	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.7	0.74	0.64	0.64	0.74	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.74	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.77	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.74	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.74	0.7	0.77	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.7	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.7	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.64	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.73	0.64	0.73	0.6	0.74	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.73	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.73	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.74	0.6699999999999999	1.0	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.19999999999999996	0.65	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.7	0.74	0.6	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.0	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.74	0.64	0.74	0.74	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.54	0.7	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.7	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.74	0.72	0.7	0.7	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.65	0.7	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64
Full IRIS Summary form 1,3-butadiene	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.73	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.73	0.64	0.7	0.7	0.76	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.73	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.73	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.7	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.73	0.64	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.76	0.73	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.7	0.62	0.75	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.74	0.75	0.62	0.75	0.62	0.7	0.75	0.73	0.75	0.73	0.75	0.7	0.7	0.73	0.75	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.75	0.7	0.71	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.72	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.72	0.72	0.7	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.73	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.74	0.64	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.64	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.85	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.77	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.7	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.73	0.73	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.75	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.73	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.76	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.56	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.73	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.7	1.0	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.030000000000000027	0.69	0.73	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.28	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.64	0.7	0.75	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.64	0.73	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.64	0.7	0.73	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.7	0.7	0.75	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.75	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999
Geographic Perspective on the Current Biomass Resource Availability in the United States	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.55	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.71	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.53	0.71	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.0	0.56	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.55	0.4	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.44999999999999996	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.69	0.7	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.65	0.69	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.5	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.48	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.52	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.54	0.47	0.61	0.47	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.47	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.47	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.73	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.73	0.52	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.56	0.61	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.55	0.55	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.56	0.71	0.63	0.62	0.53	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.4	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.53	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.65	0.62	0.48	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.53	0.53	0.62	0.5700000000000001
Georgia Statewide Characterization Study	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.73	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.55	0.6	0.53	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.48	0.53	0.44999999999999996	0.22999999999999998	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.53	0.63	0.55	0.65	0.53	0.53	0.63	0.55	0.53	0.55	0.53	0.55	0.53	0.63	0.53	0.63	0.53	0.63	0.55	0.53	0.63	0.65	0.53	0.63	0.53	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.53	0.63	0.55	0.53	0.63	0.65	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.65	0.6	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.75	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.52	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.53	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.63	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.76	0.65	0.55	0.73	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.53	0.63	0.73	0.6	0.6	0.73	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.73	0.74	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.7	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	1.0	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.5	0.53	0.44999999999999996	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.6	0.64	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.73	0.73	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.76	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.63
Global status report on alcohol 2004	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.69	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.7	0.64	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.53	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.4	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.73	0.62	0.73	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.53	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.56	0.62	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.44999999999999996	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.7	0.53	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.73	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	1.0	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.7	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.44999999999999996	0.0	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.73	0.62	0.73	0.7	0.64	0.62	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62
Ground-Water Availability in the United States: US Geological Survey Circular 1323	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.48	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.62	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.72	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.49	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.71	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.76	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.43000000000000005	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.69	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.55	0.53	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.61	0.53	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.69	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.71	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.53	0.63	0.64	0.030000000000000027	0.63	0.65	0.41000000000000003
Gulf Hypoxia Action Plan 2008 for Reducing, Mitigating, and Controlling Hypoxia in the Northern Gulf of Mexico and Improving Water Quality in the Mississippi River Basin	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.71	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.77	0.62	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.71	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.69	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.55	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.49	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.54	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.69	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.55	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.49	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.43999999999999995	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.53	0.6	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.63
Health Assessment of 1,3-Butadiene	0.48	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.42000000000000004	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.48	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5	0.5	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.45999999999999996	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.62	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.73	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.65	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.71	0.65	0.56	0.71	0.75	0.56	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.65	0.75	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.71	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.71	0.74	0.74	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.53	0.74	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.74	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.62	0.71	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.53	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.44999999999999996	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.56	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.65	0.71	0.72	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.44999999999999996	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.79	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.71	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.39	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.56	0.65	0.62	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.53	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.53	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.53	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.44999999999999996	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.72	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.44999999999999996	0.62	0.56	0.53	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.53	0.0	0.48	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.48	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.64	0.71	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.48	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.48	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.44999999999999996	0.44999999999999996	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.53	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.48	0.65	0.44999999999999996	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.48	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.74	0.56	0.74	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.7	0.5	0.74	0.6799999999999999	0.48	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.74	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.48	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.65	0.62
Heavy Oil and Natural Bitumen-Strategic Petroleum Resources	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.72	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.71	0.63	0.62	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.48	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.56	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.54	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.7	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.43000000000000005	0.55	0.69	0.62	0.65	0.72	0.62	0.63	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.74	0.53	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.55	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.62	0.7	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.63	0.56	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.7	0.56	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.71	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.71	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.56	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.62
Hypoxia in the Northern Gulf of Mexico	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.53	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.44999999999999996	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.53	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.56	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.7	0.7	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.71	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.77	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.53	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.72	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.69	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.56	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.53	0.53	0.49	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.53	0.53	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.56	0.64	0.53	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.56	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.69	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.5	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.56	1.0	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.73	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.69	0.56	0.61	0.74	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.53	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.56	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.56	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.73	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.37	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.53	0.64	0.61	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001
IARC monographs on the evaluation of carcinogenic risk of chemicals to humans	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.56	0.48	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.61	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.69	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.63	0.62	0.56	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.71	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5	0.64	0.62	0.69	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.72	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.7	0.65	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.7	0.52	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.52	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.6	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.56	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.0	0.6	0.07999999999999996	0.48	0.63	0.61	1.0	0.51	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.55	0.51	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.43999999999999995	0.16000000000000003	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.56	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001
India Bio-Fuels Annaual 2007	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.79	0.54	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.72	0.65	0.75	0.54	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.75	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.72	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.75	0.72	0.65	0.72	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.72	0.75	0.72	0.75	0.72	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.72	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.72	0.5	0.56	0.43000000000000005	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.32999999999999996	0.61	0.61	0.16000000000000003	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.77	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.75	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.75	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.5	0.54	0.5	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.72	0.75	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.72	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.65	0.72	0.72	0.61	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.72	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.72	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.75	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.65	0.6	0.72	0.54	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.72	0.72	0.75	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.54	0.72	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65
Indonesia Bio-Fuels Biofuels Annual 2007	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.73	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.55	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.75	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.48	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.73	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.73	0.7	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.73	0.63	0.7	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.73	0.63	0.7	0.73	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.6	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.69	0.7	0.69	0.7	0.69	0.55	0.6	0.7	0.69	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.69	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.06999999999999995	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.38	0.7	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.73	0.73	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.77	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.7	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.73	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.73	0.7	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.73	0.7	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.75	0.75	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.73	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.53	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.63	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63
Industrial Crops and Products	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.52	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.49	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.63	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.49	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.44999999999999996	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.69	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.52	0.56	0.52	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.69	0.52	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.52	0.49	0.49	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.69	0.52	0.56	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.49	0.63	0.49	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.52	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.6	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.49	0.76	0.69	0.69	0.42000000000000004	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.76	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.52	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.52	0.56	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.52	0.52	0.56	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.75	0.5900000000000001	0.75	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.63	0.56	0.69	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.74	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.56	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.72	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.52	0.52	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.69	0.63	0.38	0.63	0.38	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.73	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.63	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.42000000000000004	0.76	0.52	0.76	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.63	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.56	0.75	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.52	0.52	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.44999999999999996
Inhalation health effect concerns for volatilized a.i. compounds are discussed for individual products, e.g., oxydimeton-methyl, carbaryl	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.56	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.7	0.5	0.5	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.52	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.71	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.71	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.44999999999999996	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.54	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.69	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	1.0	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.48	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.71	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.73	0.64	0.73	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63
Innovative Methods for Corn Stover Collecting, Handling, Storing and Transporting	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.51	0.6	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.54	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.7	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.7	0.62	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.56	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.55	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.75	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.7	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.7	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.72	0.5	0.6	0.5	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.72	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.45999999999999996	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.5	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.65	1.0	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.71	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.0	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.73	0.5700000000000001	0.73	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.55	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001
Integrated Risk Information System File of Acetaldehyde	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.51	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.73	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.7	0.55	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.7	0.55	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.7	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.69	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.71	0.64	0.62	0.55	0.55	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.69	0.71	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.51	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.7	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.64	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.51	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.55	0.7	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.15000000000000002	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.18999999999999995	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.51	0.55	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.0	0.64	0.0	0.13	0.53	0.64	0.13	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.26	0.53	0.6	0.26	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.28	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.69	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.53	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.42000000000000004	0.5900000000000001
Integrated Risk Information System File of Acrolein	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.51	0.73	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.55	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.55	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.69	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.51	0.63	0.55	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.51	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.53	0.53	0.63	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.65	0.55	0.55	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.52	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.51	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.65	0.55	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.51	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.51	0.55	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.53	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.0	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.14	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.53	0.51	0.53	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.07999999999999996	0.64	0.07999999999999996	0.0	0.61	0.61	0.0	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.24	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.24	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.25	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.55	0.55	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.42000000000000004	0.5900000000000001
Integrated Risk Information System File of Benzene	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.52	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.73	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.52	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.7	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.54	0.54	0.64	0.7	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.54	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.72	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.54	0.56	0.64	0.72	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.54	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.64	0.12	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.040000000000000036	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.56	1.0	0.52	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.12	0.7	0.12	0.12	0.64	0.62	0.12	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.24	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.24	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.24	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.5	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.7	0.56	0.7	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.69	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.4	0.6
Japan Bio-Fuels Production Report	0.52	0.64	0.61	0.55	0.55	0.64	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.49	0.64	0.61	0.45999999999999996	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.28	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.7	0.43000000000000005	0.7	0.55	0.55	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.43000000000000005	0.55	0.64	0.55	0.61	0.55	0.7	0.43000000000000005	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.43000000000000005	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.7	0.61	0.49	0.55	0.7	0.43000000000000005	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.43000000000000005	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.52	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.52	0.64	0.52	0.64	0.61	0.52	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.71	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.56	0.61	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.52	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.52	0.56	0.52	0.56	0.52	0.56	0.52	0.61	0.64	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.52	0.56	0.52	0.44999999999999996	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.49	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.61	0.37	0.45999999999999996	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.73	0.49	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.040000000000000036	0.45999999999999996	0.45999999999999996	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.52	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.52	0.64	0.61	0.55	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.61	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.52	0.61	0.7	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.55	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.55	0.61	0.55	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.49	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.52	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.49	0.55	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.52	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.52	0.61	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.7	0.64	0.7	0.52	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.49	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.52	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.52	0.64	0.61	0.55	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.52	0.64	0.64	0.49	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.55	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.43000000000000005	0.55	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.52	0.55	0.71	0.55	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.45999999999999996
Kansas City Characterization study: Final Report	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.55	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.42000000000000004	0.65	0.63	0.43999999999999995	0.48	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.48	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.48	0.48	0.6	0.6	0.48	0.5	0.48	0.5700000000000001	0.48	0.6699999999999999	0.48	0.63	0.48	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.48	0.63	0.69	0.48	0.63	0.48	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.48	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.48	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.48	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.71	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.65	0.71	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.75	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.71	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.71	0.69	0.71	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.71	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.77	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.64	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.69	0.53	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.61	0.63	0.71	0.61	0.53	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.7	0.74	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	1.0	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.61	0.63	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.55	0.5	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.53	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001
Lake Tahoe Total Maximum Daily Load Technical Report: California and Nevada	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.53	0.74	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.56	0.71	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.55	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.52	0.7	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.74	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.55	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.54	0.64	0.63	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.63	1.0	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.71	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.62	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.43000000000000005	0.0	0.62	0.56	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001
Legislative and Regulatory Developments: Effects on Gasoline Supply, Subtasks 3.2, 4.1 and 4.2, benzene, toxics and sulfur control	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.64	0.63	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.72	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.010000000000000009	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.72	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.48	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.54	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.71	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.53	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.71	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.69	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65
Logging and Agricultural Residue Supply Curves for the Pacific Northwest	0.6	0.6	0.06000000000000005	0.55	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.0	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.71	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.69	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.75	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.53	0.55	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.55	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.73	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.69	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.69	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.72	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.55	0.69	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.62	0.55	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.7	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.55	0.69	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.73	0.55	0.73	0.56	0.7	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.69	0.64	0.48	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64
Methodology for Estimating Municipal Solid Waste Recycling Benefits	0.62	0.5	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.71	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.47	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.72	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.43999999999999995	0.63	0.43999999999999995	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.74	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.54	0.61	0.63	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62
Mexico Biofuels Annual Report	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.42000000000000004	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.56	0.49	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.49	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.52	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.69	0.56	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.52	0.63	0.49	0.49	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.49	0.63	0.49	0.63	0.56	0.49	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.49	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.49	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.49	0.6599999999999999	0.49	0.42000000000000004	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.38	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.33999999999999997	0.69	0.52	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.52	0.49	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.54	0.7	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.52	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.49	0.69	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5	0.56	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.52	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.52	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.49	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.74	0.63	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.51	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.72	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.63	0.73	0.73	0.69	0.63	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.52	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.56	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.42000000000000004	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.75	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.52	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.49	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63
Modeling the Effect of Renewable Fuels Standards 2	0.33999999999999997	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.72	0.36	0.54	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.48	0.54	0.54	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.43000000000000005	0.62	0.64	0.48	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.72	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.54	0.48	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.64	0.54	0.71	0.64	0.54	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.5	0.5	0.62	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.51	0.69	0.62	0.4	0.62	0.4	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.7	0.4	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.5	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.4	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5	0.6	0.63	0.71	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.45999999999999996	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.38	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.52	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.38	0.7	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.52	0.64	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.36	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.48	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.48	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.48	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.54	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.52	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.54	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6	0.62	0.49	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.52	0.63	0.0	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.48	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.54
Municipal Solid Waste Generation, Recycling, and Disposal in the United States: Facts and Figures for 2006	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.51	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.020000000000000018	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.51	0.61	0.51	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.71	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.52	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.4	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.7	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.72	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.52	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	1.0	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001
National Air Quality and Emissions Trends Report, 2001	0.44999999999999996	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.43000000000000005	0.43000000000000005	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.52	0.54	0.52	0.6	0.52	0.5	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.73	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.73	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.73	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.73	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.69	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.48	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.72	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.62	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.73	0.7	0.6	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.49	0.73	0.5	0.63	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.49	0.62	0.62	0.72	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.5	0.73	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.47	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.71	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.56	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.69	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.49	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.56	0.43000000000000005	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.52	0.54	0.54	0.62	0.65	0.54	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.56	0.64	0.54	0.0	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.43000000000000005	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.54	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.43000000000000005	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.43000000000000005	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.52	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.43000000000000005	0.62	0.65	0.52	0.54	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.54	0.61	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.49	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.69	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.69	0.56	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.44999999999999996	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.52	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.56
National Estuarine Eutrophication Assessment, Effects of Nutrient Enrichment in the Nation's Estuaries	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.7	0.54	0.52	0.54	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.51	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.7	0.63	0.61	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.56	0.54	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.49	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.38	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.71	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.44999999999999996	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.55	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.49	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5	0.64	0.5	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5	0.64	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.53	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.0	0.61	0.64	0.5	0.61	0.64	0.5	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.54	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.55	0.61	0.55	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.65	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.55	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.6	0.69	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.56	0.55	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.53	0.6	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.5	0.61	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.52	0.56	0.43000000000000005	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001
National Resources Canada/Fiba Canning - Biodiesel Freightliners	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.72	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.54	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.72	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.72	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.72	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.69	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.72	0.6	0.6	0.73	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.43999999999999995	0.6	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.43999999999999995	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.56	0.69	0.5	0.55	0.73	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.53	0.53	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.55	0.71	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.73	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.7	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.72	0.65	0.52	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.52	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.65	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.55	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	1.0	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.65	0.52	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.72	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.75	0.65	0.75	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.73	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6
National Scale Air Toxics Assessment for 1999	0.54	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.54	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.49	0.49	0.52	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.49	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.63	0.65	0.52	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.56	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.72	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.74	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.74	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.74	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.74	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.69	0.74	0.65	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.56	0.65	0.69	0.56	0.69	0.74	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.74	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.73	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.74	0.53	0.53	0.54	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.71	0.54	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.7	0.63	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.49	0.54	0.65	0.54	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.49	0.65	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.52	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.72	0.63	0.54	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.72	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.030000000000000027	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.49	0.65	0.54	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.54	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.49	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.49	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.49	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.7	0.6	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.6	0.49	0.52	0.63	0.4	0.6	0.69	0.62	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.65	0.6	0.69	0.69	0.65	0.61	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.44999999999999996	0.030000000000000027	0.030000000000000027	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.44999999999999996	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.43000000000000005	0.64	0.6	0.47	0.44999999999999996	0.7	0.6	0.44999999999999996	0.63	0.63	0.44999999999999996	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.44999999999999996	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.44999999999999996	0.5800000000000001	0.73	0.73	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.47	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.49	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.69	0.63	0.73	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.52	0.52	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.56
National Toxicology Program 11th Report on Carinogens	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.53	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.48	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.63	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.53	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.85	0.7	0.61	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.53	0.56	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.52	0.72	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.55	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.53	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.53	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.56	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.51	0.55	0.53	0.45999999999999996	0.69	0.45999999999999996	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.55	0.63	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.55	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.51	0.55	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.73	0.5700000000000001	0.73	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.71	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.55	0.7	0.55	0.63	0.45999999999999996	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.51	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001
National-Scale Air Toxics Assessment for 1999	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.56	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.69	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.52	0.6	0.74	0.63	0.65	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.69	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.65	0.65	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.74	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.74	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.74	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.74	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.72	0.63	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.63	0.56	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.72	0.72	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.72	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.71	0.54	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.74	0.7	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.72	0.52	0.56	0.65	0.54	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.72	0.63	0.55	0.74	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.54	0.71	0.6	0.65	0.71	0.6	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.73	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.0	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.72	0.63	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.7	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.52	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.69	0.62	0.52	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.52	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.71	0.7	0.63	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.63	0.52	0.54	0.65	0.43000000000000005	0.6	0.69	0.62	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.65	0.6	0.69	0.69	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.69	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.47	0.0	0.0	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.47	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.44999999999999996	0.64	0.63	0.49	0.47	0.7	0.63	0.47	0.63	0.63	0.47	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.47	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.47	0.5800000000000001	0.75	0.75	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.49	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.52	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.72	0.63	0.73	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.71	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.52	0.7	0.65	0.52	0.54	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.6	0.56	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001
Natural Assessment of Oil and Gas Fact Sheet: Natural Bitumen Resources of the United States	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.63	0.62	0.53	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.48	0.65	0.48	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.56	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.53	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.56	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.69	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.71	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.65	0.64	0.71	0.69	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.56	0.7	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.47	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.62	0.64	0.72	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.54	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.6	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.15000000000000002	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.0	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.7	0.61	0.69	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.7	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.56	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.71	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.55	0.62	0.47	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.5	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.69	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.48	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.65	0.5800000000000001
Natural Gas Turbines	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.5	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.75	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.4	0.55	0.55	0.65	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.44999999999999996	0.6	0.44999999999999996	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.5	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.55	0.75	0.65	0.65	0.75	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.7	0.5	0.7	0.55	0.75	0.7	0.75	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.75	0.65	0.75	0.65	0.65	0.75	0.65	0.75	0.65	0.75	0.65	0.55	0.55	0.75	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.75	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.54	0.44999999999999996	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.7	0.8	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.44999999999999996	0.44999999999999996	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.85	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.75	0.7	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.5	0.5	0.6	0.55	0.5	0.55	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.4	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.55	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.55	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.65	0.75	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.65	0.55	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.7	0.5	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.7	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.5	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.55	0.6	0.7	0.4	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.75	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.75	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.65	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.65	1.0	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.7	0.5	0.55	0.35	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.75	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.77	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.55
Nutrient Fluxes of the Mississippi-Atchafalaya River Basin and Subbasins for the Period of Record Through 2005: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 2007-1080	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.69	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.55	0.65	0.56	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.56	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.73	0.61	0.61	0.71	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.7	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.73	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.71	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.63	0.52	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.54	0.53	0.65	0.64	0.7	0.69	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.13	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.48	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.54
NYC Waste Characterization Study	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.75	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.43999999999999995	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5	0.53	0.54	0.41000000000000003	0.09999999999999998	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.63	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.5	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.65	0.75	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.63	0.63	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.72	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.72	0.63	0.72	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.72	0.63	0.54	0.69	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.75	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.77	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.72	0.69	0.72	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.72	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.72	0.74	0.63	0.63	0.54	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.54	0.54	0.63	0.69	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.74	0.63	0.74	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.63	0.74	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.74	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.54	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.54	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.54	0.63	0.63	0.54	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.54	0.63	0.72	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	1.0	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.38	0.6	0.69	0.54	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.72	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.72	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.63
Occurance Estimation Methodology and Occurance Findings Report for the Six-Year Review of Existing National Primary Drinking Water Regulations	0.62	0.6	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5	0.71	0.63	0.65	0.43999999999999995	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.53	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.55	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.72	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.71	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.7	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.52	0.64	0.63	0.43999999999999995	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.49	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.52	0.56	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5	0.65	0.55	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.55	0.53	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.69	0.61	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.53	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.47	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.55	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.53	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62
Oregon 2002 Waste Composition Study	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.72	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.4	0.29000000000000004	0.43000000000000005	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.55	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.56	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.72	0.69	0.69	0.72	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.7	0.72	0.69	0.72	0.69	0.63	0.72	0.6	0.72	0.6	0.72	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.72	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.72	0.63	0.74	0.72	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.69	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.6	0.78	0.55	0.72	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.63	0.72	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.7	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.6	0.72	0.69	0.76	0.55	0.62	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.71	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.75	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6	0.69	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.74	0.63	0.74	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.74	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.52	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	1.0	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.74	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.52	0.6
Oregon Cellulose-Ethanol Study	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.54	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.47	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.37	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.37	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.5	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.64	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.64	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.64	0.77	0.64	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.54	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.74	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.4	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.77	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.54	0.7	0.47	0.5	0.54	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.7	0.72	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.5	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.74	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.72	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.5700000000000001	0.77	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.6	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.64	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.77	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.43999999999999995	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.74	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.77	0.64	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.74	0.74	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.74	0.7	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.54
Outlook for Biomass Ethanol Production and Demand	0.56	0.54	0.64	0.49	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.49	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.47	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.39	0.54	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.54	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.37	0.54	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.49	0.72	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.52	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.74	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.52	0.0	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.47	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.33999999999999997	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.47	0.6599999999999999	0.44999999999999996	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.62	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.56	0.62	0.49	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.49	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.47	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.52	0.56	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.47	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.64	0.72	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.7	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.54	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.52	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.52	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.43000000000000005	0.65	0.56	0.65	0.65	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.47	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.54	0.49	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.52	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.65	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.54	0.64	0.52
Oxidant air pollution effects on a western coniferous forest ecosystem	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.56	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.71	0.63	0.62	0.69	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.55	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.73	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.65	0.55	0.7	0.55	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.72	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.69	0.69	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.6	0.69	0.69	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.62	0.65	0.56	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.49	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.49	0.56	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.56	0.55	0.5	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.49	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.45999999999999996	0.43000000000000005	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.38	0.0	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.6	1.0	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001
Pesticides in the Nation's Streams and Groundwater, 1992-2001	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.61	0.63	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.53	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.56	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.55	0.6	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.69	0.71	0.69	0.6	0.71	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.69	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.62	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.69	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.62	0.69	0.61	0.64	0.52	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.73	0.56	0.56	0.61	0.72	0.63	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.73	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.53	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.61	0.6	0.71	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.74	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.53	0.61	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	1.0	0.61	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.71	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.51	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.53	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.14
Petroleum Marketing Annual	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5	0.74	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.77	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.77	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.77	0.62	0.54	0.54	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.62	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.72	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.0	0.5800000000000001	0.0	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.7	0.54	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.43000000000000005	0.62	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.43000000000000005	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.74	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5	0.54	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.74	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.71	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.54	0.62
Provisional Assessment of Recent Studies on Health Affects of Particulate Matter Exposure	0.52	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.44999999999999996	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.73	0.69	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.54	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.55	0.69	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.51	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.69	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.53	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.52	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.45999999999999996	0.5800000000000001	0.020000000000000018	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.54	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.51	0.56	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.54	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.48	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.54	0.61	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.43999999999999995	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.72	0.63	0.65	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.56	0.63	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.53	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6
Quantifying the Flow: Taking Inventory of Woody Residuals	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.55	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.69	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.62	0.71	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.53	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.53	0.71	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.56	0.55	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.62	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.64	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.72	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.69	0.74	0.65	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.74	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.74	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.74	0.69	0.74	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.62	0.6	0.69	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.77	0.7	0.69	0.69	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.72	0.5	0.62	0.5	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.69	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.64	0.7	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.64	1.0	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.51	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.69	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.71	0.6	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.69	0.64	0.55	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.64	0.69	0.7	0.73	0.62	0.73	0.74	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.51	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64
Re-evaluation of some organic chemicals, hydrazine, and hydrogen peroxide	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.53	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.56	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.52	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.55	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.73	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.69	0.61	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.61	0.63	0.7	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.55	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.5	0.55	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.55	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.55	0.51	0.51	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.45999999999999996	0.54	0.45999999999999996	0.61	0.6	0.61	1.0	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.53	0.61	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.45999999999999996	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.69	0.64	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.53	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001
Residue Removal for Biomass Energy Production: Effects on Soils and Recommendations	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.56	0.61	0.55	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.52	0.6	0.56	0.55	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.0	0.56	0.61	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.51	0.55	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.4	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.7	0.55	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.54	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.55	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.55	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.55	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.55	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.51	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.56	0.42000000000000004	0.71	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.52	0.54	0.55	0.69	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.56	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.5	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.69	0.72	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.54	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.54	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.53	0.6	0.63	0.54	0.64	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.47	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.54	0.54	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.54	0.61	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.54
Response of Surface Water Chemistry to the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.55	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.55	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.55	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.65	0.64	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.71	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.53	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.61	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.51	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.54	0.7	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001
Review of the National Ambient Air Quality Standards for Ozone: Policy Assessment of Scientific and Technical Information	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.33999999999999997	0.4	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.53	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.53	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.69	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.71	0.56	0.65	0.48	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.53	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.5	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.4	0.64	0.62	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.48	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.49	0.6	0.64	0.54	0.52	0.7	0.6	0.63	0.44999999999999996	0.61	0.5	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5	0.6	0.35	0.62	0.65	0.72	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.39	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.18999999999999995	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.55	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.48	0.5	0.0	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.48	0.5	0.48	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.0	0.5800000000000001	0.48	0.5	0.48	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.48	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.42000000000000004	0.42000000000000004	0.61	0.6	0.42000000000000004	0.42000000000000004	0.42000000000000004	0.42000000000000004	0.61	0.49	0.61	0.61	0.52	0.61	0.48	0.5	0.56	0.48	0.5	0.48	0.48	0.48	0.63	0.61	0.48	0.48	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.48	0.48	0.6	0.61	0.48	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.53	0.63	0.62	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.53	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.53	0.53	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.64	0.61	0.53	0.62	0.63	0.43000000000000005	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.53	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.62
Safe Drinking Water Information System (SDWIS) End of Year data for FY 2007	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.72	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.7	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.56	0.69	0.56	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.75	0.7	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.77	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.71	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.74	0.5	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.75	0.64	0.53	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.76	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.54	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.63	0.74	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.48	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.52	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.51	0.51	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.51	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.5	0.63	0.62	0.48	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.73	0.62	0.73	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.51	0.040000000000000036	0.56
Secondary Mill Residues and Urban Wood Waste Quantities in the United States-Final Report	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.49	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.54	0.56	0.64	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.52	0.0	0.5	0.65	0.61	0.51	0.61	0.51	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.53	0.53	0.62	0.55	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.53	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.53	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.51	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.72	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.72	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.35	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.64	0.6	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.49	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.51	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.54	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.49	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.7	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.65	1.0	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.7	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.73	0.6	0.73	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.44999999999999996	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.65	0.61	0.48	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001
State of Ohio Waste Characterization Study	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.75	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.6	0.53	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.53	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.53	0.62	0.48	0.62	0.55	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.53	0.5	0.41000000000000003	0.19999999999999996	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.53	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.53	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.62	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.53	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.53	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.74	0.62	0.65	0.5	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.75	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.53	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.53	0.53	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.53	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6	1.0	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.45999999999999996	0.5	0.62	0.53	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.53	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.73	0.5800000000000001	0.73	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.76	0.65	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.30000000000000004	0.53	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.53	0.55
Statewide Feasibility Study for a Potential New York State Biodiesel Industry	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.47	0.49	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.47	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.47	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.71	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.56	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.55	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.73	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.69	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.64	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.72	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.55	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.52	0.52	0.63	0.63	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.55	0.54	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.69	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.53	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001
Statewide MSW Composition Study: A Study of Discards in the State of Minnesota	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.54	0.56	0.64	0.56	0.4	0.0	0.42000000000000004	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.73	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.69	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.56	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.7	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.35	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.42000000000000004	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61
Statewide Waste Composition Study: Pennsylvania State-wide Waste Composition	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.41000000000000003	0.0	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.72	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.65	0.69	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.69	0.72	0.61	0.51	0.72	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.61	0.7	0.64	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.72	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.64	0.65	0.7	0.69	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.7	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.48	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.54
The 2005 Food and Agriculture Organization Global Forest Resources Assessment	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.54	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.49	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.56	0.71	0.63	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.73	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.69	0.55	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.72	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.48	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.55	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.69	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.38	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.72	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.54	0.69	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.49	0.6	0.64	0.52	0.54	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.55	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.69	0.69	0.56	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.5	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.47	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.55	0.65	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.49	0.65	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.71	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.62
The 2006-2007 Missouri Municipal Solid Waste Composition Study	0.65	0.45999999999999996	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.52	0.48	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.63	0.71	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.73	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.73	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.73	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.63	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.6	0.7	0.62	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.77	0.72	0.73	0.71	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.71	0.7	0.6	0.65	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.73	0.72	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.71	0.65	0.7	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.7	0.62	0.72	0.7	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.73	0.62	0.62	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.71	1.0	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.74	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.62
The Economic Feasibilty of Ethanol Production from Sugar in the United States	0.56	0.51	0.6	0.51	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.54	0.63	0.64	0.52	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.45999999999999996	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.45999999999999996	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.47	0.64	0.52	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5	0.63	0.6	0.47	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.5	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.56	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.56	0.43999999999999995	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.49	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.63	0.52	0.63	0.7	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.33999999999999997	0.52	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.69	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.43999999999999995	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.52	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.36	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.69	0.45999999999999996	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.54	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.49	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.52	0.65	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.72	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.54	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.52	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.51	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.45999999999999996	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5	0.63	0.61	0.4	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.55	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.51	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.51	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.53	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.47
Tight Supply and Strong Demand May Raise US Nitrogen Fertilizer Prices	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.72	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.69	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.71	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.72	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.76	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.76	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.72	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.52	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.030000000000000027	0.63	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.62
Toxicological profile for Formaldehyde	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.72	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.72	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.64	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.72	0.64	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.72	0.64	0.72	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.56	0.72	0.64	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.64	0.56	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.56	0.69	0.69	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.72	0.64	0.56	0.72	0.69	0.69	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.61	0.48	0.69	0.63	0.56	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.77	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.75	0.5800000000000001	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.74	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.61	0.64	0.69	0.61	0.72	0.69	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.48	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.72	0.56	0.72	0.56	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.53	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.53	0.64	0.72	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	1.0	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.73	0.61	0.44999999999999996	0.5	0.5	0.5	0.43000000000000005	0.43000000000000005	0.56	0.4	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.53	0.74	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.4	0.64	0.56	0.4	0.64	0.72	0.72	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.69	0.69	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.72	0.69	0.72	0.56	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.64	0.69	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.75	0.69	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.7	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64
Toxicological Review of Benzene (Noncancer Effects)	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.74	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.69	0.61	0.65	0.69	0.7	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.73	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.74	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.74	0.69	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.74	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.71	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.74	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.7	0.69	0.7	0.69	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.75	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.71	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.73	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.71	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.69	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.61	0.63	0.72	0.65	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.73	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.71	0.69	0.69	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.71	0.63	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.7	0.53	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.55	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.7	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.55	0.65	0.63	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.52	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.45999999999999996	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.36	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.38	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.71	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.71	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63
Toxicological Review of Naphthalene	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.72	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.75	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.72	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.72	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.72	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.49	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.45999999999999996	0.63	0.72	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.72	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.72	0.63	0.72	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.55	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.49	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.55	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	1.0	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.0	0.38	0.5800000000000001	0.0	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.55	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.72	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.72	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.52	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63
Toxicological Review of Naphthalene (Reassessment of the Inhalation Cancer Risk)	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.53	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.54	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.65	0.62	0.73	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.7	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.52	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.54	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.55	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.51	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.63	1.0	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.44999999999999996	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.45999999999999996	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.54	0.45999999999999996	0.63	0.55	0.56	0.6	0.55	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.0	0.33999999999999997	0.5700000000000001	0.33999999999999997	0.63	0.48	0.48	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.54	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.42000000000000004	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001
Update of Distillers Grains Displacement Ratios for Corn Ethanol Life-Cycle Analysis	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.7	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.48	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.55	0.64	0.62	0.54	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.27	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.44999999999999996	0.73	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.0	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.7	0.6	0.61	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.55	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.44999999999999996	0.71	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.56	0.64	0.55	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.5	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.5	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.5	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5	0.6	0.61	0.54	0.54	0.61	0.63	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.6	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.54	0.71	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.6	0.54	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.61	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.48	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.56
Updates to the Carbon Bond Chemical Mechanism: CB05	0.63	0.51	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.51	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.55	0.63	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.61	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.69	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.61	0.55	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.71	0.7	0.7	0.55	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.69	0.65	0.71	0.7	0.54	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.55	0.55	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.76	0.65	0.55	0.69	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.7	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.69	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.0	0.7	0.61	0.5	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.65	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.55	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.51	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.51	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.51	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.72	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	1.0	0.65	0.63	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.5	0.65	0.55	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.61	0.63	0.53	0.53	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.73	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.71	0.63	0.75	0.61	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.63	0.63	0.54	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.36	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001
Urban ornamental plants: sensitivity to ozone and potential economic losses	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.55	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.53	0.63	0.56	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.7	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.5	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.71	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.47	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.0	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	1.0	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.51	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.75	0.62	0.75	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.62	0.53	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.51	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001
US Fertilizer Use of Price	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.47	0.54	0.7	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.47	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.5	0.69	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.5	0.54	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.75	0.62	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.76	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.75	0.54	0.75	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.7	0.62	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.72	0.62	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.54	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.54	0.5	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.62	0.74	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.35	0.7	0.16000000000000003	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.79	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.54
US Increasingly Imports Nitrogen and Potash Fertilizer	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.52	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.7	0.56	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.7	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.62	0.65	0.69	0.64	0.62	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.69	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.53	0.69	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.73	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.63	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.54	0.56	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.49	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.56	0.56	0.65	0.73	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.73	0.6	0.73	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.49	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.54	0.6	0.56	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001
USDA Agricultural Projections to 2016	0.48	0.49	0.52	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.52	0.45999999999999996	0.52	0.63	0.63	0.45999999999999996	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.71	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.73	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.73	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.73	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.73	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.73	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.73	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.71	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.7	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.69	0.71	0.69	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.55	0.69	0.55	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.52	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.41000000000000003	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.75	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.45999999999999996	0.63	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.73	0.75	0.75	0.63	0.72	0.49	0.75	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.36	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.49	0.41000000000000003	0.36	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.73	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.77	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.73	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.41000000000000003	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.49	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.76	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.49	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.73	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.74	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.76	0.76	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.52	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.55	0.45999999999999996	0.55	0.52	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.43999999999999995	0.45999999999999996	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.43999999999999995	0.63	0.48	0.65	0.63	0.79	0.71	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.55	0.53	0.65	0.54	0.55	0.55	0.75	0.63	0.74	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.52	0.63	0.5700000000000001
USDA's 2002 Ethanol Cost-of-Production Survey	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.72	0.6	0.72	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.7	0.65	0.52	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.54	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.74	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.74	0.69	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.74	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.74	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.7	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.72	0.56	0.72	0.56	0.72	0.69	0.72	0.69	0.72	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.72	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.72	0.7	0.72	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.63	0.7	0.7	0.63	0.75	0.47	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.4	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.69	0.44999999999999996	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.74	0.7	0.76	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.74	0.63	0.72	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.69	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.78	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.74	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.74	0.69	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.76	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.75	0.7	0.65	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.74	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.65	0.76	0.65	0.65	0.74	0.74	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.74	0.65	0.69	0.77	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.73	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.72	0.7	0.69	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.72	0.7	0.72	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.7	0.72	0.7	0.72	0.7	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.7	0.65	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.7	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.6	0.6	0.72	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.72	0.63	0.65	0.72	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.78	0.72	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.76	0.73	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.65	0.69	0.56	0.69	0.72	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.6	0.72	0.64	0.76	0.63	0.69	0.7	0.72	0.69	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.65	0.69	0.69	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.69	0.56	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.74	0.74	0.69	0.73	0.69	0.63	0.72	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.73	0.69	0.53	0.69	0.69	0.7	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.49	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.56	0.72	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001
Vermont Waste Composition Study	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.55	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.45999999999999996	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.55	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.49	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.30000000000000004	0.19999999999999996	0.36	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.52	0.52	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.7	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.62	0.65	0.71	0.62	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.71	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.55	0.71	0.55	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.71	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.52	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.74	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.55	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.76	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.52	0.71	0.7	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.62	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.65	0.71	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.52	0.52	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.52	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.49	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.65	0.52	0.62	0.74	0.62	0.74	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.52	0.62	0.55	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.74	0.62	0.52	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.74	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.52	0.55	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.62	0.52	0.55	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.52	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.52	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	1.0	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.49	0.49	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.55	0.52	0.7	0.52	0.52	0.62	0.55	0.52	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.52	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.52	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.75	0.65	0.55	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.55	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.55	0.55	0.52	0.55	0.52	0.55	0.52	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.45999999999999996	0.55
VOC/PM Cold Temperature Characterization When Operating Ethanol	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.48	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.7	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.64	0.71	0.69	0.72	0.71	0.72	0.71	0.62	0.72	0.71	0.7	0.62	0.75	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.64	0.71	0.72	0.7	0.69	0.71	0.69	0.71	0.72	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.71	0.72	0.69	0.72	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.52	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.61	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.4	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.69	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.5	0.61	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.73	0.72	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.69	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.61	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5	0.55	0.72	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.56
Wadeable Streams Assessment: A Collaborative Survey of the Nation's Streams	0.51	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.51	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.48	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.52	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.7	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.56	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.71	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.4	0.64	0.63	0.75	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.54	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.44999999999999996	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.72	0.62	0.6	0.72	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.54	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.7	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.48	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.54	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.55	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.71	0.55	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.53	0.63	0.07999999999999996	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.51	0.63	0.62	0.55	0.64	0.42000000000000004	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001
Winter Deposition of Nitrogen and Sulfur in the Eastern Columbia River Gorge National Scenic Area	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.49	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.48	0.54	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.54	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.4	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.74	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.55	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.69	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.53	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.51	0.56	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.51	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.53	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.54	0.53	0.62	0.53	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.54	0.55	0.53	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.0	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.53	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.51	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.62	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.53	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.48	0.53	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.47	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001
Wisconsin Statewide Waste Characterization Study	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.73	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.48	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.53	0.53	0.61	0.4	0.17000000000000004	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.61	0.69	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.75	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.71	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.55	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	1.0	0.65	0.63	0.71	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.48	0.6	0.63	0.55	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.55	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.56	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.53	0.55	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.73	0.61	0.73	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.73	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.71	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.53	0.5900000000000001
Working Document of the NPC Global Oil & Gas Study	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.76	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.72	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.72	0.7	0.7	0.72	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.7	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.72	0.7	0.72	0.7	0.6	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.72	0.7	0.7	0.6	0.72	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.78	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.72	0.64	0.7	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.69	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.75	0.74	0.54	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.73	0.69	0.76	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.0	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.41000000000000003	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.69	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.5	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.71	0.71	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.5	0.62	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.74	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.7	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.72	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.72	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.54	0.6	0.62	0.7	0.72	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.75	0.64	0.75	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.48	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.56
100,000 Miles of Fueling 5.9L Cummins Engines with 100% biodiesel	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.72	0.64	0.7	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.73	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.71	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.71	0.71	0.7	0.71	0.71	0.64	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.73	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.71	0.73	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.72	0.7	0.69	0.69	0.7	0.69	0.7	0.64	0.69	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.7	0.64	0.74	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.72	0.7	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.7	0.69	0.7	0.69	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.71	0.74	0.69	0.72	0.7	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.77	0.73	0.73	0.65	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.71	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.7	0.72	0.74	0.64	0.76	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.72	0.71	0.69	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.72	0.7	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.7	0.7	0.71	0.7	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.64	0.54	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.73	0.7	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.71	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.71	0.63	0.65	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.73	0.69	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.71	0.62	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.71	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.71	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.69	0.69	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.71	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.7	0.64	0.71	0.71	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.71	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.76	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.7	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.65
2007 National Association of Convenience Stores State of the Industry survey data	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.55	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.63	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.4	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.61	0.52	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.74	0.56	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.54	0.48	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.54	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.52	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.7	0.61	0.56	0.5	0.61	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.54	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.65	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.71	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.48	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.54	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.56	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.62	0.53	0.61	0.6	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.56	0.62	0.24	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001
2008 Purchasing Guide for Flexible Fuel Vehicles	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.73	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.73	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.7	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.73	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.75	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.77	0.63	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.64	0.71	0.69	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.48	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.4	0.73	0.61	0.4	0.73	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.73	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.73	0.61	0.63	0.7	0.61	0.65	0.73	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.53	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.63	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.69	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.71	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.73	0.61	0.73	0.72	0.69	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.63	0.72	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.69	0.65	0.71	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61
A Model for Estimating Vapor Pressures of Commingled Ethanol Fuels	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.55	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.72	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.72	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.69	0.69	0.6	0.72	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.52	0.55	0.52	0.55	0.7	0.69	0.63	0.27	0.52	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.55	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.48	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.5	0.49	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.64	0.55	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.73	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.69	0.56	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.5	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.52	0.64	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.54	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.55
A Study of the Effects of Fuel Type and Emission Control Systems on Regulated Gaseous Emissions from Heavy-Duty Diesel Engines	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.53	0.61	0.49	0.51	0.65	0.0	0.56	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.73	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.73	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.72	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.5	0.63	0.6	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.7	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.7	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.44999999999999996	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.52	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.54	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.54	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.55	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.55	0.53	0.65	0.61	0.71	0.74	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.51	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.69	0.62	0.55	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.73	0.6	0.73	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.49	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.42000000000000004	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.64	0.63	0.62
An analysis of the projected energy use of future dry mill corn ethanol plants (2010-2030)	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.0	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.33999999999999997	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.62	0.64	0.69	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.53	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.53	0.54	0.64	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.65	0.55	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.52	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.53	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	1.0	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.73	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.48	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001
Annual Energy Outlook 2006	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.43000000000000005	0.62	0.54	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.74	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.74	0.74	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.79	0.7	0.74	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.74	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.74	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5	0.5	0.77	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.77	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.77	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.5	0.62	0.77	0.5	0.77	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.77	0.77	0.6599999999999999	0.77	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.77	0.7	0.77	0.7	0.77	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.77	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.77	0.62	0.7	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.6	0.5	0.7	0.54	0.7	0.74	0.74	0.7	0.47	0.7	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.5	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.74	0.39	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5	0.43000000000000005	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.74	0.77	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.77	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.74	0.16000000000000003	0.43000000000000005	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.7	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.74	0.62	0.7	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.62	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.77	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.77	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.74	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.77	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.85	0.6599999999999999	0.85	0.7	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.81	0.6599999999999999	0.85	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.81	0.62	0.81	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.85	0.62	0.81	0.62	0.81	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.81	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.81	0.62	0.62	0.81	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.74	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.77	0.74	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.77	0.74	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.74	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.10999999999999999	0.040000000000000036	0.47	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.5	0.7	0.62	0.74	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.77	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62
API Gasoline Tax Report	0.5700000000000001	0.48	0.61	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.48	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.74	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.43999999999999995	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.53	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.74	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.43999999999999995	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.61	0.53	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.53	0.53	0.61	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.53	0.61	0.61	0.53	0.61	0.53	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.53	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.7	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.53	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.48	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.53	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.74	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.7	0.48	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.48	0.53	0.43999999999999995	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.48	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.48	0.7	0.53	0.48	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.48	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.43999999999999995	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.48	0.74	0.48	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.48	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.43999999999999995	0.43999999999999995	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.74	0.5700000000000001	0.48	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.48	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.53	0.61	0.61	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.48	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.53	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.53	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.48	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.48	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.71	0.61	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001
Benzene metabolism in rodents at doses relevant to human exposure of Urban Air	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.56	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.71	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.49	0.54	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.53	0.54	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.49	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.040000000000000036	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.53	0.53	0.6	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.71	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001
Biodiesel Engine Performance and Emissions Testing	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.5	0.52	0.43999999999999995	0.52	0.6	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.48	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.52	0.56	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.7	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.56	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.7	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.62	0.64	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.5	0.65	0.71	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.7	0.64	0.56	0.62	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.72	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.45999999999999996	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.52	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.7	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.52	0.47	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.52	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.54	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.54	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.73	0.62	0.73	0.63	0.43999999999999995	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.52	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.71	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.62	0.64	0.77	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.6
Biodiesel from Algae Oil	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.71	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.42000000000000004	0.45999999999999996	0.45999999999999996	0.38	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.38	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.33999999999999997	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.63	0.13	0.5900000000000001	0.25	0.71	0.33999999999999997	0.25	0.33999999999999997	0.33999999999999997	0.33999999999999997	0.33999999999999997	0.13	0.33999999999999997	0.33999999999999997	0.49	0.13	0.63	0.5	0.13	0.6699999999999999	0.25	0.13	0.25	0.71	0.33999999999999997	0.33999999999999997	0.49	0.25	0.33999999999999997	0.25	0.33999999999999997	0.33999999999999997	0.25	0.6699999999999999	0.25	0.6699999999999999	0.25	0.33999999999999997	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.25	0.71	0.33999999999999997	0.33999999999999997	0.25	0.33999999999999997	0.63	0.42000000000000004	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.42000000000000004	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.63	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.42000000000000004	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.55	0.69	0.63	0.5	0.55	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.71	0.5	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.42000000000000004	0.45999999999999996	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.45999999999999996	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.71	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.55	0.74	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63
Bioethanol as Basis for Regional Development in Brazil: An Input-Output Model with Mixed Technologies	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.73	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.71	0.69	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.7	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.72	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.48	0.63	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.72	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.54	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.72	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.7	0.62	0.73	0.64	0.73	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62
Biofuels and the Bay: Getting It Right to Benefit Farms, Forests and the Chesapeake	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.69	0.69	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5	0.64	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.61	0.63	0.72	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.51	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.74	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.6	1.0	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.71	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.73	0.62	0.73	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.0	0.53	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001
Biofuels for Transport: An International Report	0.47	0.52	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.5	0.56	0.49	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.47	0.62	0.62	0.52	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.56	0.64	0.44999999999999996	0.49	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.41000000000000003	0.65	0.56	0.64	0.41000000000000003	0.41000000000000003	0.65	0.5	0.41000000000000003	0.5800000000000001	0.41000000000000003	0.56	0.41000000000000003	0.5800000000000001	0.41000000000000003	0.6	0.41000000000000003	0.65	0.56	0.41000000000000003	0.64	0.64	0.41000000000000003	0.64	0.41000000000000003	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.41000000000000003	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.41000000000000003	0.65	0.56	0.41000000000000003	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.54	0.52	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.54	0.52	0.6	0.7	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.69	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.52	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.52	0.62	0.69	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.52	0.5	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.52	0.52	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.47	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.72	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.4	0.62	0.49	0.54	0.52	0.52	0.56	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.77	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.6	0.52	0.52	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.54	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.71	0.6	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.41000000000000003	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.47	0.52	0.62	0.52	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.63	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.63	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.71	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.47	0.54	0.62	0.64	0.54	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.52	0.52	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.49	0.44999999999999996	0.54	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.47	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.49	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.47	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.65	0.65	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.54	0.52	0.52	0.47	0.64	0.62	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.64	0.62	0.73	0.6	0.73	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.64	0.65	0.54	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.65	0.54	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56
Biomass and Biofuels in Maine: Estimating Supplies for Expanding the Forest Products Industry	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.56	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.51	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.48	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.52	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.51	0.55	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.72	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.5	0.63	0.5	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.5	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.7	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.5	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5	0.63	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.73	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.69	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.51	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.53	0.6	0.54	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.44999999999999996	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.52	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001
"Case Study ""Jatropha Curcas"""	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.75	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.21999999999999997	0.5800000000000001	0.36	0.65	0.5	0.61	0.36	0.36	0.65	0.36	0.36	0.36	0.36	0.5	0.36	0.5800000000000001	0.36	0.36	0.36	0.65	0.5	0.36	0.21999999999999997	0.61	0.36	0.21999999999999997	0.36	0.5	0.4	0.4	0.36	0.61	0.36	0.36	0.36	0.65	0.5	0.36	0.75	0.75	0.5	0.21999999999999997	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.72	0.72	0.65	0.72	0.72	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.65	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.72	0.65	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.72	0.72	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.72	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.72	0.65	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.61	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.65	0.54	0.65	0.75	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.8	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.72	0.61	0.75	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.54	0.54	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.54	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.72	0.76	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.72	0.79	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.75	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.75	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.72	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.72	0.65	0.72	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.74	0.5800000000000001	0.74	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.74	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.74	0.61	0.74	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.61	0.74	0.61	0.74	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.61	0.74	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.74	0.65	0.61	0.74	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.72	1.0	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.69	0.72	0.61	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.5	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.47	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.65
Characterization of Biodiesel Exhaust Emissions for EPA 211(b)	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.0	0.43999999999999995	0.55	0.63	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.71	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.63	0.73	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.6	0.71	0.72	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.73	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.71	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.71	0.69	0.72	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.71	0.63	0.6	0.7	0.65	0.39	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.65	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.71	0.65	0.62	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.73	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.73	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.73	0.6	0.61	0.7	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.0	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.49	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.54	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.6
Chemical and Biological Characteristics of Exhaust Emissions from a DI Diesel Engine Fuelled with Rapeseed Oil Methyl Ester	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.7	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.54	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.7	0.64	0.65	0.56	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.71	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.7	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.54	0.6	0.71	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.69	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.73	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.53	0.6	0.73	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.54	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.53	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.61
Combustion and Emissions Performance of Low Sulfur, Ultra Low Sulfur and Biodiesel Blends in a DI Diesel Engine	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.52	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.43999999999999995	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.43999999999999995	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.53	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.61	0.74	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.72	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.73	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.56	0.73	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.72	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.55	0.63	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.55	0.73	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.49	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.52	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.71	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.6
Comparison of Emissions from Conventional and Flexible Fuel Vehicles Operating on Gasoline and E85 Fuels	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.53	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.72	0.65	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.73	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.69	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.56	0.52	0.71	0.5	0.54	0.5	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.0	0.6799999999999999	0.37	0.0	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.62	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.54	0.52	0.72	0.55	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.55	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.56	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.54	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.62	0.54	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.56	0.7	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.48	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.65	0.54	0.54	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.56
DDC 6V-71N Emission Testing on Diesel and Biodiesel Blend	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.51	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.51	0.5700000000000001	0.48	0.6	0.65	0.69	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.53	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.7	0.72	0.63	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.72	0.43999999999999995	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.72	0.65	0.43999999999999995	0.63	0.72	0.63	0.72	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.63	0.7	0.72	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.5	0.69	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.74	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.69	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.72	0.64	0.71	0.6	0.64	0.71	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.74	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.73	0.54	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.71	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.69	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.51	0.74	0.5700000000000001	0.51	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.55	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.72	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.71	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.73	0.62	0.73	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.62	0.64	0.55
DDC 6V-92TA MU1 Coach Upgrade Emission Optimization on 20%/80% Soy/Diesel Blend	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.74	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.7	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.69	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.71	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.7	0.72	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.69	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.71	0.69	0.69	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.69	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.73	0.69	0.73	0.73	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.73	0.69	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.71	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.7	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.7	0.69	0.73	0.7	0.65	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.71	0.73	0.7	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.74	0.71	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.7	0.71	0.71	0.7	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.71	0.74	0.71	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.64	0.69	0.65	0.74	0.64	0.65	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.69	0.73	0.71	0.63	0.7	0.64	0.6	0.76	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.76	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.7	0.71	0.63	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.72	0.69	0.7	0.69	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.71	0.72	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.71	0.7	0.71	0.7	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.7	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.7	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.75	0.69	0.64	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.69	0.7	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.69	0.64	0.65	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.7	0.69	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.65	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.71	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.7	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.69	0.63	0.7	0.73	0.65	0.69	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64
Effect of Fuel on the Regulated, Unregulated and Mutagenic Emissions of DI Diesel Engines	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.53	0.51	0.6599999999999999	0.43999999999999995	0.53	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.69	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.72	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.53	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.53	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.54	0.55	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.64	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.71	0.76	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.55	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.53	0.53	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.69	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.55	0.62	0.53	0.54	0.54	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.69	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.53	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001
Effects of Biodiesel Blends on Vehicle Emissions, FY 2006 Annual Operating Plan Milestone 10.4	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.45999999999999996	0.5	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.72	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.4	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.4	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.5	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.64	0.64	0.71	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.48	0.62	0.45999999999999996	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.74	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.5	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.71	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.71	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.54	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.72	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.71	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.73	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.65	0.56	0.55	0.55	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61
Emission Performance of Selected Biodiesel - VTT's Contribution	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.54	0.56	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.51	0.54	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.69	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.56	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.73	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.73	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.75	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.53	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.75	0.56	0.75	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.51	0.69	0.53	0.51	0.7	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.69	0.6	0.61	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.62	0.55	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.61	0.69	0.69	0.73	0.64	0.73	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.69	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.61	0.62	0.53
Emission Performance of Selected Biodiesel Fuels	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.55	0.43999999999999995	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.48	0.48	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.74	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.74	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.74	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.74	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.55	0.61	0.63	0.43000000000000005	0.55	0.71	0.63	0.55	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.61	0.43000000000000005	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.73	0.55	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.65	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.73	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.53	0.53	0.69	0.61	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.71	0.75	0.53	0.75	0.65	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.45999999999999996	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.45999999999999996	0.71	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.69	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.53	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.55	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.69	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.53	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.65	0.73	0.63	0.73	0.65	0.63	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.53	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.55
Emissions and Lubricity Evaluation of Rapeseed Derived Biodiesel Fuels	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.6	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.7	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.43000000000000005	0.6	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.43000000000000005	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.69	0.52	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.72	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.55	0.69	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.65	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.63	0.69	0.56	0.7	0.56	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.52	0.65	0.69	0.73	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.73	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.7	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.61	0.56	0.64	0.7	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.53	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.52	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.52	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.63	0.53	0.6	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.52	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.54	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.73	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001
Emissions Characteristics of Soy Methyl Ester Fuels in an IDI Compression Ignition Engine	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.53	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.49	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.74	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.71	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.71	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.42000000000000004	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.42000000000000004	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.64	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.55	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001
Emissions Characterization of a Caterpillar 3126E Equipped with a Prototype SCRT System with Ultra Low Sulfur Diesel and a Biodiesel Blend	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.56	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.53	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.48	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.4	0.64	0.71	0.63	0.64	0.69	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.4	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.56	0.72	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.73	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.65	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.73	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.61	0.52	0.7	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.55	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.71	0.71	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.61	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.53	0.64	0.63	0.69	0.64	0.63	0.63
Emissions Comparison of Alternative Fuels in an Advanced Automotive Diesel Engine	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.5	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.54	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.55	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.62	0.63	0.53	0.55	0.65	0.61	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.69	0.52	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.54	0.72	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.54	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.53	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.44999999999999996	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.52	0.63	0.55	0.52	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.49	0.61	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.44999999999999996	0.6	0.55	0.52	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.49	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.65	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001
Emissions Testing with Blends of Esters of Rapeseed Oil Fuel With and Without a Catalytic Converter	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.53	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.71	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.56	0.69	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.73	0.69	0.64	0.54	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.73	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.56	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.55	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.73	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.73	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.53	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.53	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.56
Emissions Tests with an On-Road Vehicle Fueled with Methyl and Ethyl Esters of Rapeseed Oil	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.55	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.53	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.53	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.69	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.69	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.69	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.47	0.63	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.63	0.75	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.52	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.49	0.72	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.53	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.71	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.69	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.7	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.73	0.61	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6
Evaluation of a Tallow/Diesel Blend in a DDC 6V-92TA Engine	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.51	0.56	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.45999999999999996	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.72	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.72	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.72	0.6	0.65	0.73	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.74	0.7	0.69	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.7	0.54	0.63	0.71	0.72	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.74	0.7	0.7	0.54	0.69	0.7	0.69	0.7	0.7	0.69	0.72	0.69	0.72	0.69	0.7	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.74	0.7	0.7	0.69	0.7	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.75	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.6	0.73	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.74	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.69	0.6	0.72	0.72	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.69	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.72	0.63	0.55	0.73	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.7	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.73	0.6	0.62	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.56	0.75	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.77	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.71	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.51	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.56	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.7	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.6	0.72	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.6	0.75	0.69	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.7	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.71	0.63	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63
Evaluation of Biodiesel in an Urban Transit Bus Powered by a 1981 DDCC8V71 Engine	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.44999999999999996	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.69	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.7	0.63	0.54	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.54	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.54	0.65	0.54	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.54	0.54	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.7	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.7	0.61	0.69	0.54	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.54	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.7	0.63	0.52	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.77	0.56	0.56	0.65	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.73	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.72	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.49	0.76	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.76	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.77	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.72	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.65	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.69	0.69	0.62	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.55	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.71	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.71	0.55	0.55	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.71	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.55	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62
Evaluation of Biodiesel in an Urban Transit Bus Powered by a 1988 DDECII6V92 TA Engine	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.48	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.62	0.69	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.7	0.71	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.7	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.7	0.63	0.54	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.54	0.54	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.7	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.7	0.61	0.69	0.54	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.54	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.7	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.74	0.56	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.73	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.7	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.73	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.49	0.76	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.76	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.77	0.71	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.72	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.62	0.71	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.7	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.62	0.71	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.62	0.65	0.71	0.62	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.71	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.71	0.71	0.63	0.6	0.71	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.73	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.55	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.72	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.55	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.71	0.64	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62
Evaluation of Methyl Soyate/Diesel Blend in a DDC 6V-92TA Engine: Optimization of NOx Emissions	0.63	0.62	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.69	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.72	0.69	0.72	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.69	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.75	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.52	0.71	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.6	0.72	0.64	0.6	0.7	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.7	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.71	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.71	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.7	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.71	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.69	0.69	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.71	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.71	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.64	0.64	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.48	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.65
Evaluation of Methyl Soyate/Diesel Fuel Blends as a Fuel for Diesel Engines	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.48	0.47	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.51	0.64	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.69	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.63	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.75	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.71	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.71	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.51	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.7	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.48	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.63	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.74	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.72	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.71	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.5	0.64	0.63	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.56	0.64	0.55	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.56	0.7	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.71	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.51	0.69	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.48	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6
Evaluation of the Effects of Alternative Diesel Fuel Formulations on Exhaust Emissions Rates and Reactivity	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.38	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.54	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.55	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.55	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.72	0.62	0.65	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.61	0.53	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.5	0.65	0.62	0.72	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.53	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.55	0.71	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.61	0.56	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.65	0.55	0.56	0.64	0.54	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.7	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.54	0.64	0.56	0.44999999999999996	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.54	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.5	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.55	0.56	0.64	0.54	0.5	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.61	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.55	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.54	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.6	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.71	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.42000000000000004	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56
F.O. Licht World Ethanol & Biofuels Report	0.65	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.62	0.74	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.48	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.72	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.07999999999999996	0.53	0.62	0.55	0.6	0.45999999999999996	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.29000000000000004	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.0	0.55	0.6	0.7	0.62	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.45999999999999996	0.45999999999999996	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.65	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.53	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.53	0.48	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.5	0.55	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.51	0.7	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.55	0.7	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.55	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.7	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.71	0.71	0.74	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.72	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.7	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.53
F.O. Licht World Ethanol Markets: The Outlook to 2015	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.72	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.61	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.61	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.74	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.69	0.7	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.7	0.72	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.7	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.72	0.69	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.7	0.69	0.7	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.69	0.7	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.42000000000000004	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.0	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.06999999999999995	0.63	0.61	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.74	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.69	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.7	0.65	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.52	0.65	0.49	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.65	0.5	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.61	0.65	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.74	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.7	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.72	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63
F.O. Licht's World Ethanol and Biofuels Report	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.48	0.55	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.74	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.55	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.020000000000000018	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.4	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.49	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.32999999999999996	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.06999999999999995	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.4	0.4	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.43999999999999995	0.55	0.48	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.55	0.7	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.72	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.72	0.64	0.61	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.53	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.72	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.53	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.55	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.53	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.55
FAPRI 2007 Agricultural Outlook	0.71	0.45999999999999996	0.52	0.65	0.65	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.78	0.71	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.78	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.75	0.75	0.71	0.65	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.75	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.75	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.52	0.49	0.71	0.75	0.52	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.78	0.62	0.75	0.75	0.79	0.75	0.78	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.71	0.75	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.75	0.55	0.71	0.71	0.78	0.75	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.71	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.76	0.71	0.65	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.75	0.71	0.71	0.74	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.71	0.71	0.75	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.74	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.0	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.76	0.30000000000000004	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.49	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.75	0.71	0.71	0.78	0.78	0.78	0.65	0.78	0.49	0.78	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.26	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.30000000000000004	0.26	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.7	0.75	0.78	0.78	0.71	0.77	0.62	0.65	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.75	0.78	0.71	0.65	0.49	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.75	0.78	0.47	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.75	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.62	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.71	0.45999999999999996	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.78	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.75	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.75	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.7	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.78	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.78	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.78	0.78	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.71	0.75	0.75	0.62	0.71	0.75	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.8	0.71	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.62	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.65	0.78	0.71	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.71	0.77	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.75	0.71	0.77	0.71	0.77	0.71	0.75	0.75	0.71	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.71	0.77	0.71	0.77	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.77	0.71	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.65	0.71	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.71	0.77	0.65	0.71	0.77	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.75	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.75	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.71	0.75	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.71	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.65	0.8	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.78	0.71	0.65	0.71	0.8	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.71	0.71	0.75	0.71	0.71	0.75	0.62	0.71	0.71	0.78	0.78	0.75	0.75	0.71	0.75	0.65	0.71	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.49	0.75	0.52	0.45999999999999996	0.5900000000000001	0.45999999999999996	0.78	0.81	0.49	0.49	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.78	0.71	0.62	0.71	0.75	0.75	0.52	0.75	0.52	0.78	0.65	0.78	0.71	0.78	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.78	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.55	0.71	0.78	0.52	0.52	0.75	0.75	0.74	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.71	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.75	0.77	0.65	0.71	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.62
Feasibility of Corn Residue Collection in Kearney, Nebraska Area	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.49	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.52	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5	0.6	0.52	0.7	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.69	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.69	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.63	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.71	0.6	0.65	0.71	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.71	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.74	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.55	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.71	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.71	0.54	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.71	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.71	0.61	0.64	0.72	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.54	0.5	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.72	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.52	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.54	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.65	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.55
Formaldehyde: Hazard characterization and dose-response assessment for carcinogenicity by the route of inhalation	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.53	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.51	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.43999999999999995	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.56	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.56	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.56	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.72	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.69	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.72	0.64	0.63	0.4	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.52	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.54	0.61	0.56	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.54	0.51	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.52	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.51	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.61	0.48	0.5800000000000001	0.63	1.0	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.49	0.54	0.0	0.55	0.62	0.55	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.54	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.63
Fuel Additive and Blending Approaches to Reducing NOx Emissions from Biodiesel	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.65	0.47	0.56	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.54	0.61	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.71	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.71	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.69	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.73	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.49	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.7	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.35	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.72	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63
Fuel Permeation form Automotive Systems	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.54	0.62	0.65	0.43999999999999995	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.72	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.52	0.62	0.62	0.52	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.52	0.62	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.65	0.62	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.63	0.7	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.54	0.69	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.77	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.54	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.030000000000000027	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.52	0.62	0.52	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.49	0.49	0.49	0.49	0.49	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.49	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.49	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.47	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.65	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.62	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.49	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.47	0.54	0.49	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.76	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.5700000000000001
Heavy-Duty Diesel Emissions as a Function of Alternate Fuels	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.52	0.54	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.69	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.74	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.74	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.74	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.74	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.5	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.52	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.72	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.52	0.7	0.54	0.55	0.63	0.7	0.54	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.55	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.63	0.55	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.55	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.71	0.6	0.55	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.55
Heavy-Duty Engine Performance and Comparative Emission Measurements for Different Biodiesel Blends Used in the Montreal Project	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.56	0.55	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.48	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.53	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.55	0.54	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.63	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.54	0.61	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.7	0.62	0.55	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.48	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.54	0.6	0.62	0.5	0.56	0.53	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.62	0.6
How Much Ethanol Can Come From Corn?	0.62	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.73	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.72	0.64	0.72	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.72	0.64	0.72	0.64	0.72	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.72	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.72	0.62	0.48	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.53	0.53	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.7	0.7	0.56	0.72	0.53	0.7	0.53	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.53	0.4	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.7	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.77	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.53	0.64	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.53	0.5	0.62	0.56	0.7	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.7	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.62	0.73	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.65	0.64	0.7	0.62	0.73	0.62	0.7	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.78	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.56	0.48	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.74	0.53	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.74	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.73	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.48	0.64	0.53	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.75	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.64	0.48	0.5	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.7	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001
Impact of Test Cycle and Biodiesel Concentration of Emissions	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.53	0.44999999999999996	0.48	0.61	0.53	0.55	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.55	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.56	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.56	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.43999999999999995	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.55	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.43999999999999995	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.53	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.51	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.53	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.5	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.55	0.71	0.71	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.51	0.51	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.69	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.55	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.56	0.69	0.6	0.51	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.62	0.53	0.69	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.53	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.48	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.43999999999999995	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.7	0.61	0.71	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.55	0.75	0.61	0.51	0.63	0.6	0.51	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.5	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.53	0.61	0.53	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.43000000000000005	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.52	0.65	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.56	0.53	0.63	0.73	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.48	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.53	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.51	0.6	0.53	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.65	0.53	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.7	0.55	0.7	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.48	0.55	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.51
Influence on Transient Emissions at Various Injection Timings, Using Cetane Improvers, Bio-Diesel, and Low Aromatic Fuels	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.55	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.55	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.51	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.54	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.54	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.61	0.71	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.7	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.72	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.69	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.72	0.62	0.54	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.55	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.53	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.54	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.54	0.65	0.54	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.54	0.65	0.54	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.65	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.54	0.6	0.65	0.54	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.56	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.54	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.54	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62
Infrastructure Requirements for an Expanded Fuel Ethanol Industry	0.6	0.51	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.73	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.7	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.74	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.72	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.51	0.6	0.51	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.33999999999999997	0.51	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.53	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.0	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.52	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.7	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.53	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.71	0.69	0.71	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.73	0.6	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.61	0.62	0.0	0.0	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001
January 2008 Gasoline Taxes	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.75	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.71	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.78	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.78	0.63	0.78	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.63	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.78	0.71	0.78	0.71	0.78	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.78	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.78	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.77	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.71	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.71	0.63	0.72	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.49	0.75	0.56	0.49	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.52	0.71	0.71	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.74	0.63	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.75	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.63	0.49	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.63	0.74	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.63	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.44999999999999996	0.6	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.71	0.71	0.63	1.0	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.71	0.71	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.71	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.63	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.71	0.6	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.52	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.52	0.56	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63
Manure Production and Characteristics	0.52	0.43999999999999995	0.63	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.45999999999999996	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.52	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.49	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.49	0.6	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.6	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.45999999999999996	0.45999999999999996	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.43999999999999995	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.41000000000000003	0.6	0.43999999999999995	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.7	0.43999999999999995	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.43999999999999995	0.52	0.52	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.49	0.6	0.7	0.43999999999999995	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.43999999999999995	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.52	0.69	0.52	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.52	0.6	0.71	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.71	0.55	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.55	0.43999999999999995	0.73	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.43999999999999995	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.6	0.52	0.45999999999999996	0.49	0.49	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.73	0.64	0.65	0.71	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.76	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.71	0.55	0.63	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.63	0.65	0.52	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.71	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.79	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.52	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.51	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.45999999999999996	0.55	0.45999999999999996	0.45999999999999996	0.41000000000000003	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.55	0.55	0.43999999999999995	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.49	0.6	0.49	0.6	0.49	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.49	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.49	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.52	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.51	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.52	0.52	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.49	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.49	0.55	0.65	0.52	0.52	0.49
Methyl Soyate Evaluation of Various Diesel Blends in a DDC 6V-92 TA Engine	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.53	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.61	0.64	0.69	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.71	0.65	0.69	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.72	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.75	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.72	0.63	0.63	0.73	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.69	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.52	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.72	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.72	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.69	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.69	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.69	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.53	0.64	0.53	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.72	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.61
National Rail Freight Infrastructure Capacity and Investment Study, 200X	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.69	0.56	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.54	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.74	0.44999999999999996	0.44999999999999996	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.45999999999999996	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.71	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.71	0.7	0.71	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.65	0.72	0.64	0.52	0.73	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.71	0.64	0.69	0.62	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.69	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	1.0	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.62	0.75	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.55	0.63	0.53	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6
Northern Front Range Air Quality Study Final Report: Volumen 1	0.47	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.45999999999999996	0.47	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.54	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.7	0.52	0.52	0.69	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.54	0.69	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.62	0.71	0.65	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.4	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.77	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.7	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.55	0.5	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.71	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.55	0.45999999999999996	0.64	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.52	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.44999999999999996	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.47	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.47	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.47	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.47	0.47	0.7	0.65	0.47	0.47	0.47	0.47	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.61	0.5	0.63	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.52	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6
Oil Market Report: A Monthly Oil Market and Stocks Assessment	0.51	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.53	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.53	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.7	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.7	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.69	0.7	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.72	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.61	0.65	0.69	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.72	0.61	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.64	0.72	0.69	0.72	0.69	0.65	0.72	0.64	0.72	0.64	0.72	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.72	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.54	0.7	0.71	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.56	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.71	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.71	0.5	0.63	0.5	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.45999999999999996	0.7	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.53	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.53	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.61	0.73	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.51	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63
Optimising Tractor CI Engines for Biodiesel Operation	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.53	0.55	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.51	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.7	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.72	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.53	0.63	0.65	0.43999999999999995	0.53	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.53	0.6	0.72	0.65	0.63	0.43999999999999995	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.72	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.72	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.53	0.53	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.53	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.53	0.61	0.72	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.53	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.75	0.61	0.75	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.55	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.71	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001
Prevention of Significant Deterioration Construction Permit Application	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.53	0.53	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.54	0.6	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.74	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.63	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.75	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.73	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.55	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.0	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.52	0.52	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.51	0.53	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.5	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.55	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.7	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.61	0.7	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.54	0.61	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.55	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.54	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.54	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.5	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001
Regulated Emissions from Biodiesel Tested in Heavy-Duty Engines Meeting 2004 Emission Standards	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.56	0.54	0.45999999999999996	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.45999999999999996	0.53	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.71	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.51	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.6	0.63	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.54	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.47	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.47	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.63	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.71	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.71	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.69	0.72	0.64	0.63	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.53	0.7	0.52	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.71	0.47	0.54	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.71	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.7	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.55	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.54	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.56	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.69	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.53	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.56	0.69	0.6	0.55	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.73	0.63	0.73	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6
Renewable Fuel Standard Challenges Faced by Terminals	0.38	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.74	0.42000000000000004	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.65	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.69	0.74	0.64	0.69	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.74	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.72	0.69	0.72	0.69	0.61	0.63	0.72	0.69	0.74	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.51	0.63	0.51	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.54	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.61	0.74	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.0	0.5700000000000001	0.31000000000000005	0.31000000000000005	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.51	0.63	0.65	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.48	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.48	0.72	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.55	0.6	0.7	0.51	0.63	0.7	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.42000000000000004	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.65	0.55	0.55	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.76	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	1.0	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.7	0.61	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.78	0.63	0.78	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.38	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.51	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.65
Response of Jatropha curcas under different spacing to Jatropha de-oiled cake	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.54	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.65	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.5	0.65	0.49	0.5	0.47	0.5	0.54	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.56	0.5	0.65	0.54	0.5	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.55	0.5	0.54	0.43000000000000005	0.43000000000000005	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.47	0.51	0.5	0.65	0.54	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.55	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.71	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.71	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.64	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.71	0.55	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.72	0.63	0.55	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	1.0	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.53	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.72	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.73	0.55	0.73	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.55	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001
Sources of Nitrogen Loads to the Bay	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5	0.53	0.53	0.62	0.53	0.64	0.56	0.53	0.62	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.48	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.53	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.7	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.71	0.7	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.65	0.64	0.5	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.56	0.62	0.72	0.62	0.42000000000000004	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.44999999999999996	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.69	0.56	0.69	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.44999999999999996	0.62	0.56	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.48	0.62	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.7	0.56	0.53	0.56	0.53	0.53	0.56	0.53	0.62	0.64	0.56	0.39	0.48	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.5	0.56	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.53	0.7	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.48	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.53	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.53	0.53	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.53	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.42000000000000004	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.48	0.62	0.62	0.53	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.64	0.7	0.62	1.0	0.56	0.56	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.56	0.62	0.5	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.56	0.48	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.75	0.53	0.75	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.42000000000000004	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.53	0.5	0.53	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.64	0.39	0.48	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.33999999999999997	0.53	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.64	0.53
Statistical Handbook for Canada's Upstream Petroleum Industry	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.63	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.7	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.51	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.51	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.72	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.72	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.72	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.55	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.72	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.72	0.69	0.63	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.72	0.69	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.73	0.63	0.72	0.69	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.74	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.76	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.53	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.53	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.020000000000000018	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.51	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.64	0.71	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.53	0.69	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.71	0.69	0.73	0.61	0.73	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.53	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.73	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001
Staying home: How ethanol will change U.S. corn exports, 2006	0.61	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.7	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.71	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.71	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.71	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.71	0.69	0.64	0.4	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.77	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.72	0.63	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.53	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.71	0.71	0.7	0.61	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.54	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	1.0	0.64	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.55	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.050000000000000044	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001
Sugar and Ethanol in Brazil: A Study of the Brazilian Sugar Cane, Sugar and Ethanol Industries	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.71	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.48	0.71	0.65	0.61	0.56	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.0	0.61	0.0	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.53	0.27	0.0	0.48	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.74	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.69	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.64	0.65	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.71	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.7	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.62	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.53	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.30000000000000004	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6
The Effect of Biodiesel Composition on Engine Emissions from a DDC Series 60 Diesel Engine	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.54	0.52	0.42000000000000004	0.52	0.6	0.48	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.54	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.7	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.69	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.65	0.64	0.53	0.7	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.51	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.52	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.7	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.72	0.75	0.5900000000000001	0.75	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5	0.53	0.64	0.7	0.69	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.72	0.62	0.54	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.72	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.76	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.7	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.69	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.55	0.64	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001
The Effect of Biodiesel Fuels on transient Emissions from Modern Diesel Engines, Part I Regulated Emissions and Performance	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.53	0.41000000000000003	0.54	0.6	0.48	0.53	0.48	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.5	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5	0.6	0.5	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.64	0.5	0.64	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.72	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.71	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.48	0.6	0.71	0.61	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.54	0.47	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.55	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.51	0.54	0.54	0.64	0.56	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.61
The Effect of Oxygenated Fuels on Emissions from a Modern Heavy-Duty Diesel Engine	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.31000000000000005	0.45999999999999996	0.5800000000000001	0.35	0.48	0.55	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.48	0.65	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.62	0.61	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.63	0.6	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.71	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.53	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.47	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.47	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.55	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.7	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.7	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.5	0.69	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001
The Importance of Adequate Rail Investment	0.55	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.48	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.53	0.6	0.72	0.62	0.65	0.72	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.53	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.53	0.63	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.72	0.53	0.72	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.72	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.62	0.72	0.6	0.72	0.6	0.72	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.72	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.72	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.53	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.69	0.69	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.71	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.72	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.41000000000000003	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.53	0.5	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.73	0.73	0.69	0.62	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.53	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.53	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.75	0.5800000000000001	0.75	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.55	0.5	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.48	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001
The New European Challenge for Brazilian Ethanol Exports	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.54	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.54	0.6	0.61	0.7	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.52	0.54	0.52	0.54	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.47	0.33999999999999997	0.52	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.72	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.77	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.5	0.61	0.54	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.49	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.54	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.54	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.74	0.56	0.56	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.7	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.56	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.7	0.56	0.56	0.7	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.74	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.75	0.5900000000000001	0.75	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001
The Potential Impacts of Increased Corn Production for Ethanol in the Great Lakes-St. Lawrence River Region	0.6	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.53	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.55	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.48	0.71	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.27	0.63	0.62	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.49	0.72	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.49	0.7	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.69	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.54	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.48	0.5	0.49	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.69	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.4	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.53	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.0
The U.S. Truck Driver Shortage: Analysis and Forecasts	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.69	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.69	0.62	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.71	0.63	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.65	0.6	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.6	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.65	0.69	0.56	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.72	0.69	0.72	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.56	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.65	0.75	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.4	0.65	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.54	0.54	0.63	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.71	0.73	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.0	0.56	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.56	0.63	0.73	0.56	0.63	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.72	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.52	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.71	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.73	0.56	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6
Thermochemical Ethanol via Indirect Gasification and Mixed Alcohol Synthesis of Lignocellulosic Biomass	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.54	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.45999999999999996	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.33999999999999997	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.74	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.49	0.72	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.7	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.71	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.54	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.51	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.69	0.76	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.72	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.51	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.69	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61
Transient Emission Evaluation of Biodiesel Fuel Blend in a 1987 Cummins L10 and DDC 6V-92-TA	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.43999999999999995	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.71	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.7	0.61	0.7	0.69	0.69	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.7	0.61	0.69	0.71	0.7	0.69	0.71	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.7	0.61	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.71	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.72	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.43999999999999995	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.72	0.64	0.6	0.43999999999999995	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.72	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.7	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.77	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.69	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.73	0.72	0.69	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.74	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.62	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.74	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.71	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.75	0.6	0.55	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.52	0.75	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.62	0.78	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.7	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.73	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.69	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.71	0.73	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.74	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.65	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.76	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.7	0.61	0.72	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.69	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62
Transient Emissions from No. 2 Diesel and Biodiesel Blends in a DDC Series 60 Engine	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.54	0.55	0.54	0.5	0.55	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.4	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.4	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.7	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.72	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.72	0.61	0.63	0.74	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.71	0.49	0.7	0.53	0.49	0.7	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.74	0.6	0.54	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.74	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.53	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.54	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.54	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.54	0.6	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.72	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.61	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.54	0.7	0.53	0.53	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.73	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.7	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.73	0.62	0.73	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6
Transient Emissions Testing of Biodiesel and Other Additives in a DDC Series 60 Engine	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.56	0.56	0.55	0.54	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.47	0.56	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.69	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.74	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.55	0.7	0.62	0.55	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.73	0.61	0.52	0.65	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.73	0.61	0.65	0.49	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.55	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.69	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.56	0.55	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.5	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.5	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.5	0.62	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.71	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.69	0.53	0.53	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.73	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.55	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001
Transient Emissions Testing of Biodiesel in a DDC 6V 92TA DDEC Engine	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.72	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.51	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.69	0.72	0.69	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.53	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.7	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.63	0.7	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.71	0.72	0.6	0.72	0.63	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.72	0.63	0.72	0.7	0.7	0.72	0.7	0.72	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.72	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.72	0.72	0.63	0.72	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.74	0.69	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.54	0.61	0.71	0.7	0.61	0.71	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.74	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.74	0.63	0.74	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.71	0.63	0.74	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.73	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.7	0.7	0.6	0.63	0.72	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.73	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.6	0.65	0.73	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.76	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.74	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.63	0.72	0.7	0.64	0.61	0.72	0.6	0.73	0.61	0.6	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.72	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.74	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.69	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.69	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.69	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.76	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.73	0.63	0.73	0.63	0.56	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.74	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.61	0.64	0.63
Transportation Fuels of the Future, Biofuels: Part 1	0.5	0.5	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.45999999999999996	0.52	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.54	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.44999999999999996	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.71	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.52	0.44999999999999996	0.64	0.6	0.52	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.52	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.64	0.52	0.52	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.43999999999999995	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.48	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.49	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.54	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.54	0.44999999999999996	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5	0.64	0.54	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.54	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.52	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.56	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.52	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.73	0.6	0.73	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.76	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.48	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001
Urban tree residues: Results of the first national inventory	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.49	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.47	0.49	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.53	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.0	0.47	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.55	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.63	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.55	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.72	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.5	0.62	0.6	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.54	0.65	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.43000000000000005	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.47	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.6	0.52	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.49	0.5	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.55	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	1.0	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.52	0.55	0.64	0.54	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.47	0.6	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.52	0.55	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.49	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.48	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.54
Urban Wood Waste Resource Assessment	0.48	0.5	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5	0.56	0.64	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.39	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.53	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5	0.39	0.0	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.73	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.64	0.64	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.72	0.64	0.72	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.72	0.63	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.72	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.53	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.72	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.7	0.73	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.48	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.76	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.73	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.72	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.73	0.64	0.72	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.44999999999999996	0.7	0.64	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.44999999999999996	0.7	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.73	0.64	0.56	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.5	0.53	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.5	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.42000000000000004	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5	0.5	0.64	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.44999999999999996	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.48	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.48	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.75	0.56	0.75	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.75	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5	0.61	0.64	0.44999999999999996	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.62	0.7	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56
Validation & Evaluation of Biomarkers in Workers Exposed to Benzene in China	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.65	0.56	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.69	0.53	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.48	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.51	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.62	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.7	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.53	0.73	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.54	0.62	0.69	0.72	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.52	0.69	0.6	0.54	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.54	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.52	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.54	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.55	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.53	0.61	0.53	0.64	0.63	0.45999999999999996	0.6699999999999999	0.0	0.5700000000000001	0.4	0.6	0.62	0.7	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.45999999999999996	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.55	0.69	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.69	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.62	0.7	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.53	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001
Workshop on Atmospheric Deposition of Nitrogen: Media Brief	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.72	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.7	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.72	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.72	0.65	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.72	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.72	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.72	0.6	0.65	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.71	0.7	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.72	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.72	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.7	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.55	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.72	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.75	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.51	0.51	0.56	0.6	0.51	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.53	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.55	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.5	0.5	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.53	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.53	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.51	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.43000000000000005	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.5	0.6	0.5	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.7	0.6	0.63	0.51	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.49	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.29000000000000004	0.53	0.56	0.0	0.61	0.55	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.6
World Fuel Ethanol Outlook: Can ethanol be traded globally in a large proportion?	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.55	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.7	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.53	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.44999999999999996	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.65	0.56	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.51	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.33999999999999997	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.7	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.43999999999999995	0.62	0.49	0.7	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.65	0.56	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.72	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6
2005 Data	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.78	0.78	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.33999999999999997	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.78	0.78	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.89	0.78	0.78	0.78	0.78	0.78	0.78	0.56	0.78	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.78	0.78	0.56	0.78	0.78	0.56	0.78	0.89	0.78	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.78	0.78	0.78	0.78	0.78	0.78	0.78	0.78	0.78	0.78	0.56	0.78	0.78	0.89	0.78	0.78	0.78	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.89	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.89	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.44999999999999996	0.78	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.33999999999999997	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.44999999999999996	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.44999999999999996	0.12	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.78	0.44999999999999996	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.44999999999999996	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.89	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.44999999999999996	0.44999999999999996	0.44999999999999996	0.44999999999999996	0.44999999999999996	0.44999999999999996	0.44999999999999996	0.44999999999999996	0.6699999999999999	0.44999999999999996	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.44999999999999996	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.44999999999999996	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.89	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.78	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.78	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.44999999999999996	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.56	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.56	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	1.0	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.78	0.78	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.78	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.56	0.78	0.78	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.56	0.44999999999999996	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.78	0.44999999999999996	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.44999999999999996	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.78	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.78	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.78	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.33999999999999997	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56
2007 Iowa Land Value Survey	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.6	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.75	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.56	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.56	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.75	0.71	0.52	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.71	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.75	0.52	0.75	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.71	0.75	0.71	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.71	0.75	0.71	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.71	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.6	0.6	0.71	0.6	0.71	0.85	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.6	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.71	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.56	0.75	0.6	0.56	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.71	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.71	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.75	0.49	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.72	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.71	0.74	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.77	0.63	0.77	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.63	0.77	0.63	0.77	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.77	0.6	0.63	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.77	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.75	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.75	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.71	1.0	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.52	0.52	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.71	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.56	0.75	0.75	0.63	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.030000000000000027	0.63	0.52	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.71	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.52	0.71	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.52
2782nd Council Meeting on Transport, Telecommunications, and Energy	0.53	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.55	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.54	0.62	0.69	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.51	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.72	0.6	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.65	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.72	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.69	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.43000000000000005	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.54	0.54	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.51	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.43999999999999995	0.63	0.43999999999999995	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.54	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.56	0.54	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.64	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.69	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.71	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.53	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.71	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001
Acute Respiratory function and transported air pollutants: observational studies	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.56	0.6	0.49	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.53	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.55	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.6	0.65	0.69	0.64	0.6	0.71	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.69	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.62	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.69	0.54	0.61	0.65	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.53	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.52	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.53	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.56	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.63	0.55	0.49	0.6	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.64	0.63	0.69	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.63	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.52	0.47	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.54	0.56	0.54	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.56	0.54	0.56	0.54	0.5	0.54	0.020000000000000018	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.52	0.56	0.54	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.53	0.64	0.55	0.56	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.54	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.56	0.56	0.49	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.6	1.0	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.56	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.54	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.54	0.64	0.52	0.65	0.53	0.64	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.49	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.53	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001
Agriculture Machinery Cost Calculation Methods	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.53	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.48	0.73	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.5	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.53	0.53	0.53	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.72	0.53	0.61	0.64	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.64	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.74	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	1.0	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.48	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.55	0.64	0.35	0.45999999999999996	0.64	0.61	0.54	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.48	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.45999999999999996	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.64	0.65	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001
Algae as Biodiesel Feedstock	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.71	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.43000000000000005	0.47	0.43000000000000005	0.47	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.43000000000000005	0.43000000000000005	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.43000000000000005	0.4	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.47	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.47	0.65	0.61	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.47	0.4	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.54	0.4	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.4	0.61	0.4	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.43000000000000005	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.54	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.54	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.72	0.54	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5	0.65	0.72	0.54	0.65	0.72	0.54	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.47	0.61	0.54	0.47	0.54	0.47	0.54	0.54	0.47	0.07999999999999996	0.54	0.63	0.61	0.54	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.47	0.54	0.07999999999999996	0.61	0.47	0.61	0.47	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.47	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.54	0.61	0.65	0.5	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.72	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.43000000000000005	0.65	0.61	0.47	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.47	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.72	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.47	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.47	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.79	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.72	0.54	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.61	0.74	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.47	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.7	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.72	0.65	0.61	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.72	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	1.0	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.54	0.65	0.61	0.75	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.72	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.75	0.61	0.75	0.72	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.7	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61
AlgaeLink	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.78	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.78	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.78	0.56	0.56	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.78	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.78	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.78	0.44999999999999996	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.44999999999999996	0.44999999999999996	0.44999999999999996	0.44999999999999996	0.44999999999999996	0.44999999999999996	0.44999999999999996	0.44999999999999996	0.44999999999999996	0.44999999999999996	0.44999999999999996	0.44999999999999996	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.56	0.44999999999999996	0.44999999999999996	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.44999999999999996	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.44999999999999996	0.6699999999999999	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.56	0.44999999999999996	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.44999999999999996	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.78	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.56	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.78	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.78	0.56	0.56	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.44999999999999996	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.44999999999999996	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	1.0	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.78	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.78	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.44999999999999996	0.44999999999999996	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.44999999999999996	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.44999999999999996	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.44999999999999996	0.56
Annual World Ethanol Production by Country	0.53	0.53	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.72	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.62	0.53	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.5	0.55	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.45999999999999996	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.55	0.7	0.55	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.7	0.62	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.73	0.7	0.53	0.65	0.62	0.53	0.72	0.7	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.62	0.72	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.5	0.72	0.5	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.42000000000000004	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.39	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.75	0.41000000000000003	0.64	0.5	0.55	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.06999999999999995	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.0	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.7	0.48	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.53	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.48	0.62	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.45999999999999996	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.53	0.7	0.55	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.7	0.55	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.64	0.63	0.55	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.65	0.53	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.7	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.43000000000000005	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.62	0.65	0.55	0.53	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.53	0.65	0.51	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.7	0.7	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.62	0.39	0.6	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5
Another Energy Sector Stimulus	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.4	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.47	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.7	0.54	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.7	0.54	0.6	0.69	0.64	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.74	0.54	0.75	0.64	0.54	0.6	0.7	0.54	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.74	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.47	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.53	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.54	0.4	0.54	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.0	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.54	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.74	0.54	0.74	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.74	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.74	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.54	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.53	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6
Approach for Developing 2002 and Future Emission Summaries, Memorandum from Madeleine Strum to Docket	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.55	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.69	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.69	0.65	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.73	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.77	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.48	0.53	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.49	0.55	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.0	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.5	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63
As planet swelters, are algae unlikely saviour? 	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.55	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.030000000000000027	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.72	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.5	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.75	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.7	0.54	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.55	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.71	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.75	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.69	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.61	1.0	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.61	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61
Asian Palm Oil for Euro Biodiesel	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.49	0.52	0.45999999999999996	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.49	0.55	0.52	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.73	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.37	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.49	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.75	0.64	0.75	0.64	0.52	0.55	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.7	0.64	0.61	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.45999999999999996	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.52	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.7	0.61	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.55	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.64	0.61	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.73	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.55	0.74	0.61	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.55	0.73	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.75	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61
Auto/Oil Air Quality Improvement Research Program, Phase I and II Test Data	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.72	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.71	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.74	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.53	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.020000000000000018	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.54	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.71	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.7	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.49	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.61	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.51	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.44999999999999996	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.45999999999999996	0.65	0.56	0.6	0.47	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6
Barge Transportation in the United States	0.42000000000000004	0.42000000000000004	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.49	0.54	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.52	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.43999999999999995	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.73	0.4	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.30000000000000004	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.30000000000000004	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.35	0.5700000000000001	0.35	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.47	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.43999999999999995	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.72	0.64	0.72	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.35	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.52	0.72	0.54	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.36	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.47	0.49	0.49	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.72	0.47	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.52	0.4	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.42000000000000004	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.71	0.43999999999999995	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.43999999999999995	0.42000000000000004	0.69	0.61	0.54	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.49	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.7	0.64	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.64	0.43999999999999995	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.54	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.47	0.42000000000000004	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.49	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.4	0.61	0.52	0.52	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.42000000000000004	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.52	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.54	0.52	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.64	1.0	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.43999999999999995	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.52	0.61	0.54	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.47	0.54	0.64	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.47	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.75	0.52	0.75	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.65	0.61	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.4	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.37	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.48	0.52	0.54	0.35	0.54	0.52	0.52
Biodiesel Emissions Test Summary	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.75	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.43999999999999995	0.35	0.35	0.54	0.35	0.47	0.5	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.54	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.54	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.69	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.54	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.72	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.54	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.72	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.5	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.72	0.63	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.43999999999999995	0.41000000000000003	0.6	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.74	0.5	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.75	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.43999999999999995	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.47	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.43999999999999995	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.63	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.72	0.69	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.72	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.75	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.54
Bio-diesel from Jatropha: the life-cycle perspective	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.49	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.69	0.6	0.62	0.7	0.72	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.62	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.72	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.65	0.54	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.65	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.54	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.65	0.54	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.56	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.0	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.65	0.54	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.54	0.64	0.49	0.62	0.41000000000000003	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.41000000000000003	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.49	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.49	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.49	0.72	0.41000000000000003	0.49	0.41000000000000003	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.41000000000000003	0.5800000000000001	0.41000000000000003	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.41000000000000003	0.7	0.41000000000000003	0.7	0.41000000000000003	0.61	0.64	0.72	0.41000000000000003	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.41000000000000003	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.64	0.72	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.7	0.62	0.72	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.49	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.76	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.52	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.52	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.72	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	1.0	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.75	0.5800000000000001	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.56
Biodiesel Fuel Comparison Final Data Report for Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.53	0.61	0.63	0.54	0.53	0.61	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.5	0.6	0.53	0.5	0.61	0.53	0.61	0.53	0.6	0.61	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.5	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.53	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.53	0.5	0.53	0.61	0.5	0.64	0.5	0.64	0.5	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5	0.6	0.53	0.61	0.5	0.61	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.53	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.55	0.71	0.5	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.71	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.54	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.53	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.54	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.52	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.54	0.6	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.72	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.73	0.62	0.73	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.71	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.55	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001
Biodiesel: Algae as a Renewable Source for Liquid Fuel	0.52	0.56	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.72	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5	0.63	0.65	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.65	0.39	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.74	0.0	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.0	0.65	0.0	0.39	0.65	0.0	0.43999999999999995	0.39	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.39	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.39	0.5700000000000001	0.74	0.0	0.65	0.43999999999999995	0.5700000000000001	0.0	0.5700000000000001	0.0	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.54	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.74	0.0	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.53	0.63	0.69	0.65	0.55	0.71	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.73	0.65	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.71	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.7	0.56	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.7	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.56	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.52	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.71	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.62	0.69	0.64	0.73	0.63	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.48	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.62
Bioenergy Feedstock Characteristics	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.49	0.63	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.51	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.49	0.45999999999999996	0.52	0.72	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.52	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.69	0.52	0.52	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.43000000000000005	0.63	0.52	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.38	0.52	0.38	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.75	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.75	0.6	0.6	0.43000000000000005	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.75	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.75	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.71	0.4	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.72	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.75	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.72	0.6	0.72	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.55	0.55	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.72	0.7	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.45999999999999996	0.6599999999999999	0.49	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.72	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.72	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.63	1.0	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.8	0.63	0.8	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.52	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.74	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.71	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.63	0.63
Biofuel increasing China's corn imports	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.7	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.54	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.47	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.69	0.63	0.54	0.54	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.65	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.74	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.47	0.47	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.62	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.7	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.69	0.54	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.77	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.54	0.65	0.54	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.54	0.65	0.54	0.54	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.54	0.52	0.54	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.54	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.54	1.0	0.54	0.49	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.73	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.56	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.54	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.49
Biofuels Barometer	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.5	0.5	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.5	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.5	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.33999999999999997	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.5	0.56	0.5	0.56	0.5	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.62	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.5	0.33999999999999997	0.56	0.33999999999999997	0.56	0.5	0.33999999999999997	0.56	0.56	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.5	0.62	0.5	0.5	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.33999999999999997	0.56	0.5	0.56	0.5	0.56	0.33999999999999997	0.5	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.5	0.33999999999999997	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.33999999999999997	0.5	0.33999999999999997	0.36	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.39	0.39	0.56	0.56	0.42000000000000004	0.6699999999999999	0.44999999999999996	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.39	0.33999999999999997	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.44999999999999996	0.6699999999999999	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.33999999999999997	0.39	0.39	0.56	0.62	0.44999999999999996	0.7	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.5	0.5	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.33999999999999997	0.5	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.56	0.75	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.39	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.73	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.5	0.5	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5	0.5	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.73	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.5	0.44999999999999996	0.5	0.5	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.5	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.5	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	1.0	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.5	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.73	0.62	0.5	0.5	0.62	0.56	0.5	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.33999999999999997	0.65	0.5	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.5	0.62
Biofuels for Shell-biomass based blending components for transport fuels (gasoline and diesel)	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.55	0.55	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.47	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.0	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.52	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.55	0.62	0.54	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.69	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.7	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.5	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5	0.64	0.5	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.5	0.64	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.5	0.63	0.64	0.5	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.63	1.0	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.71	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001
Biofuels Policies in Asia: Trade effects on World Agricultural and Biofuels Trade	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.63	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.39	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.0	0.54	0.64	0.6	0.5	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.71	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.62	0.65	0.5	0.61	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.0	0.0	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.7	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.56	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.73	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.54	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.54	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.55	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.52	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.61	0.65	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.56	0.7	0.47	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001
Biofuels: Linking Support to Performance	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.72	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.73	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.55	0.6	0.74	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.75	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.77	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.7	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.6	0.7	0.53	0.6	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.71	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.55	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.54	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.55	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.53	0.7	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.73	0.0	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.73	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.5	0.6
Biomass Program: Thermochemical Conversion of Corn Stover	0.55	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.51	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.72	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.53	0.69	0.7	0.55	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.55	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.43000000000000005	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.77	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.51	0.51	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.53	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.69	0.53	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.69	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.71	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.71	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55
BNSF railway biodiesel freight cost information	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.54	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.47	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.52	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.47	0.73	0.6	0.47	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.5	0.56	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.47	0.56	0.47	0.73	0.6	0.62	0.5	0.47	0.6	0.47	0.6	0.62	0.47	0.69	0.47	0.69	0.47	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.47	0.73	0.6	0.62	0.47	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.74	0.64	0.64	0.5	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.54	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.55	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.71	0.62	0.7	0.72	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.6	0.62	0.71	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	1.0	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.64	0.7	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.62	0.73	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.71	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.71	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001
Bri Energy Process: Technology Summary	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.76	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.56	0.4	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.61	0.53	0.69	0.4	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.72	0.69	0.71	0.69	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.5	0.61	0.5	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.5	0.53	0.48	0.56	0.69	0.61	0.74	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.74	0.61	0.75	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.56	0.72	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.48	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5	0.64	0.5	0.61	0.69	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.48	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.74	0.43000000000000005	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.69	0.64	0.56	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.64	0.69	0.61	0.64	0.69	0.72	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.74	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.61	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.69	0.64	0.72	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.7	0.64	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.72	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.61	0.72	0.72	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.61	0.53	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.61	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.64	0.72	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64
Changes in soil characteristics and foilage nutrient content in Jatropha curcas plantations in relation to stand density in Indian wasteland	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.49	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.54	0.63	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.51	0.62	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.53	0.53	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.53	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.47	0.65	0.56	0.62	0.47	0.47	0.65	0.44999999999999996	0.47	0.010000000000000009	0.47	0.56	0.47	0.5800000000000001	0.47	0.5	0.47	0.65	0.56	0.47	0.55	0.62	0.47	0.55	0.47	0.56	0.43000000000000005	0.43000000000000005	0.47	0.62	0.53	0.52	0.47	0.65	0.56	0.47	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.7	0.6	0.63	0.52	0.6	0.61	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.7	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.56	0.49	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.48	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.55	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.53	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.53	0.61	1.0	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.53	0.56	0.53	0.53	0.56	0.53	0.56	0.52	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.69	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5	0.64	0.53	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001
Changes in Water Level and Storage in the High Plains Aquifer, Predevelopment to 2005: US Geological Survey Fact Sheet 2007-3029	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.53	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.7	0.62	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.7	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.53	0.63	0.73	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.64	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.55	0.64	0.53	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.42000000000000004	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5
Characteristic Performance and Yields using a Single-Pass, Split-Stream Maize Grain and Stover Harvester	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.52	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.69	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.71	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.62	0.65	0.56	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.62	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.69	0.6	0.61	0.7	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.7	0.6	0.71	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.5	0.7	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.55	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.56
Chemical Kinetics and Photochemical Data for Use in Atmospheric Studies, Evaluation Number 14	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.52	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.7	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.43000000000000005	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.73	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.55	0.69	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.38	0.38	0.38	0.38	0.38	0.020000000000000018	0.020000000000000018	0.38	0.61	0.020000000000000018	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.38	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.54	0.64	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.48	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.54	0.7	0.6	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.51	0.53	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001
Claims and Facts on Jatropha curcas L	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.43999999999999995	0.65	0.0	0.6799999999999999	0.41000000000000003	0.63	0.0	0.0	0.6799999999999999	0.0	0.0	0.36	0.0	0.41000000000000003	0.0	0.65	0.0	0.36	0.0	0.6799999999999999	0.41000000000000003	0.0	0.43999999999999995	0.63	0.0	0.43999999999999995	0.0	0.41000000000000003	0.36	0.36	0.0	0.63	0.36	0.36	0.0	0.6799999999999999	0.41000000000000003	0.0	0.69	0.73	0.41000000000000003	0.43999999999999995	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.73	0.6	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.73	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.73	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.52	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.75	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.52	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.55	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.52	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.63	0.73	0.6	0.6	0.71	0.7	0.52	0.73	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.73	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.71	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.52	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.54	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.55	0.54	0.55	0.54	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.54	0.55	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.54	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.52	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.55	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.71	0.65	1.0	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.6	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.6	0.76	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.53	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001
Communication from Douglas Newman, International Trade Commission to Doris Wu, EPA	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.64	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.65	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.48	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.73	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.54	0.55	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.71	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.75	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.52	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.69	0.61	0.54	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.55	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.63	0.55	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.0	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.55	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.5	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.69	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.69	0.62	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.55	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001
Comparison between Two Policy Strategies for Scheduling in a Biomass Logisitic System	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.55	0.56	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.5	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.61	0.7	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.55	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.72	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.69	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.52	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.71	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.48	0.64	0.71	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.52	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.54	0.54	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.71	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.020000000000000018	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.63	0.51	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001
Condensation and Hydrolysis	0.44999999999999996	0.41000000000000003	0.63	0.63	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.71	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.49	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.49	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.52	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.49	0.56	0.52	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.52	0.56	0.52	0.56	0.49	0.49	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.71	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.52	0.52	0.56	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.71	0.49	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.71	0.6	0.56	0.49	0.56	0.49	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.71	0.49	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.49	0.49	0.49	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.71	0.49	0.56	0.71	0.49	0.49	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.71	0.6	0.71	0.63	0.6	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.71	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.71	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.71	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.52	0.63	0.71	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.54	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.71	0.33999999999999997	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.71	0.5	0.6	0.49	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.77	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.71	0.56	0.71	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.71	0.63	0.72	0.6	0.63	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.49	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.44999999999999996	0.52	0.56	0.44999999999999996	0.44999999999999996	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.63	0.56	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.75	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.78	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.52	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.52	0.49	0.49	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.49	0.44999999999999996	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.52	0.49	0.52	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.52	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.49	0.41000000000000003	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.52	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	1.0	0.56	0.63	0.71	0.52	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.44999999999999996	0.55	0.6	0.49	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.52	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.52	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.49	0.49	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.49	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.52	0.56	0.56	0.75	0.44999999999999996	0.75	0.71	0.56	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.75	0.52	0.56	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.52	0.61	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.41000000000000003	0.52	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.65	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.56
Construction and Demolition (C&D) Materials	0.56	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.54	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.52	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.7	0.61	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.52	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.71	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.71	0.56	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.56	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.7	0.73	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.7	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.69	0.73	0.69	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.7	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.56	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.52	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.52	0.54	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.77	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.52	0.56	0.54	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.76	0.54	0.55	0.7	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.54	0.7	0.61	0.54	0.72	0.61	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.52	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.44999999999999996	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.54	0.61	0.52	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.56	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.47	0.52	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.52	0.54	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.56	0.54	0.47	0.63	0.49	0.49	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.56	0.52	0.54	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.52	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.61	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.73	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	1.0	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.54	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.51	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.54	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.75	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.56	0.49	0.56	0.56	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.71	0.38	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.52
Consumer Fact Sheet on Atrazine	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.52	0.62	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.49	0.49	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.52	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.55	0.62	0.55	0.55	0.65	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.65	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.55	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.65	0.55	0.55	0.63	0.62	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.74	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.74	0.71	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.62	0.71	0.62	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.55	0.62	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.55	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.62	0.55	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.72	0.55	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.55	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.42000000000000004	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.52	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.52	0.65	0.55	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.55	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.62	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.53	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.53	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.65	0.62	0.53	0.55	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.55	0.52	0.55	0.52	0.55	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.55	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.52	0.62	0.55	0.52	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.55	0.52	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.65	0.52	0.55	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.75	0.5900000000000001	0.75	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.55	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.49	0.7	0.49	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.0	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001
Consumer Fact Sheet on Nitrates/Nitrites	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.75	0.55	0.64	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.71	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.7	0.53	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.73	0.65	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.53	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.43000000000000005	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.56	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.53	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.75	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.53	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.53	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.55	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.7	0.65	0.65	1.0	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.53	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.48	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.53	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.6	0.73	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.53	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.53	0.55	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.0	0.63	0.5800000000000001
Conversation with Bryce Stokes	0.5700000000000001	0.43999999999999995	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.54	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.47	0.47	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.47	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.64	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.5	0.54	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.5	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.8	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.5	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.64	0.7	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.74	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.5	0.74	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5	0.64	0.6	0.5	0.5	0.64	0.5	0.64	0.6	0.54	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.47	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.7	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.5	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5	0.54	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.74	0.6	0.74	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.74	0.5700000000000001	0.47	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.74	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	1.0	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.47	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.54	0.47	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.44999999999999996	0.5	0.69	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.48	0.54	0.5	0.54	0.5	0.6	0.5
Corn Stover Collection Project	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.54	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.47	0.47	0.4	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.47	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.7	0.54	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.54	0.6	0.64	0.5	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.64	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.77	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.7	0.74	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.37	0.5	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.5	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.64	0.43999999999999995	0.6	0.7	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.43999999999999995	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.43999999999999995	0.43999999999999995	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.54	0.64	0.47	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.54	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.72	0.5	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.72	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.5	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.5	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.54	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.27	0.27	0.5	0.6	0.37	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.5	0.7	0.4	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.5	0.47	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.64	0.65	0.54	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.5700000000000001
Corn: Yield by year, US	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.7	0.7	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.48	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.53	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.7	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.61	0.83	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.7	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.74	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.77	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.74	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.61	0.53	0.53	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.53	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.75	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.74	0.78	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.74	0.61	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.74	0.61	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.53	0.53	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.74	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.74	0.6599999999999999	1.0	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.53	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.53	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61
Country Analysis Briefs, Venezuela Oil	0.64	0.53	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.72	0.56	0.56	0.48	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.53	0.53	0.5	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.72	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.72	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.7	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.53	0.72	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.77	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.77	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.77	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.77	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.71	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.72	0.64	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.72	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.75	0.61	0.5	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.71	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.74	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.53	0.61	0.7	0.56	0.69	0.69	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.77	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.72	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.53	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.48	0.61	0.69	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.64	0.61	0.5	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.56	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.48	0.64	0.53	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.74	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.69	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.53	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.72	0.79	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.75	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.72	0.73	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.73	0.69	0.61	0.64	0.74	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.72	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.53	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.77	0.64	0.77	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.72	0.64	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.53	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.71	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.61
Cribbean Basin Initiative	0.64	0.6	0.52	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.52	0.64	0.52	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.74	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.48	0.64	0.64	0.48	0.64	0.48	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.72	0.48	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.72	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.48	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.72	0.48	0.56	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.48	0.52	0.52	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.72	0.48	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.48	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.72	0.56	0.64	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.72	0.64	0.72	0.56	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.64	0.72	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.64	0.72	0.64	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.72	0.56	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.76	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.72	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.52	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.52	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.72	0.64	0.6	0.74	0.52	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.72	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.77	0.56	0.4	0.56	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.48	0.48	0.56	0.64	0.48	0.48	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.8	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.64	0.56	0.76	0.79	0.64	0.72	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.72	0.56	0.72	0.64	0.56	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.8	0.52	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.52	0.56	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.52	0.64	0.52	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.52	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.52	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.52	0.52	0.56	0.56	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.72	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.64	1.0	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.48	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.52	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.52	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.52	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.43999999999999995	0.76	0.56	0.76	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.52	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.71	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6
Crop and Plants, Field Corn	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.52	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.49	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.52	0.52	0.71	0.52	0.6	0.52	0.52	0.71	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.6	0.52	0.71	0.52	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.52	0.52	0.56	0.56	0.52	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.52	0.71	0.52	0.52	0.6	0.71	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.71	0.63	0.6	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.75	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.71	0.6	0.71	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.6	0.71	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.71	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.49	0.71	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.71	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.52	0.56	0.52	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.72	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.56	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.75	0.6	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.52	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.71	0.52	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.52	0.7	0.7	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.75	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.52	0.52	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.52	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.52	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.49	0.56	0.6	0.49	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.49	0.49	0.6599999999999999	0.49	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.7	0.49	0.6599999999999999	0.49	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.52	0.52	0.56	0.56	0.49	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.49	0.49	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.49	0.6599999999999999	0.49	0.49	0.49	0.49	0.63	0.49	0.49	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.49	0.49	0.49	0.56	0.63	0.49	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.52	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.56	0.52	0.63	0.6	0.52	0.63	0.6	0.52	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.49	0.49	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.52	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.49	0.52	0.56	0.52	0.63	0.52	0.6	0.52	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.52	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.56	0.61	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.71	0.52	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.56
Dead Zone' Again Rivals Record Size	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.55	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.63	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.55	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.72	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.72	0.6	0.56	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.72	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.52	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.74	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6	0.72	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.030000000000000027	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6
Details about NMIM	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.73	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.73	0.62	0.62	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.73	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.73	0.73	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.56	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.73	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.5	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.73	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.73	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.73	0.73	0.56	1.0	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.73	0.73	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.73	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.73	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.73	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.73	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.73	0.62	0.73	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.73	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.73	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.62
Determination of Parameters for an Alfalfa Rotary Dryer	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.53	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.51	0.51	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.64	0.48	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.71	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.77	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.54	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.6	0.73	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.71	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.51	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.72	0.6	0.63	0.51	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.42000000000000004	0.42000000000000004	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.53	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.71	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.48	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.69	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.5700000000000001	0.73	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001
Determination that Gasoline Stage 1 Area Source (GD AS) Category Does Not Need to Be Regulated Under Section 112(C)6, Memorandum from Stephen Shedd to Kent Hustvedt	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.53	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.63	0.7	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.69	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.61	0.64	0.56	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.69	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.51	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.56	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.55	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.55	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.54	0.6	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.53	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.56	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.53	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65
Development of a 2001 National Landcover Database for the United States	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.53	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.54	0.51	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.72	0.51	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.53	0.53	0.62	0.64	0.55	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.54	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.51	0.64	0.51	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.71	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.61	0.6	0.69	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.69	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.61	0.69	0.65	0.55	0.6	0.54	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.43999999999999995	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.72	0.48	0.48	0.6	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.49	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.75	0.62	0.64	0.54	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.33999999999999997	0.64	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.71	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.48	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.71	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.52	0.71	0.61	0.6	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.73	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5	0.53	0.64	0.6	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.62	0.63	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.5	0.54	0.55	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.53	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	1.0	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5	0.71	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.55	0.62	0.54	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.5	0.5	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.64	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.65	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.48	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.0	0.64	0.62	0.48	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.55
Development of Biodiesel for Use in High Speed Diesel Engines	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.72	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.73	0.56	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.45999999999999996	0.61	0.55	0.51	0.56	0.51	0.5	0.53	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.48	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.48	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.48	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.48	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.48	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.48	0.61	0.53	0.64	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.53	0.69	0.5	0.53	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.6	0.69	0.69	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.65	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.7	0.55	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.71	0.7	0.7	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.71	0.69	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.73	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.53	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.76	0.63	0.69	0.74	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.56	0.69	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.53	0.6	0.64	0.69	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.64	0.56	0.61	0.72	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.56	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.55	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.73	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.53	0.64	0.63	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.53	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.63	0.63	0.53	0.69	0.53	0.53	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.78	0.63	0.78	0.63	0.53	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.7	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61
Diesel Thoughtput Volume by Percentage of Diesel Fuel Retailers	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.53	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.71	0.61	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.72	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.72	0.7	0.7	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.71	0.63	0.69	0.56	0.69	0.56	0.7	0.69	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.64	0.61	0.72	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.7	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.53	0.020000000000000018	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.72	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.7	0.72	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.61	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.62	0.61	0.69	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.75	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.55	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.7	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.7	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.48	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.62
Distribution of Above Ground Biomass in Corn Stover	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.51	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.51	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.51	0.63	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.53	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.61	0.71	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.65	0.61	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.53	0.51	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.73	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.5	0.61	0.51	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.54	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.71	0.55	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.56	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.51	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.75	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.51	0.48	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.54	0.55	0.53	0.48	0.48	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.53	0.53	0.55	0.63	0.51	0.48	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.51	0.64	0.61	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.65	0.55	0.55	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.53	0.55	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.53	0.45999999999999996	0.61	0.51	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.51	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.53	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61
Economic Analysis of Two Receiving Facility Designs for a Bioenergy Plant	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.53	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.51	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.55	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.63	0.54	0.71	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.69	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.65	0.52	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.73	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.73	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.49	0.63	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.73	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.7	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.51	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.69	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.69	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.52	0.52	0.63	0.63	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.56	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.52	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.020000000000000018	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.64	0.73	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.53	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.52	0.61	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.55	0.61	0.7	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001
Effects of Using Oxygenated Fuels on Carbon Monoxide, Formaldehyde and Acetaldehyde Concentrations in Denver	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.53	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.69	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.62	0.64	0.74	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.56	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.52	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.49	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.48	0.72	0.65	0.0	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.45999999999999996	0.55	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.53	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.48	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.64	0.42000000000000004	0.42000000000000004	0.52	0.44999999999999996	0.42000000000000004	0.42000000000000004	0.42000000000000004	0.42000000000000004	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.69	0.74	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.55	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.51	0.51	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.61
EIA Annual Energy Outlook 2007	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.5	0.64	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.7	0.74	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.64	0.6	0.7	0.74	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.64	0.7	0.7	0.74	0.7	0.74	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.76	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.5	0.8	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.8	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.8	0.5	0.8	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.74	0.8	0.6699999999999999	0.8	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.8	0.7	0.8	0.7	0.8	0.64	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.8	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.8	0.64	0.7	0.54	0.64	0.5	0.6	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.74	0.74	0.74	0.5	0.7	0.5	0.7	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.52	0.52	0.64	0.77	0.64	0.53	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.37	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.5	0.37	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.74	0.8	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.77	0.6	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.74	0.0	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.77	0.64	0.7	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.74	0.64	0.74	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.77	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.72	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.81	0.6699999999999999	0.81	0.7	0.7	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.77	0.64	0.81	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.77	0.64	0.77	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.81	0.64	0.77	0.64	0.77	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.77	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.77	0.64	0.64	0.77	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.74	0.7	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.33999999999999997	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.76	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.77	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.74	0.74	0.7	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.09999999999999998	0.040000000000000036	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5	0.64	0.7	0.7	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.64	0.64	0.54	0.7	0.64	0.74	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.74	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64
EIA Annual Energy Outlook 2008	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.5	0.64	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.7	0.74	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.64	0.6	0.7	0.74	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.64	0.7	0.7	0.74	0.7	0.74	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.74	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.74	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.74	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.74	0.64	0.64	0.76	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.5	0.8	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.8	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.8	0.5	0.8	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.74	0.8	0.6699999999999999	0.8	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.8	0.7	0.8	0.7	0.8	0.64	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.8	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.8	0.64	0.7	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.6	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.74	0.74	0.74	0.5	0.7	0.5	0.7	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.52	0.52	0.64	0.77	0.64	0.53	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.4	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5	0.4	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.74	0.8	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.77	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.74	0.0	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.77	0.64	0.7	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.74	0.64	0.74	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.77	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.72	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.81	0.6699999999999999	0.81	0.7	0.7	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.77	0.64	0.81	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.77	0.64	0.77	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.81	0.64	0.77	0.64	0.77	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.77	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.77	0.64	0.64	0.77	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.74	0.7	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.33999999999999997	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.76	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.77	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.74	0.74	0.7	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.09999999999999998	0.0	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5	0.64	0.7	0.7	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.64	0.64	0.54	0.7	0.64	0.74	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.74	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64
EIA September 2008 Monthly Energy Review Table 10.2b	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.72	0.72	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.62	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.5800000000000001	0.77	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.72	0.72	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.75	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.71	0.7	0.69	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.7	0.74	0.5800000000000001	0.75	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.71	0.7	0.7	0.74	0.69	0.7	0.69	0.7	0.7	0.69	0.76	0.69	0.76	0.69	0.7	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.71	0.7	0.7	0.69	0.7	0.65	0.74	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.74	0.69	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.75	0.75	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.71	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.5	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.6	0.72	0.74	0.64	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.64	0.69	0.7	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.72	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.7	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.72	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.75	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.33999999999999997	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.72	0.7	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.64	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.52	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.69	0.6	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.74	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.74	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.7	0.64
Email correspondence with Jeffrey Tuite	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.54	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.52	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.62	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.7	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.73	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.030000000000000027	0.65	0.65	0.030000000000000027	0.030000000000000027	0.65	0.030000000000000027	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.75	0.5900000000000001	0.75	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.72	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.52	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.62	0.75	0.69	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001
Emerging Biofuels: Outlook of Effects on U.S. Grain, Oilseed, and Livestock Markets	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.56	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.74	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.7	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.74	0.6	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.69	0.69	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.76	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.74	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.62	0.73	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62
Emission Inventories for Ocean-Going Vessels Using Category 3 Propulsion Engines In or Near the United States, Draft Technical Support Document	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.5	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.65	0.69	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.69	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.35	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.71	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.53	0.6	0.71	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.55	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.55	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.7	0.6	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.44999999999999996	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6
Engine Exhaust Emissions Evaluation of a Cummins L10E When Fueled With a Biodiesel Blend	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.53	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.7	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.4	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.7	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.4	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.63	0.7	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.74	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.69	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.61	0.73	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.71	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.55	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.71	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.74	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.6	0.74	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.7	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.69	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.73	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.71	0.69	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.61	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.69	0.62	0.65	0.61
EPA Certification and Fuel Economy Information System	0.55	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.65	0.63	0.51	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.53	0.61	0.53	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.51	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.53	0.61	0.51	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.51	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.51	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.51	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.51	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.48	0.48	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.55	0.49	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.7	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.6	0.48	0.49	0.7	0.5	0.61	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.55	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.61	0.47	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.72	0.55	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.51	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.7	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.53	0.53	0.61	0.74	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.0	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.55	0.53	0.64	0.53	0.53	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.4	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.42000000000000004	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.55	0.53	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.5	0.49	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.51	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.42000000000000004	0.5900000000000001
EPA Science Advisory Board	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.43000000000000005	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.43000000000000005	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.69	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.54	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.7	0.64	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.75	0.5800000000000001	0.75	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.74	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.54	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.77	0.54	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.0	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.74	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.47	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.75	0.62	0.74	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.43000000000000005	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62
EPA's Combined Heat & Power Partnership	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.72	0.62	0.72	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.72	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.72	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.5700000000000001	0.75	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.75	0.69	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.75	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.72	0.62	0.0	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.69	0.54	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.62	0.7	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001
Essential Rendering	0.48	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.48	0.64	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.74	0.5800000000000001	0.48	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.53	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.69	0.53	0.53	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.53	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.53	0.69	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.48	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.53	0.64	0.53	0.53	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.53	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.74	0.43000000000000005	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.53	0.74	0.53	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.43000000000000005	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.74	0.43000000000000005	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.43000000000000005	0.53	0.53	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.53	0.74	0.43000000000000005	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.43000000000000005	0.5800000000000001	0.48	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.53	0.64	0.53	0.64	0.48	0.53	0.64	0.64	0.48	0.74	0.64	0.48	0.64	0.64	0.48	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.53	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.53	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.53	0.48	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.53	0.64	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.48	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.74	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.37	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.48	0.48	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.48	0.69	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.74	0.53	0.64	0.6	0.53	0.48	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.7	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.79	0.64	0.53	0.48	0.64	0.64	0.53	0.53	0.64	0.53	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.53	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.53	0.64	0.74	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.53	0.53	0.64	0.48	0.5800000000000001	0.74	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.48	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.43000000000000005	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.43000000000000005	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.74	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.48	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.53	0.48	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.43000000000000005	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.43000000000000005	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.74	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.48	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.48	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.48	0.53	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.79	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.53	0.48	0.48	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.53	0.48	0.64	0.64	0.48	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.48	0.48	0.48	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.53	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.53	0.53	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.64	0.53	0.48	0.53	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.53	0.48	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.37	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.48	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.48	0.37	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.74	0.5800000000000001	0.74	0.48	0.48	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.48	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.48	0.69	0.53	0.69	0.69	0.48	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.73	0.53	0.69	0.64	0.53	0.53	0.53	0.53	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.48	0.48	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.77	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001
Estimating the Field Capacity of Farm Machines	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.43999999999999995	0.64	0.55	0.55	0.73	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.53	0.55	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.55	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.53	0.61	0.53	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.76	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.76	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.76	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.72	0.61	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.55	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.5	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.53	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.48	0.55	0.61	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.53	0.48	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.74	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.55	0.53	0.55	0.61	0.53	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.48	0.0	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.74	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5	0.61	0.74	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.55
Ethanol Biorefinery Locations	0.56	0.44999999999999996	0.49	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.49	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.44999999999999996	0.44999999999999996	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.44999999999999996	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.52	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.52	0.63	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.49	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.56	0.44999999999999996	0.52	0.44999999999999996	0.52	0.44999999999999996	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.56	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.52	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.63	0.69	0.52	0.69	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.43999999999999995	0.52	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.44999999999999996	0.52	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.52	0.49	0.44999999999999996	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.63	0.49	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.49	0.74	0.52	0.52	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.49	0.44999999999999996	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.49	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.56	0.56	0.49	0.52	0.52	0.63	0.49	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.56	0.44999999999999996	0.52	0.44999999999999996	0.52	0.56	0.49	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.35	0.6599999999999999	0.49	0.6	0.52	0.38	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.56	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.69	0.52	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.56	0.56	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.52	0.56	0.38	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.52	0.56	0.52	0.56	0.56	0.52	0.44999999999999996	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.56	0.52	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.52	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.52	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.52	0.63	0.65	0.52	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.56	0.56	0.69	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.69	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.49	0.56	0.56	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.63	0.52	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.52	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.45999999999999996	0.69	0.56	0.69	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.49	0.44999999999999996	0.49	0.49	0.52	0.56	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.56	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.49	0.52	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.56	0.44999999999999996	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.0	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.56	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.56	0.44999999999999996
Ethanol Imports and the Caribbean Basin Initiative	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.74	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.53	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.54	0.6	0.7	0.54	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.54	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.54	0.52	0.52	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.54	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.54	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.75	0.62	0.7	0.75	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.75	0.62	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.75	0.7	0.75	0.7	0.65	0.75	0.64	0.75	0.64	0.75	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.75	0.62	0.7	0.65	0.75	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.69	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.74	0.62	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.48	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.64	0.54	0.55	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.48	0.48	0.56	0.54	0.48	0.48	0.52	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.6	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5	0.7	0.7	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.6	0.52	0.52	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.78	0.6	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.55	0.6	0.53	0.54	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5
Ethanol Production from Wood: Comparison of Hydrolysis Fermentation and Gasification Biosynthesis	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.7	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.55	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.62	0.7	0.55	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.55	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.63	0.64	0.71	0.64	0.71	0.64	0.64	0.71	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.71	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.0	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.71	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.64	0.69	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.65	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.53	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.72	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.75	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.5	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.63	0.54	0.69	0.54	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.5	0.62	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5	0.65	0.5	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.65	0.5	0.65	0.5	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.5	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5	0.62	0.65	0.5	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.54	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.73	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.53	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.53	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.7	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.56	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.49	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.51	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6
Ethanol Provisions in the CAFTA-DR	0.53	0.42000000000000004	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.71	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.71	0.53	0.61	0.65	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.71	0.65	0.62	0.71	0.62	0.65	0.56	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.74	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.56	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.65	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.56	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.71	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.75	0.74	0.75	0.74	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.62	0.75	0.62	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.77	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.44999999999999996	0.62	0.74	0.74	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.48	0.74	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.65	0.5	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.5	0.6	0.62	0.48	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.53	0.5	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.53	0.5	0.56	0.56	0.71	0.53	0.71	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.48	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.74	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.74	0.62	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.65	0.74	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.44999999999999996	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.71	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.71	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.71	0.56	0.71	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.53	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.56	0.71	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.65	0.7	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.71	0.62	0.48	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.56	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.53	0.53	0.53
EU Biodiesel Feedstock Challenge	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.54	0.5	0.47	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.43999999999999995	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.43999999999999995	0.43999999999999995	0.43999999999999995	0.72	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.47	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.47	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.54	0.72	0.47	0.41000000000000003	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.43999999999999995	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.43999999999999995	0.5700000000000001	0.43999999999999995	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.47	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.54	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.76	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.72	0.47	0.5	0.63	0.47	0.63	0.47	0.54	0.63	0.47	0.37	0.54	0.75	0.63	0.54	0.69	0.5	0.54	0.5	0.72	0.47	0.63	0.37	0.5	0.47	0.5	0.47	0.63	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.5	0.72	0.47	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.69	0.0	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.7	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.43999999999999995	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.47	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.47	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.5	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.47	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.54	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.54	0.5	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.72	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.6
Evaluation of the Effects of Biodiesel and Biodiesel Blends on Exhaust Emission Rates and Reactivity-2	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.53	0.53	0.38	0.54	0.6	0.45999999999999996	0.56	0.49	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.37	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.37	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.5	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5	0.61	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.56	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.5	0.62	0.6	0.72	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.72	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.72	0.63	0.64	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.54	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.55	0.55	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.53	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.53	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.51	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.62	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.51	0.54	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.73	0.61	0.73	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.42000000000000004	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001
FACTOIDS: Drinking Water and Ground Water Statistics for 2007	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.7	0.56	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.72	0.71	0.69	0.71	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.69	0.72	0.69	0.71	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.71	0.72	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.75	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.69	0.7	0.55	0.63	0.74	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.75	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.73	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.69	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.71	1.0	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.63	0.72	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.61	0.55	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.71	0.55	0.55	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.73	0.64	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.71	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.0	0.51	0.56
Farm Machinery Operation Cost Calculations	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.48	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.53	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.69	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5	0.62	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.53	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.6	0.62	0.7	0.73	0.6	0.71	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.72	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.53	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.62	0.5	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.55	0.62	0.48	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.5	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.5	0.65	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.63	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.5	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.48	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.53	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.53	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.53	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.53	0.6	0.53	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.55	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.72	0.6	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	1.0	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.55	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.6	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5	0.6	0.0	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.69	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.45999999999999996	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001
Feedstock Engineering	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.39	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.77	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.39	0.43000000000000005	0.39	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.39	0.53	0.62	0.62	0.39	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.77	0.53	0.39	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.39	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.39	0.5800000000000001	0.39	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.39	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.33999999999999997	0.62	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.53	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.39	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.48	0.62	0.29000000000000004	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.33999999999999997	0.62	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.74	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.48	0.48	0.72	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.48	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.43000000000000005	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.62	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.53	0.53	0.72	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.62	0.72	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.62	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.77	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.77	0.77	0.77	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.53	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.33999999999999997	0.48	0.33999999999999997	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.33999999999999997	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.33999999999999997	0.33999999999999997	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.39	0.33999999999999997	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.75	0.62	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.29000000000000004	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001
Field Drying Charactersitics and Mass Relationships of Corn Stover Fractions	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.54	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.53	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.62	0.54	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.6	0.49	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.54	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.7	0.6	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.62	0.52	0.52	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.61	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.62	0.55	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.53	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.49	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	1.0	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.55	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.71	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.43999999999999995	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.52	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001
Form 814	0.5	0.75	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.75	0.5	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.88	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.5	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.5	0.5	0.63	0.5	0.75	0.5	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.5	0.75	0.75	0.5	0.75	0.5	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.5	0.75	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.75	0.75	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.75	0.63	0.5	0.75	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.88	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.88	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.75	0.5	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.5	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.5	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.88	0.63	0.75	0.75	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.75	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.38	0.88	0.75	0.88	0.63	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.5	0.75	0.5	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.5	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.75	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.5	0.63	0.75	0.5	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.5	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.38	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.75	0.38	0.63	0.5	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.75	0.5	0.75	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.5	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.88	0.75	1.0	0.5	0.75	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.75	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.88	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.75	0.5	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.75	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.38	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.88	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.88	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.5	0.75	0.75	0.38	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.63
From Biomass to Biofuels: A Roadmap to the Energy Future	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.47	0.56	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.56	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.45999999999999996	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.74	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.54	0.61	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.54	0.71	0.64	0.54	0.63	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.48	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.52	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.64	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.61	0.52	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.56	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.75	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.54	0.52	0.5	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.47	0.53	0.63	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.61	0.56	0.71	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.48	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61
Fuel and Kerosene Sales 2006, Table 16	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.74	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.72	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.69	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.69	0.61	0.74	0.72	0.72	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.72	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.72	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.73	0.69	0.61	0.72	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.75	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.72	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.72	0.69	0.72	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.72	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.72	0.77	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.69	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5	0.56	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.53	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.69	0.61	0.63	0.53	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.07999999999999996	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.74	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.69	0.74	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.5	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.53	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.7	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.53	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.61	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.72	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.74	0.61	1.0	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.56	0.64	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.56	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.48	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.69	0.56	0.64	0.69	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.73	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.56	0.69	0.56	0.69	0.64	0.61	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.53	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.64	0.48
Fueling Diesel Engines with Blends of Methyl Ester Soybean Oil and Diesel Fuel	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.74	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.53	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.72	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.49	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.72	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.62	0.61	0.54	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.72	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65
Global Trade Analysis Project	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.73	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.44999999999999996	0.52	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.44999999999999996	0.44999999999999996	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.52	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.52	0.44999999999999996	0.44999999999999996	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.8	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.49	0.63	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.49	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.5	0.63	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.52	0.49	0.63	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.49	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.52	0.63	0.44999999999999996	0.49	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.74	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.44999999999999996	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.73	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.49	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.72	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.35	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.55	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.56	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.76	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.76	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.52	0.63	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.52	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.76	0.63	0.76	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.73	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.7	0.49	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.42000000000000004	0.52	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.63
Growing giant miscanthus in Illinois	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.56	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.62	0.5	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.0	0.0	0.0	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.0	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.73	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.62	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.73	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.5	0.5	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.73	0.56	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.72	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.71	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.72	0.64	0.72	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.64	0.72	0.64	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.72	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.75	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.75	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.78	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.53	0.62	0.64	0.5	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.73	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.56	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.53	0.64	0.62	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.53	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.75	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.75	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.53	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.56	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	1.0	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.53	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.64	0.73	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.73	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64
Harvest and Storage of Wet and Dry Corn Stover As a Biomass Feedstock	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.51	0.65	0.61	0.53	0.52	0.5	0.56	0.51	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.51	0.61	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5	0.62	0.6	0.48	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.48	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.35	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.69	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.35	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.51	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.51	0.56	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.53	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.53	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.56	0.48	0.63	0.51	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.64	0.65	0.75	0.6	0.75	0.65	0.63	0.56	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.36	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001
Hazardous Liquid Pipelines Transporting Ethanol, Ethanol Blends, and Other Biofuels	0.55	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.6	0.69	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.56	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.71	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.42000000000000004	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.55	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.69	0.54	0.27	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.7	0.55	0.55	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.0	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.45999999999999996	0.72	0.5	0.62	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.71	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.69	0.75	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.73	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.72	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.73	0.62	0.73	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.56	0.53	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001
Health effects of ambient ozone on healthy children at summer camp	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.53	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.71	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.5	0.6	0.61	0.72	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.49	0.69	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.7	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.54	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.52	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.52	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.61	0.6	0.47	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.52	0.6	0.63	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5	0.53	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.38	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.47	0.47	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.65	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	1.0	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.61	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.55	0.55	0.63	0.61	0.55	0.52	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.45999999999999996	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.53	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.55
House Rule 6559	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.8	0.54	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.74	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.74	0.6	0.6	0.74	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.8	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.74	0.74	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.74	0.6	0.74	0.6	0.74	0.74	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.74	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.74	0.74	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.74	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.74	0.74	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6	0.74	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6	0.74	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.74	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.74	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.0	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.4	0.74	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.74	0.8	0.6	0.6	0.74	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.74	0.74	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6	0.74	0.74	0.74	0.74	0.6	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.74	0.74	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.74	0.74	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.74	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.74	0.74	0.74	0.8	0.4	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.74	0.8	0.6699999999999999	1.0	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6	0.74	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.74	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.74	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.74	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.8	0.74	0.74	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6	0.74	0.74	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.74	0.6699999999999999
http://www.gao.gov/highlights/d07713high.pdf	0.8	0.75	0.75	0.8	0.78	0.78	0.78	0.8	0.78	0.75	0.75	0.85	0.8	0.8200000000000001	0.8	0.8	0.8	0.8	0.75	0.75	0.78	0.8	0.73	0.8200000000000001	0.78	0.8	0.53	0.78	0.8200000000000001	0.78	0.78	0.85	0.78	0.8200000000000001	0.8	0.78	0.78	0.78	0.8200000000000001	0.71	0.78	0.8	0.85	0.8	0.8	0.8	0.85	0.75	0.83	0.75	0.78	0.78	0.8200000000000001	0.78	0.78	0.8	0.87	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.78	0.8	0.8	0.8	0.75	0.8200000000000001	0.8200000000000001	0.78	0.8	0.77	0.5	0.73	0.8	0.8	0.81	0.8	0.8200000000000001	0.8	0.8	0.81	0.8	0.8	0.73	0.8	0.8	0.8	0.8	0.8	0.78	0.8	0.81	0.8	0.8	0.73	0.8200000000000001	0.8	0.73	0.8	0.8	0.78	0.78	0.8	0.8200000000000001	0.78	0.8	0.8	0.81	0.8	0.8	0.76	0.8	0.8	0.73	0.8	0.8	0.8200000000000001	0.84	0.8200000000000001	0.8200000000000001	0.78	0.8200000000000001	0.78	0.8200000000000001	0.8	0.78	0.8200000000000001	0.77	0.8	0.71	0.8200000000000001	0.8	0.8	0.8200000000000001	0.8	0.8200000000000001	0.84	0.8200000000000001	0.78	0.77	0.8200000000000001	0.8200000000000001	0.8200000000000001	0.8200000000000001	0.78	0.8200000000000001	0.8200000000000001	0.8200000000000001	0.8200000000000001	0.8200000000000001	0.78	0.78	0.8	0.8200000000000001	0.84	0.8200000000000001	0.78	0.8200000000000001	0.78	0.83	0.55	0.78	0.78	0.8	0.8	0.8	0.75	0.73	0.83	0.78	0.8	0.8	0.78	0.8	0.6	0.78	0.8	0.53	0.84	0.84	0.78	0.77	0.75	0.84	0.8	0.8	0.75	0.8	0.75	0.53	0.78	0.85	0.8	0.8	0.8	0.8	0.8200000000000001	0.78	0.48	0.55	0.75	0.78	0.78	0.8	0.77	0.8200000000000001	0.55	0.78	0.85	0.8	0.8200000000000001	0.48	0.78	0.78	0.62	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.78	0.78	0.75	0.78	0.8200000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.55	0.78	0.53	0.43999999999999995	0.6	0.8200000000000001	0.8	0.8	0.8200000000000001	0.8	0.73	0.85	0.8	0.84	0.85	0.75	0.6	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.8	0.5700000000000001	0.8	0.85	0.8200000000000001	0.8200000000000001	0.8200000000000001	0.79	0.78	0.75	0.79	0.8	0.5	0.8200000000000001	0.8	0.53	0.71	0.8	0.8	0.75	0.8	0.8	0.8200000000000001	0.8200000000000001	0.55	0.8	0.83	0.55	0.75	0.78	0.6	0.73	0.8	0.85	0.74	0.8200000000000001	0.6	0.73	0.8	0.8200000000000001	0.53	0.48	0.8200000000000001	0.8	0.75	0.8	0.8200000000000001	0.8	0.75	0.78	0.78	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.6	0.6	0.75	0.78	0.75	0.78	0.85	0.75	0.8	0.75	0.78	0.78	0.8	0.75	0.78	0.84	0.78	0.8	0.8	0.6	0.78	0.8	0.8	0.8	0.75	0.8	0.78	0.8	0.75	0.78	0.78	0.73	0.8	0.78	0.8	0.8	0.87	0.78	0.75	0.78	0.8	0.8	0.8	0.81	0.78	0.81	0.78	0.78	0.75	0.75	0.8	0.78	0.75	0.69	0.78	0.78	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.77	0.8	0.81	0.75	0.8	0.75	0.78	0.75	0.77	0.75	0.77	0.78	0.78	0.78	0.8	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.8	0.81	0.75	0.77	0.75	0.77	0.78	0.78	0.75	0.8200000000000001	0.78	0.8	0.75	0.77	0.8	0.75	0.81	0.81	0.84	0.8	0.81	0.81	0.81	0.81	0.78	0.62	0.78	0.78	0.8200000000000001	0.8	0.75	0.77	0.75	0.75	0.77	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.8	0.8	0.75	0.75	0.8	0.79	0.78	0.75	0.75	0.78	0.8	0.75	0.8	0.8	0.8200000000000001	0.78	0.8200000000000001	0.5	0.53	0.8200000000000001	0.78	0.73	0.78	0.78	0.83	0.75	1.0	0.8200000000000001	0.78	0.8	0.8	0.8200000000000001	0.87	0.9	0.78	0.8200000000000001	0.75	0.78	0.75	0.78	0.75	0.78	0.78	0.91	0.85	0.48	0.8200000000000001	0.87	0.43000000000000005	0.43999999999999995	0.75	0.78	0.45999999999999996	0.75	0.75	0.8	0.43999999999999995	0.75	0.75	0.8	0.45999999999999996	0.8	0.8	0.73	0.75	0.8	0.78	0.75	0.6	0.75	0.85	0.78	0.5	0.78	0.75	0.75	0.78	0.79	0.75	0.8	0.8	0.8	0.85	0.75	0.76	0.85	0.55	0.73	0.8	0.71	0.8	0.78	0.8	0.78	0.8	0.78	0.75	0.8	0.75	0.78	0.73	0.8200000000000001	0.8	0.8	0.8	0.8	0.85	0.8	0.8	0.9	0.8	0.8200000000000001	0.8	0.85	0.85	0.8	0.81	0.78	0.8	0.8	0.8200000000000001	0.8	0.8	0.65	0.78	0.87	0.8	0.8	0.85	0.75	0.8	0.75	0.75	0.78	0.78	0.78	0.78	0.78	0.8	0.8	0.75	0.55	0.75	0.83	0.78	0.8	0.5700000000000001	0.48	0.8	0.6
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/technical/Standards/nhcp.html	0.65	0.69	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.78	0.63	0.73	0.73	0.69	0.69	0.75	0.73	0.73	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.71	0.71	0.76	0.73	0.73	0.54	0.75	0.73	0.73	0.75	0.74	0.71	0.71	0.73	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.73	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.71	0.75	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.71	0.7	0.73	0.69	0.74	0.75	0.75	0.73	0.73	0.76	0.75	0.73	0.71	0.73	0.71	0.73	0.76	0.76	0.76	0.75	0.73	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.76	0.71	0.5	0.69	0.73	0.65	0.74	0.65	0.78	0.65	0.65	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.73	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.74	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.78	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.78	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.74	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.76	0.65	0.69	0.73	0.73	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.78	0.72	0.76	0.78	0.76	0.78	0.73	0.76	0.78	0.7	0.73	0.75	0.76	0.73	0.75	0.72	0.73	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.78	0.76	0.7	0.72	0.78	0.72	0.78	0.76	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.76	0.76	0.75	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.78	0.76	0.72	0.76	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.65	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.75	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.75	0.6	0.73	0.75	0.73	0.54	0.76	0.73	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.72	0.65	0.63	0.75	0.73	0.71	0.71	0.73	0.71	0.73	0.52	0.76	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.76	0.6	0.75	0.73	0.49	0.54	0.69	0.73	0.73	0.69	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.73	0.79	0.77	0.75	0.5	0.73	0.73	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.73	0.73	0.71	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.47	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5	0.62	0.71	0.69	0.69	0.76	0.76	0.71	0.73	0.75	0.72	0.78	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.73	0.69	0.73	0.69	0.52	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.76	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.49	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.52	0.71	0.73	0.72	0.73	0.69	0.73	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.75	0.75	0.52	0.71	0.71	0.6	0.62	0.73	0.73	0.74	0.69	0.6	0.73	0.76	0.69	0.52	0.44999999999999996	0.72	0.75	0.71	0.65	0.8	0.75	0.75	0.65	0.71	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.56	0.56	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.85	0.69	0.75	0.73	0.73	0.71	0.71	0.75	0.73	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.71	0.7	0.71	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.71	0.71	0.69	0.69	0.73	0.7	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.71	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.71	0.71	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.75	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.76	0.75	0.69	0.71	0.69	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.71	0.71	0.73	0.73	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.73	0.74	0.74	0.75	0.75	0.74	0.74	0.74	0.74	0.73	0.65	0.75	0.74	0.71	0.75	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.69	0.73	0.7	0.7	0.74	0.79	0.78	0.7	0.7	0.73	0.73	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.73	0.69	0.71	0.69	0.7	0.7	0.76	1.0	0.75	0.76	0.76	0.75	0.75	0.8	0.73	0.73	0.75	0.69	0.73	0.73	0.71	0.73	0.71	0.71	0.64	0.75	0.44999999999999996	0.73	0.7	0.54	0.54	0.73	0.65	0.52	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.73	0.54	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.71	0.75	0.75	0.73	0.54	0.71	0.76	0.71	0.41000000000000003	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.7	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.69	0.75	0.75	0.71	0.75	0.47	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.73	0.69	0.71	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.71	0.78	0.73	0.73	0.75	0.78	0.76	0.78	0.71	0.78	0.72	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.76	0.71	0.6	0.71	0.73	0.71	0.74	0.69	0.73	0.75	0.72	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.78	0.74	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.69	0.75	0.73	0.71	0.73	0.73	0.69	0.71	0.69	0.56	0.75	0.71	0.73	0.71	0.6	0.43000000000000005	0.73	0.56
Hypothetical SOA Production from Ethanol Photooxidation	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.53	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.53	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.71	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.51	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.51	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.51	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.51	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.51	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.51	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.73	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.73	0.6	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.6	0.7	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.69	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.47	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.64	0.33999999999999997	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.48	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.41000000000000003	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.55	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.62	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.51	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.43999999999999995	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.37	0.37	0.5	0.69	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.62	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.51	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.47	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.7	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.74	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.62	0.51	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.62	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.45999999999999996
ICM Website	0.64	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.64	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.8200000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.55	0.73	0.64	0.55	0.55	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.55	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.73	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.55	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.55	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.73	0.64	0.73	0.73	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.73	0.55	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.8200000000000001	0.64	0.73	0.8200000000000001	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.8200000000000001	0.64	0.73	0.73	0.8200000000000001	0.73	0.8200000000000001	0.64	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.8200000000000001	0.73	0.8200000000000001	0.73	0.73	0.8200000000000001	0.64	0.8200000000000001	0.64	0.8200000000000001	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.8200000000000001	0.64	0.73	0.73	0.8200000000000001	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.64	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.45999999999999996	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.73	0.8200000000000001	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.73	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.73	0.8200000000000001	0.64	0.73	0.8	0.73	0.64	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.64	0.55	0.73	0.73	0.64	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.73	0.64	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.64	0.55	0.73	0.73	0.8200000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.45999999999999996	0.91	0.73	0.91	0.55	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.73	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.73	0.55	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.45999999999999996	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.73	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.73	0.55	0.55	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.73	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.55	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.55	0.64	0.73	0.8200000000000001	0.64	0.73	0.73	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.73	0.73	0.64	0.64	1.0	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.73	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.73	0.64	0.55	0.73	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.64	0.73	0.73	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.45999999999999996	0.64	0.73	0.55	0.45999999999999996	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.8200000000000001	0.73	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.73	0.73	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.73	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.55
Impact of Feeding Distillers Grains on Nutrient Planning for Beef Cattle Systems	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.55	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.55	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.71	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.69	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.73	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.47	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.44999999999999996	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.49	0.7	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.62	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.65	0.7	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.54	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.54	0.65	0.54	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.54	0.65	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.54	0.64	0.65	0.54	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.45999999999999996	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.55	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.72	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.54	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.62	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.55
Industry data for 2008 taken from National Biodiesel Board fact sheets at http://www.biodiesel.org/buyingbiodiesel/producers_marketers/Producers%20Map- Existing091708.pdf	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.43000000000000005	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.54	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.47	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.65	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.47	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.61	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.53	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.4	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.53	0.53	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.69	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.020000000000000018	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.69	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.7	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.69	0.69	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.71	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.54	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999
Information about the 2005 NEI 	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.75	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.52	0.65	0.71	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.52	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.75	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.8	0.62	0.71	0.71	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.62	0.75	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.8	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.65	0.75	0.65	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.52	0.62	0.62	0.45999999999999996	0.75	0.49	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.75	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.55	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.85	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.52	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.52	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.45999999999999996	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.71	0.71	0.64	0.65	0.55	0.75	0.65	0.8	0.55	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.49	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.55	0.52	0.62	0.55	0.71	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.55	0.62	0.65	0.52	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.78	0.74	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.75	0.75	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.75	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.52	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.52	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.52	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.52	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.62	0.49	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.52	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.65	0.62	0.45999999999999996	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.45999999999999996	0.62	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.55	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.45999999999999996	0.63	0.45999999999999996	0.45999999999999996	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.45999999999999996	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.52	0.55	0.55	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.49	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.52	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.71	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.48	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.45999999999999996	0.5900000000000001
Information derived form staff-level communication with National Biodiesel Board personnel	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.54	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.5	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.63	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.63	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.43999999999999995	0.62	0.54	0.61	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.53	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.71	0.69	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.5	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.7	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.53	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.49	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.52	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.52	0.64	0.72	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.6	1.0	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.54	0.69	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.47	0.62	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.49	0.6	0.53	0.47	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.47	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.49	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.49	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.55	0.56	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001
Information on the Biomass Research Board	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.52	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.31999999999999995	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.49	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.49	0.54	0.49	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.54	0.73	0.54	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.69	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.42000000000000004	0.52	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.55	0.55	0.52	0.6	0.54	0.56	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5	0.64	0.4	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.54	0.64	0.69	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.31999999999999995	0.61	0.64	0.47	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.54	0.54	0.52	0.54	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.49	0.64	0.44999999999999996	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.7	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.63	0.61	0.54	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.47	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.52	0.52	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.54	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.52	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.43999999999999995	0.47	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.54	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.52	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.52	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.49	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.49	0.42000000000000004	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.61	1.0	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.52	0.69	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.33999999999999997	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.47	0.54	0.47	0.47	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.42000000000000004	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.35	0.5900000000000001	0.42000000000000004	0.35	0.42000000000000004	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.75	0.5700000000000001	0.75	0.64	0.61	0.49	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.43999999999999995	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.49	0.49	0.5	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.52	0.49	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.42000000000000004	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.47	0.5900000000000001
Insecticide Resistance Action Committee, for toxicity classifications and toxicity mode of action definitions used	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.53	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.55	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.48	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.53	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.52	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.45999999999999996	0.71	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.56	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.48	0.44999999999999996	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.53	0.62	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.56	0.52	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63
International Energy Agency Data Services	0.54	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.5700000000000001	0.49	0.61	0.52	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.49	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.51	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.74	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.52	0.74	0.61	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.54	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.54	0.52	0.74	0.54	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.74	0.54	0.52	0.5	0.64	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.47	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.47	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.47	0.71	0.64	0.47	0.61	0.69	0.47	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.4	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.7	0.61	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.5	0.5	0.49	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.51	0.71	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.49	0.43999999999999995	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.52	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.48	0.49	0.52	0.71	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.43999999999999995	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.52	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.69	0.54	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.47	0.47	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.54	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.71	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.43999999999999995	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.4	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.43999999999999995	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.42000000000000004	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.52	0.52	0.4	0.52	0.4	0.49	0.49	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.54	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.49	0.47	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.54	0.52	0.61	0.61	0.73	0.5700000000000001	0.73	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.52	0.69	0.49	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.43999999999999995	0.69	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.52	0.61
International Energy Outlook 2007	0.52	0.61	0.55	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.37	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.52	0.55	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.55	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.55	0.73	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.49	0.61	0.73	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.42000000000000004	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.42000000000000004	0.42000000000000004	0.7	0.61	0.42000000000000004	0.5800000000000001	0.42000000000000004	0.5800000000000001	0.42000000000000004	0.6699999999999999	0.42000000000000004	0.61	0.42000000000000004	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.42000000000000004	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.42000000000000004	0.5800000000000001	0.42000000000000004	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.42000000000000004	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.42000000000000004	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.42000000000000004	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.49	0.72	0.7	0.7	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.7	0.52	0.71	0.64	0.52	0.64	0.72	0.52	0.72	0.7	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.72	0.7	0.72	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.64	0.72	0.64	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.64	0.72	0.7	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.64	0.55	0.43999999999999995	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.52	0.61	0.45999999999999996	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.49	0.49	0.45999999999999996	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.49	0.54	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.49	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.55	0.5	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.24	0.4	0.5800000000000001	0.73	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.7	0.52	0.64	0.7	0.45999999999999996	0.64	0.7	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.52	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.7	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.7	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.55	0.55	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.55	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.52	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.55	0.77	0.5800000000000001	0.77	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.55	0.77	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.52	0.55	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.43000000000000005	0.64	0.61	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.43000000000000005	0.52	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.43000000000000005	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.43000000000000005	0.52	0.43000000000000005	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.55	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.35	0.28	0.49	0.64	0.64	0.45999999999999996	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.43000000000000005	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.49	0.64	0.55	0.55	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64
International Fire Cod 2903.4: Agricultural Products	0.54	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.71	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.49	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.49	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.49	0.49	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.77	0.7	0.6	0.69	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.54	0.62	0.56	0.72	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.49	0.49	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.74	0.6	0.74	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.74	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.69	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.74	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.56	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5	0.56	0.73	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.7	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.73	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.73	0.72	0.54	0.54	0.7	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.7	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.54	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.49	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.72	0.6	0.73	0.54	0.73	0.53	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.76	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.69	0.62	0.52	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.56
International Rice Research Institute	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.41000000000000003	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.52	0.6	0.73	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.53	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.45999999999999996	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.45999999999999996	0.45999999999999996	0.6799999999999999	0.45999999999999996	0.45999999999999996	0.55	0.45999999999999996	0.55	0.45999999999999996	0.5700000000000001	0.45999999999999996	0.5700000000000001	0.45999999999999996	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.45999999999999996	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.45999999999999996	0.6	0.45999999999999996	0.55	0.52	0.52	0.45999999999999996	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.45999999999999996	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.45999999999999996	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.75	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.52	0.48	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.49	0.65	0.6	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.45999999999999996	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.71	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.6	0.71	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.52	0.55	0.65	0.55	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.38	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.45999999999999996	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.52	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.76	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.49	0.49	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.52	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.49	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.52	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.52	0.7	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.55	0.6	0.45999999999999996	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.52	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.43999999999999995	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.63	1.0	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.45999999999999996	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.45999999999999996	0.63	0.41000000000000003	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.49	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.49	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.41000000000000003	0.55	0.30000000000000004	0.41000000000000003	0.30000000000000004	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.55	0.65	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.49	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.49	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.55	0.55	0.52	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.73	0.6	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.71	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.49	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.52	0.52	0.6	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.52	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.45999999999999996	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001
Investigating Machinery Management Parameters with Computer Tools	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.53	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.54	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.7	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.73	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.71	0.62	0.64	0.69	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.71	0.65	0.62	0.69	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.71	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.5	0.65	0.62	0.74	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.71	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.53	0.7	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.71	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.54	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.62	0.73	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.71	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6
Low Cost Algae Production System Introduced	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.61	0.7	0.56	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.52	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.69	0.52	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.52	0.61	0.69	0.52	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.61	0.56	0.49	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.0	0.6599999999999999	0.0	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.49	0.49	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.61	0.69	0.56	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.54	0.63	0.7	0.56	0.56	0.54	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.77	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.74	0.63	0.74	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.74	0.56	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.74	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.54	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.54	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.54
Machinery Management: Estimating Farm Machinery Costs	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.7	0.61	0.63	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.61	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.55	0.7	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.7	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.7	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.55	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.75	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.51	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.55	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.7	0.61	0.55	0.64	0.65	0.55	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.0	0.55	0.48	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.29000000000000004	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63
Magellan and Buckeye joint assessment of dedicated ethanol pipeline	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.54	0.65	0.56	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.53	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.71	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.7	0.53	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.7	0.53	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.53	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.7	0.53	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.53	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.4	0.62	0.7	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.44999999999999996	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.72	0.65	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.53	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.56	0.53	0.65	0.6	0.54	0.63	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.61	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.53	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	1.0	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.51	0.6	0.64	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.53	0.53	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.5	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.73	0.56	0.73	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001
Memo on MOVES evap rates	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.75	0.71	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.8	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.38	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.75	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.5900000000000001	0.75	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.55	0.55	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001
Memo on MOVESHC, CO & Nox emission rates	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.75	0.65	0.72	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.73	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.73	0.63	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.75	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.75	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.75	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.75	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.75	0.65	0.7	0.73	0.73	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.63	0.75	0.65	0.7	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.75	0.73	0.7	0.7	0.75	0.7	0.75	0.65	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.75	0.7	0.75	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.73	0.75	0.73	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.75	0.65	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.78	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.75	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.75	0.75	0.6	0.72	0.63	0.73	0.73	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.78	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.73	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.7	0.65	0.030000000000000027	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.71	0.7	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.74	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.71	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.73	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.8	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.65	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.72	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.73	0.65	0.73	0.73	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.73	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.65	0.63	0.73	0.65	0.65	0.63
Memo to docket on running MOVES	0.62	0.55	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.75	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.55	0.55	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.71	0.62	0.65	0.73	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.75	0.62	0.65	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.74	0.65	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.75	0.65	0.75	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.75	0.65	0.75	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.65	0.75	0.65	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.75	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.56	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.62	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.5	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.75	0.77	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.7	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.71	0.62	0.65	0.71	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.45999999999999996	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.55	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.74	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.75	0.62	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001
Modeling of Forage Drying in Single and Triple Pass Rotary Drum Dryers	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.48	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.55	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.56	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.69	0.63	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.76	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.72	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.71	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.72	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.76	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.56	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.56	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.63	0.72	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.51	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.56	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.5800000000000001	0.73	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.56	0.6	0.6
National Renewable Energy Laboratory estimate based on biomass portion available at $45-$55/dry ton	0.54	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.7	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.53	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.69	0.65	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.69	0.52	0.41000000000000003	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.52	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.52	0.63	0.65	0.52	0.65	0.63	0.52	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.43000000000000005	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.53	0.71	0.6	0.61	0.48	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.0	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.0	0.0	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.030000000000000027	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.61	0.65	0.48	0.53	0.49	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.54	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.39	0.63	0.39	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.39	0.61	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.39	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.65	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.51	0.64	0.61	0.51	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.55	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.43000000000000005	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6
Natural Resources and Environment, Land and Water Division	0.43999999999999995	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.47	0.52	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.44999999999999996	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.47	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.47	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.52	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.71	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.52	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.71	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.7	0.69	0.7	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.69	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.54	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.56	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.49	0.56	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.47	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.69	0.63	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.64	0.54	0.47	0.6	0.64	0.47	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.47	0.64	0.54	0.69	0.49	0.63	0.63	0.47	0.64	0.5	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.47	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.71	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.75	0.54	0.75	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.54	0.47	0.61	0.56	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.54	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.56	0.5700000000000001
Neste Oil website	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.53	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.53	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.48	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.53	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.42000000000000004	0.71	0.8	0.65	0.71	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.42000000000000004	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.77	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.75	0.5900000000000001	0.75	0.65	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.77	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.53	0.48	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.48	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.53	1.0	0.65	0.48	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.65	0.48	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.77	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.48
NOx Solutions for Biodiesel	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.71	0.6	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.49	0.49	0.44999999999999996	0.49	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.49	0.44999999999999996	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.71	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.52	0.63	0.52	0.6	0.52	0.56	0.52	0.52	0.63	0.49	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.71	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.52	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.52	0.63	0.63	0.44999999999999996	0.52	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.52	0.56	0.52	0.41000000000000003	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.63	0.49	0.52	0.49	0.52	0.41000000000000003	0.49	0.52	0.52	0.41000000000000003	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.41000000000000003	0.6	0.63	0.41000000000000003	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.49	0.52	0.63	0.52	0.63	0.52	0.49	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.49	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.49	0.63	0.49	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.38	0.6	0.71	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.49	0.56	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.49	0.49	0.6	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.41000000000000003	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.71	0.6	0.71	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.76	0.6	0.63	0.71	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.6	0.49	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.71	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.41000000000000003	0.49	0.49	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.52	0.6	0.49	0.55	0.71	0.56	0.49	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.71	0.6	0.49	0.63	0.49	0.63	0.71	0.56	0.56	0.44999999999999996	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.6	0.44999999999999996	0.44999999999999996	0.44999999999999996	0.44999999999999996	0.44999999999999996	0.63	0.63	0.44999999999999996	0.71	0.6	0.63	0.75	0.44999999999999996	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.72	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.49	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.49	0.6	0.63	0.52	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.52	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.52	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.65	0.6	0.56	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.52	0.6	0.63	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.52	0.56	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	1.0	0.49	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.63	0.6	0.52	0.52	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.69	0.52	0.63	0.56	0.75	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.52	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.71	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.63	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.74	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.49	0.52	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.49	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6
OECD-FAO Agricultural Outlook 2007-2016	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.72	0.75	0.65	0.77	0.8	0.75	0.75	0.74	0.77	0.73	0.75	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.7	0.75	0.62	0.72	0.75	0.7	0.72	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.77	0.75	0.75	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.75	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.72	0.77	0.7	0.77	0.8	0.79	0.77	0.8	0.77	0.77	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.8	0.72	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.72	0.77	0.77	0.5700000000000001	0.75	0.62	0.83	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.7	0.7	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.72	0.75	0.7	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.7	0.75	0.75	0.7	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.7	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.7	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.7	0.75	0.73	0.72	0.7	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.72	0.72	0.77	0.72	0.75	0.77	0.75	0.77	0.75	0.75	0.77	0.77	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.75	0.77	0.72	0.75	0.72	0.72	0.77	0.75	0.77	0.72	0.77	0.72	0.77	0.75	0.72	0.75	0.72	0.75	0.72	0.75	0.75	0.77	0.72	0.72	0.77	0.75	0.72	0.75	0.74	0.42000000000000004	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.76	0.39	0.77	0.62	0.77	0.78	0.75	0.77	0.5800000000000001	0.77	0.7	0.77	0.75	0.7	0.75	0.81	0.81	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.5700000000000001	0.8200000000000001	0.62	0.72	0.7	0.72	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.0	0.72	0.6	0.72	0.72	0.7	0.72	0.72	0.65	0.39	0.0	0.72	0.7	0.77	0.7	0.77	0.8	0.77	0.75	0.8	0.65	0.7	0.75	0.72	0.7	0.7	0.75	0.72	0.7	0.75	0.75	0.79	0.75	0.77	0.5700000000000001	0.75	0.75	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.77	0.77	0.43999999999999995	0.72	0.75	0.72	0.69	0.7	0.69	0.7	0.72	0.7	0.7	0.77	0.75	0.75	0.77	0.7	0.72	0.75	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.75	0.65	0.72	0.83	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.8	0.65	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.75	0.77	0.72	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.72	0.72	0.77	0.7	0.75	0.75	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.72	0.75	0.7	0.72	0.83	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.83	0.7	0.72	0.77	0.75	0.72	0.72	0.75	0.7	0.72	0.76	0.75	0.7	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.75	0.75	0.8	0.75	0.75	0.72	0.72	0.75	0.72	0.75	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.75	0.77	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.7	0.72	0.72	0.74	0.65	0.74	0.72	0.77	0.75	0.77	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.75	0.72	0.75	0.72	0.72	0.77	0.72	0.77	0.72	0.74	0.75	0.77	0.75	0.75	0.72	0.77	0.72	0.77	0.75	0.77	0.75	0.75	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.72	0.74	0.72	0.77	0.72	0.77	0.72	0.77	0.75	0.77	0.72	0.75	0.72	0.77	0.72	0.7	0.75	0.75	0.72	0.8	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.77	0.62	0.75	0.7	0.72	0.8	0.72	0.77	0.72	0.72	0.77	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.75	0.77	0.72	0.72	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.77	0.72	0.72	0.75	0.75	0.72	0.62	0.75	0.8	0.65	0.7	0.72	0.72	0.75	0.7	0.7	0.72	0.8	0.75	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.75	0.8	0.75	0.77	0.75	0.8	0.77	0.75	0.77	0.75	0.77	0.75	0.72	0.7	0.72	0.78	0.77	0.72	0.77	0.8	0.72	0.75	0.75	0.77	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.7	0.72	0.8	0.72	0.72	0.77	0.8200000000000001	0.8200000000000001	0.8	0.77	0.75	0.77	0.72	0.7	0.75	0.75	0.7	0.65	0.75	0.7	0.72	0.75	0.8	0.75	0.7	0.7	0.75	0.8	0.77	0.75	0.62	0.52	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.83	0.75	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.75	0.72	0.75	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.75	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.62	0.77	0.7	0.79	0.75	0.77	0.77	0.72	0.72	0.83	0.75	0.75	0.65	0.8	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.75	0.77	0.79	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.75	0.75	0.7	0.75	0.73	0.75	0.72	0.7	0.77	0.75	0.75	0.77	0.77	0.77	0.71	0.72	0.77	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.65
Official Opening of Petrojam Ethanol Limited	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.6	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.69	0.62	0.64	0.69	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.71	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.71	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.71	0.69	0.71	0.69	0.62	0.64	0.71	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.75	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.33999999999999997	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.77	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.0	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.55	0.55	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.71	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.53	0.64	0.53	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.73	0.69	0.6	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.55	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.73	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.69	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.71	0.62	0.73	0.62	0.73	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.6	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.53
OMB Circular A-4	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.75	0.75	0.69	0.75	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.75	0.75	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.75	0.75	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.75	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.5	0.69	0.74	0.63	0.69	0.8	0.75	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.85	0.69	0.69	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.75	0.75	0.69	0.75	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.8200000000000001	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.8200000000000001	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.5	0.75	0.75	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.5700000000000001	0.75	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.75	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.75	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.75	0.5700000000000001	0.75	0.5700000000000001	0.75	0.75	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.75	0.5700000000000001	0.75	0.5700000000000001	0.75	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.75	0.5700000000000001	0.75	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.75	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.75	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.75	0.75	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.8200000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.75	0.75	0.69	0.63	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.75	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.63	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.75	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.88	0.69	0.8200000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.75	0.69	0.63	0.88	0.69	0.63	0.38	0.63	0.69	0.38
Oregon Climate Service	0.6	0.5	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.45999999999999996	0.55	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.69	0.6	0.55	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.41000000000000003	0.55	0.5	0.5	0.55	0.55	0.5	0.55	0.5	0.73	0.5	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.64	0.69	0.55	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.0	0.64	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.69	0.64	0.6	0.69	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.55	0.64	0.6	0.69	0.55	0.73	0.64	0.55	0.69	0.69	0.55	0.69	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.69	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.64	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.64	0.6	0.69	0.69	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.5	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.55	0.5	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.5	0.64	0.5	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.74	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.64	0.73	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.5	0.64	0.76	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.78	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.8200000000000001	0.55	0.8200000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.69	0.69	0.64	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.55	0.69	0.6	0.5	0.64	0.55	0.69	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.64	0.55	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.55	0.69	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.64	0.5	0.55	0.69	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.55	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.69	0.45999999999999996	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.64	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.69	0.6	0.55	1.0	0.6	0.55	0.69	0.55	0.55	0.64	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.55	0.5	0.55	0.6	0.64	0.55	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.45999999999999996	0.45999999999999996	0.5	0.55	0.6	0.64	0.5	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.6	0.69	0.45999999999999996	0.45999999999999996	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.55	0.69	0.64	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.45999999999999996	0.64	0.5	0.5	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.5	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.6
Overview Presentation to CRC on EPACT Testing	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.71	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.56	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.72	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.72	0.69	0.72	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.74	0.63	0.71	0.74	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.72	0.72	0.69	0.69	0.74	0.72	0.69	0.72	0.69	0.69	0.72	0.69	0.72	0.69	0.72	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.72	0.69	0.69	0.72	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.49	0.7	0.65	0.52	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.78	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.49	0.69	0.49	0.72	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.49	0.49	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.74	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.74	0.6	0.74	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.74	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.54	0.63	0.52	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.0	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.69	0.49	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.74	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63
Ozone exposure and lung function in children attending a southern California summer camp	0.61	0.56	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.55	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.73	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.69	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.55	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.52	0.69	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.45999999999999996	0.55	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.49	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.0	0.53	0.53	0.55	0.53	0.56	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.45999999999999996	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.71	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	1.0	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.52	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.56	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.69	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.53	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6
Palm oil continues to dominate global consumption in 2006/2007	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.53	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.65	0.62	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.0	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.73	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.5	0.63	0.65	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.71	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.55	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.63	1.0	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.64	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.52	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.55	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001
Personal communication as noted in the Billion-ton Study	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.5	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.49	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.54	0.020000000000000018	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.56	0.62	0.54	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.52	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.52	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.61	0.63	0.52	0.56	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.7	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.54	0.63	0.4	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.5	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.49	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.49	0.63	0.61	0.56	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.65	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.56	0.56	0.52	0.5	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.49	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.56	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.65	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.61	0.55	0.61	1.0	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.54	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.56	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.56	0.54	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.48	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.52
Personal communication to Craig Harvey	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.29000000000000004	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.61	0.71	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.69	0.56	0.61	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.56	0.53	0.53	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.69	0.56	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.77	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.77	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.69	0.56	0.53	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.69	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.53	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.53	0.56	0.64	0.77	0.69	0.56	0.56	0.69	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.56	0.64	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.61	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.53	0.52	0.64	0.61	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.53	0.64	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.72	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.53	0.61	0.53	0.56	0.53	0.63	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.48	0.61	0.56	0.52	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.48	0.56	0.5	0.61	0.53	0.53	0.56	0.53	0.53	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.48	0.5	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.53	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.53	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.53	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.53	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.5	0.64	0.63	0.64	1.0	0.56	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.53	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.53	0.61	0.56	0.69	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.61	0.56	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.53	0.61	0.53	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.61	0.56	0.56	0.56
Personal communication with Natalie Hoffman, Managing Member of California Renewable Energies, LLC	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.56	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.53	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.56	0.69	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.65	0.56	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.69	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.48	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.48	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.36	0.36	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.38	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.77	0.54	0.65	0.61	0.73	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.52	0.7	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.52	0.69	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.7	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.54	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.7	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.45999999999999996	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.63	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.73	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.52	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.55	0.61	0.53	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.53	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6
Petrojam Limited	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.5	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.75	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.5	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.69	0.69	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.5	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.8	0.69	0.63	0.8	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.85	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.63	0.38	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.8200000000000001	0.69	0.8200000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.75	0.69	0.43999999999999995	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.75	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.75	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	1.0	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.43999999999999995	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001
Petroleum Market Model of the National Energy Modeling System	0.61	0.56	0.6	0.51	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.55	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.53	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.53	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.48	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.71	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.51	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.51	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.51	0.63	0.62	0.51	0.61	0.6	0.51	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.36	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.5	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.54	0.6	0.53	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.48	0.48	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.6	0.5	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.64	0.61	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.55	0.6	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.53	0.56	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.51	0.64	0.73	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.64	0.61	0.53	0.63	0.63	0.53	0.61	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.53	0.56	0.6	0.53	0.64	0.55	0.55	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.53	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.56	0.55	0.56	0.56	0.020000000000000018	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.51	0.51	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.42000000000000004	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.55	0.56
Petroleum Marketing Annual 2006, Table 31	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.76	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.71	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.69	0.71	0.71	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.71	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.73	0.74	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.71	0.72	0.71	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.71	0.72	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.69	0.69	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.71	0.69	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.71	0.64	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.77	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.7	0.69	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.69	0.72	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.52	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.0	0.64	0.0	0.64	0.64	0.42000000000000004	0.64	0.71	0.71	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.74	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.74	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.69	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.7	0.7	0.69	0.64	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.61	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.71	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.73	0.74	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.71	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.71	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.71	0.69	0.7	0.69	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.49
Petroleum Marketing Annual 2006, Tables 31, 34, and 48	0.65	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.77	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.71	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.56	0.7	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.71	0.71	0.76	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.76	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.71	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.73	0.75	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.63	0.65	0.75	0.76	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.71	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.76	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.74	0.75	0.74	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.71	0.75	0.76	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.77	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.7	0.71	0.73	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.52	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.0	0.63	0.0	0.54	0.65	0.49	0.65	0.73	0.69	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.54	0.6	0.62	0.78	0.56	0.62	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.74	0.63	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.69	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.71	0.69	0.63	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.71	0.7	0.63	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.69	0.71	0.71	0.72	0.65	0.72	0.71	0.71	0.69	0.69	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.73	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.73	0.63	0.69	0.73	0.73	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.75	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.71	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.69	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5
Plano National de Energia 2030	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.47	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.54	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.54	0.54	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.7	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.64	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.7	0.6	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.37	0.54	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.37	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.37	0.71	0.64	0.37	0.54	0.7	0.37	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.4	0.54	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.54	0.0	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.43999999999999995	0.43999999999999995	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.43999999999999995	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.7	0.73	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.43999999999999995	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.56	0.5	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.54	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.74	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.54	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.74	0.6	0.74	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.5	0.74	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.74	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.54	0.6	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.43999999999999995	0.64	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.47	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.43999999999999995	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.43999999999999995	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.43999999999999995	0.6	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.47	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.54	0.56	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.4	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001
Plantation management: activities/labour costs	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.42000000000000004	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.0	0.61	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.71	0.61	0.61	0.72	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.48	0.64	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.75	0.53	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.74	0.74	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.7	0.72	0.72	0.64	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.55	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.74	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.77	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.75	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.53	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.7	0.61	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	1.0	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.48	0.64	0.55	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.75	0.5900000000000001	0.75	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.72	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64
PLANTS Profile for Jatropha curcas L.	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.73	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.71	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.73	0.52	0.6	0.41000000000000003	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.65	0.41000000000000003	0.41000000000000003	0.5700000000000001	0.41000000000000003	0.41000000000000003	0.36	0.41000000000000003	0.52	0.41000000000000003	0.6	0.41000000000000003	0.36	0.41000000000000003	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.41000000000000003	0.52	0.65	0.41000000000000003	0.52	0.41000000000000003	0.52	0.38	0.38	0.41000000000000003	0.65	0.36	0.36	0.41000000000000003	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.41000000000000003	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.52	0.52	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.71	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.73	0.63	0.65	0.72	0.54	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.71	0.7	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.71	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.54	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.71	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.71	0.6	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.72	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.71	0.55	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.8	0.63	0.71	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.71	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.73	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.6	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.73	0.73	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.71	0.65	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63
POET Website	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.75	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.84	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.75	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.75	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.75	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.75	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.84	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.84	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.75	0.84	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.8	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.84	0.6699999999999999	0.84	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.75	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.5900000000000001	0.75	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.84	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.84	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.84	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.84	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.75	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001
Poet, ISU partner for BPX research	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.65	0.56	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.42000000000000004	0.71	0.74	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.71	0.62	0.71	0.62	0.65	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.53	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.53	0.53	0.62	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.62	0.65	0.53	0.62	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.73	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.72	0.71	0.65	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.75	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.71	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.72	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.71	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.74	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.74	0.7	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.42000000000000004	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.56	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.74	0.65	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.71	0.62	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.62	0.65	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.71	0.56	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.72	0.71	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.65	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.53	0.74	0.62	0.74	0.56	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.74	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.74	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.53	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.75	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5	0.53	0.62	0.62	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.53	0.63	0.65	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.48	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.5	0.53	0.48	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.53	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.53	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001
Potential Infrastructure Constraints on Current Corn Based and Future Biomass Based US Ethanol Production	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.49	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.53	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.53	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.42000000000000004	0.71	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.33999999999999997	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.7	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.53	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.51	0.71	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.54	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.69	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.62	0.69	0.6	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.52	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.47	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.47	0.5900000000000001	0.47	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.47	0.5900000000000001	0.47	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.47	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.47	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.47	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.42000000000000004	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.51	0.53	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.53
Presentations of K.C. McFarland and G. Anderl	0.56	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.56	0.63	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.52	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.73	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.54	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.74	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6	0.72	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.72	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.72	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.72	0.6	0.6	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.72	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.7	0.63	0.75	0.69	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.72	0.69	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.72	0.63	0.72	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.72	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.56	0.43000000000000005	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.75	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.4	0.5800000000000001	0.4	0.74	0.69	0.65	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.72	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.49	0.62	0.6	0.69	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.54	0.74	0.56	0.54	0.76	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.49	0.72	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.74	0.65	0.72	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.54	0.6	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.77	0.65	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.49	0.56	0.54	0.56	0.65	0.56	0.56	0.52	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.63	0.65	0.56	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.52	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.74	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.53	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.72	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.52	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.77	0.56	0.77	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.47	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.54
PV Solar Radiation	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.33999999999999997	0.33999999999999997	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.44999999999999996	0.62	0.62	0.44999999999999996	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.5	0.5	0.62	0.5	0.56	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.44999999999999996	0.5	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.5	0.56	0.5	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.56	0.44999999999999996	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.5	0.5	0.5	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.5	0.44999999999999996	0.5	0.5	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.73	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.73	0.5	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.62	0.73	0.62	0.62	0.73	0.5	0.73	0.5	0.73	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.73	0.62	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.5	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.44999999999999996	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.73	0.44999999999999996	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.73	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.56	0.7	0.5	0.5	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.85	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.62	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.5	0.56	0.5	0.62	0.5	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.73	0.5	0.5	0.73	0.69	0.44999999999999996	0.69	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.5	0.5	0.5	0.5	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.5	0.73	0.56	0.56	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.5	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.5	0.62	0.5	0.56	0.73	0.62	0.73	0.56	0.56	0.5	0.56	0.5	0.5	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.73	0.62	0.56	0.5	0.5	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.73	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.5	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.5	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.5	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.5	0.62	0.73	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	1.0	0.56	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.73	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.5	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.5	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.5	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.5	0.56	0.5	0.73	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.5	0.56	0.73	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.5	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.77	0.5	0.39	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.5	0.62
Questions Relative to Harvesting & Storing Corn Stover	0.6	0.5	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.7	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.49	0.49	0.5	0.6	0.56	0.54	0.56	0.52	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.48	0.56	0.62	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.71	0.62	0.69	0.65	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.5	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.75	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.69	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.65	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.69	0.6	0.65	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.69	0.69	0.72	0.56	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.54	0.65	0.56	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.71	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.54	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.52	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.65	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.54	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.63	0.63	1.0	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.52	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.71	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.56	0.52	0.33999999999999997	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.54	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.41000000000000003	0.63	0.7	0.56	0.7	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.73	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.55	0.56	0.61	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.54	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.54	0.5800000000000001
Renewable Fuels Association	0.38	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.71	0.38	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.49	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.44999999999999996	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.75	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.52	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.71	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.52	0.71	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.71	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.52	0.41000000000000003	0.41000000000000003	0.71	0.71	0.41000000000000003	0.71	0.6	0.41000000000000003	0.6	0.41000000000000003	0.41000000000000003	0.6	0.41000000000000003	0.6699999999999999	0.41000000000000003	0.62	0.52	0.41000000000000003	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.41000000000000003	0.71	0.71	0.41000000000000003	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.41000000000000003	0.71	0.41000000000000003	0.6	0.71	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.71	0.6	0.41000000000000003	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.71	0.41000000000000003	0.6	0.71	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.41000000000000003	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.49	0.63	0.6	0.41000000000000003	0.41000000000000003	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.41000000000000003	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.30000000000000004	0.6699999999999999	0.30000000000000004	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.6	0.52	0.56	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.33999999999999997	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.0	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.41000000000000003	0.33999999999999997	0.56	0.33999999999999997	0.33999999999999997	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.71	0.69	0.52	0.69	0.6	0.49	0.6	0.63	0.71	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.38	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.56	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.38	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.38	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.63	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.72	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.52	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.73	0.56	0.73	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.52	0.71	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.56	0.73	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.73	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.44999999999999996	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.49	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.78	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.52	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.71	0.52	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.52	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.6	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.52	0.63	0.52	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.41000000000000003	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.71	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.52	0.33999999999999997	0.71	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.56	0.7	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.52	0.52	0.63	0.0	0.6	0.71	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.56
Renewable Fuels Association Website	0.45999999999999996	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.45999999999999996	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.49	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.69	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.49	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.49	0.72	0.63	0.49	0.63	0.49	0.6	0.63	0.49	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.49	0.63	0.63	0.72	0.49	0.72	0.49	0.63	0.72	0.6	0.72	0.6	0.72	0.63	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.49	0.63	0.72	0.63	0.71	0.69	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.4	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.49	0.49	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.4	0.6599999999999999	0.4	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.15000000000000002	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.52	0.43000000000000005	0.6	0.45999999999999996	0.45999999999999996	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.4	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.52	0.69	0.63	0.49	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.49	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.49	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.45999999999999996	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.49	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.51	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.52	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.52	0.69	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.52	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.55	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.73	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.74	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.49	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.43000000000000005	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.18000000000000005	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001
Review of Competing Processes	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.76	0.56	0.69	0.56	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.76	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.52	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.44999999999999996	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.56	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.73	0.52	0.63	0.52	0.56	0.0	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.7	0.56	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.76	0.56	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.44999999999999996	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.44999999999999996	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.49	0.56	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.44999999999999996	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.44999999999999996	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.44999999999999996	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.44999999999999996	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.52	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.52	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.38	0.44999999999999996	0.5900000000000001	0.44999999999999996	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.73	0.52	0.73	0.69	0.56	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.65	0.52	0.7	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001
Review of Data on HAP Content in Gasoline, Memorandum from MACTECT to Steve Shedd	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.5	0.63	0.6	0.76	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.62	0.7	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.51	0.56	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.73	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.030000000000000027	0.48	0.65	0.62	0.56	0.71	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.64	0.71	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.65	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.52	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.51	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.71	0.63	0.65	0.56	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.73	0.65	0.73	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6
Second-generation biodiesel	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.49	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.49	0.41000000000000003	0.52	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.49	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.71	0.56	0.52	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.49	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.44999999999999996	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.41000000000000003	0.56	0.6	0.52	0.71	0.52	0.63	0.52	0.52	0.71	0.6	0.52	0.56	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.6	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.71	0.52	0.52	0.56	0.63	0.52	0.56	0.52	0.52	0.49	0.49	0.52	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.49	0.52	0.71	0.52	0.52	0.71	0.0	0.52	0.56	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.44999999999999996	0.74	0.71	0.44999999999999996	0.6	0.63	0.44999999999999996	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.49	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.41000000000000003	0.63	0.71	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.49	0.63	0.63	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.63	0.71	0.7	0.52	0.52	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.75	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.38	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.52	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.72	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.49	0.56	0.63	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.49	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.49	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.52	0.71	0.52	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.49	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.44999999999999996	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.52	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.41000000000000003	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.52	0.56	0.6	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.63	0.49	0.56	0.52	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.52	0.49	0.56	0.56	0.52	0.56	0.69	0.56	0.69	0.6	0.41000000000000003	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.52	0.49	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.49	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.49	0.49	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.38	0.44999999999999996	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.52	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.52	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.74	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	1.0	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.71	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.52	0.52	0.56	0.64	0.63	0.52	0.56	0.71	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.52	0.6	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.52	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.49	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.71	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.49	0.74	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.52	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.56
Seed oil content variation in Jatropha curcas Linn. in different altitudinal ranges and site conditions in H.P. India	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.61	0.56	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.48	0.62	0.55	0.63	0.48	0.48	0.62	0.43000000000000005	0.48	0.43000000000000005	0.48	0.55	0.48	0.5700000000000001	0.48	0.56	0.48	0.62	0.55	0.48	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.48	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.55	0.0	0.0	0.48	0.63	0.56	0.54	0.48	0.62	0.55	0.48	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.71	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.56	0.71	0.62	0.64	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5	0.62	0.61	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.69	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.49	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.52	0.7	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.71	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.55	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.53	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.52	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.61	0.52	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.56	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.54	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001
Senate Bill 3303	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.43999999999999995	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.75	0.63	0.69	0.75	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.63	0.75	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.75	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.75	0.69	0.63	0.8	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.85	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.75	0.5700000000000001	0.75	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.75	0.5700000000000001	0.75	0.63	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.8200000000000001	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.5	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	1.0	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.75	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.75	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.75	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.75	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.69
Simulation of Corn Stover Logistics from On-farm Storage to an Ethanol Plant	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.65	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.61	0.5	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.54	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.62	0.65	0.56	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.44999999999999996	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.74	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.71	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.33999999999999997	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.61	0.61	0.73	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.55	0.72	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.73	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.5	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.54	0.55	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.53	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.5	0.49	0.6	0.44999999999999996	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.54	0.7	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.54	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.5	0.54	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.53
Single-pass Corn and Stover Harvesters: Development and Performance	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.56	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.53	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.51	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.62	0.7	0.54	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.54	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.54	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.54	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.44999999999999996	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.69	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.74	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.54	0.56	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.56	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.7	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.53	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.51	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.6	0.62	0.48	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.48	0.65	0.6	0.71	0.48	0.63	0.63	0.48	0.65	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.54	0.6	0.44999999999999996	0.65	0.62	0.7	0.56	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.75	0.0	0.75	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.53	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001
Single-Pass, Split-Stream of Corn Grain and Stover: Characteristic Performance of Three Harvester Configurations	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.54	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.48	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.69	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.56	0.7	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.73	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.54	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.69	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.7	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.7	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.7	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.73	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.69	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.53	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001
Size does matter	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.5	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.43999999999999995	0.63	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.0	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.0	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.0	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.8	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.8200000000000001	0.5	0.8200000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.43999999999999995	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.43999999999999995	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.5	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.5	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.5	0.5	0.5	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.5	0.5	0.5	0.5	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.43999999999999995	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	1.0	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.43999999999999995	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.5	0.69	0.5	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.69	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.43999999999999995	0.5	0.5	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.43999999999999995	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.5	0.43999999999999995	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001
SPECIATE Version 4.0	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.75	0.65	0.75	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.75	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.5	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.75	0.65	0.75	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.75	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.8	0.7	0.7	0.6	0.8	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.8	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.8	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.8	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.75	0.7	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.7	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.7	0.8	0.75	0.7	0.7	0.75	0.7	0.75	0.7	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.65	0.75	0.65	0.75	0.75	0.7	0.7	0.75	0.7	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.75	0.65	0.7	0.75	0.8	0.75	0.75	0.6	0.65	0.75	0.7	0.65	0.75	0.8	0.8	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.8	0.75	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.8	0.7	0.75	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.75	0.75	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.44999999999999996	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.75	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.75	0.7	0.75	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.75	0.7	0.75	0.6	0.7	0.7	0.75	0.7	0.75	0.55	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.75	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.65	0.6	0.75	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.75	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.75	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.8	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.55	0.55	0.75	0.7	0.55	0.7	0.7	0.75	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.75	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.75	0.7	0.75	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.75	0.6	0.75	0.75	0.7	0.7	0.75	0.75	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.75	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.75	0.75	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.75	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.75	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.75	0.75	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.75	0.75	0.7	0.6	0.75	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.6	0.75	0.7	0.75	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.75	0.7	0.75	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.75	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.75	0.65	0.75	0.75	0.7	0.65	0.75	0.75	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.75	0.75	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.75	0.7	0.7	0.75	0.7	0.75	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.75	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.75	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.75	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.75	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.8	0.7	0.7	0.75	0.75	0.8	0.6	0.8	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.8	0.75	0.7	0.75	0.65	0.75	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.75	0.77	0.65	0.65	0.75	0.65	0.7	0.65
Starch Hydrolysis	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.71	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.77	0.71	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.77	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.36	0.71	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.74	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.48	0.48	0.71	0.77	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.77	0.71	0.77	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.75	0.65	0.75	0.71	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.53	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.53	0.53	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.71	0.77	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.77	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.53	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.77	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.71	0.77	1.0	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.77	0.5900000000000001	0.77	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.77	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.77	0.65	0.77	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.77	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65
Stochastic Modeling of Costs of Corn Stover Costs Delivered to an Intermediate Storage Facility	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.54	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.5	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.48	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.0	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.74	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.54	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.73	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.71	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.55	1.0	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.53	0.64	0.0	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.69	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.56	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001
Stricter fuel standards to combat climate change and reduce air pollution	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.54	0.55	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.54	0.55	0.48	0.55	0.55	0.65	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.54	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.55	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.53	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.0	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.53	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.52	0.69	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.56	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.7	0.55	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5	0.62	0.64	0.55	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5	0.61	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5	0.61	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.53	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.48	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6	1.0	0.61	0.62	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.62	0.55	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.69	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001
Sugarcane selected as commodity	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.040000000000000036	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.55	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.52	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.52	0.71	0.65	0.62	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.52	0.52	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.52	0.64	0.65	0.72	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.74	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.78	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.65	0.65	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.62	0.74	0.55	0.65	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.74	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.74	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.71	0.52	0.55	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	1.0	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.52	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.52	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.71	0.75	0.65	0.75	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.75	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.7	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.62
Summary Data on Diesel Fuel Retailers	0.52	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.49	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.71	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.71	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.71	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.71	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.56	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.63	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.71	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.71	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.52	0.0	0.25	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.49	0.55	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.52	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.49	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.52	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.55	0.71	0.65	0.71	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.73	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.52	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.71	0.7	0.49	1.0	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.71	0.63	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.55	0.65	0.5700000000000001
Sungrant Bioweb	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.54	0.4	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.47	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.47	0.54	0.47	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.47	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.74	0.6	0.74	0.54	0.6	0.74	0.54	0.54	0.74	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.74	0.6	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.74	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.47	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.4	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.47	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.47	0.6	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.47	0.54	0.74	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.4	0.4	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.9299999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.74	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.8	0.6	0.8	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.54	0.74	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6699999999999999	1.0	0.6	0.6	0.74	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.74	0.54	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.74	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.74	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.74	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.74	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.74	0.47	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6
Survey Evidence on the Importance of Fuel Availability to Choice of Alternative Fuels and Vehicles	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.48	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.51	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.65	0.6	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.54	0.65	0.65	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.52	0.69	0.63	0.0	0.63	0.65	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.56	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.54	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.55	0.54	0.65	0.54	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.54	0.56	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.62	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.74	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.51	0.7	0.64	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.55	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.47	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.42000000000000004	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6
Sustainability of Brazilian bio-ethanol	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.47	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.47	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.49	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.47	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.47	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.72	0.63	0.72	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.47	0.52	0.47	0.52	0.62	0.65	0.43999999999999995	0.5	0.47	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.85	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.72	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.75	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.49	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.54	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.69	0.62	1.0	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.74	0.62	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.72	0.62	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.74	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.65	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.53	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001
Syntroleum Investor Presentation	0.54	0.5	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.69	0.54	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.63	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.54	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.7	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.7	0.75	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.6	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.41000000000000003	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.41000000000000003	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.47	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.41000000000000003	0.41000000000000003	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.73	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.72	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.54	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.5	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.5	0.54	0.54	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.54	0.43999999999999995	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.47	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.54	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.6	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.63	0.5	0.54	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.54	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.63	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.54
Technical Support Document on Benefits of Reducing GHG Emissions	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.54	0.52	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.69	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.72	0.61	0.71	0.61	0.71	0.6	0.61	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.71	0.7	0.6	0.71	0.72	0.6	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.71	0.72	0.71	0.61	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.61	0.7	0.71	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.61	0.72	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.74	0.7	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.72	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.0	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.6	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.49	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.5	0.65	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5	0.65	0.5	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.54	0.65	0.5	0.65	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5	0.63	0.65	0.5	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.55	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.55	0.62	0.63	0.54	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001
Technological Progress and Commercialization of Biodiesel in Malaysia	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.54	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.54	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.54	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.62	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.61	0.56	0.62	0.0	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.56	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.72	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.64	0.61	0.72	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.71	0.6	0.53	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.61	0.73	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.49	0.69	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.56	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.72	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.7	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.64	0.61	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001
Technologies: Pyrolysis and Other Thermal Processing	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.54	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.72	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.72	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.72	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.47	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.71	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.56	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.62	0.54	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.74	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.72	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.69	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.69	0.7	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.71	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.62
"The ""NEAR85"" estimate of E85 retail facilities"	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.48	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.72	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.61	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.73	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.73	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.54	0.64	0.72	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.74	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.7	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.32999999999999996	0.7	0.72	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.74	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.7	0.63	0.64	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.74	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.61	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.55	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.75	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.7	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.33999999999999997	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.7	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.64	0.73	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.49	0.64	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.48	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61
The Brazilian Experience with Biofuels	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.5	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5	0.72	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.53	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.53	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.37	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.53	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.69	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.69	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.61	0.0	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.44999999999999996	0.69	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.64	0.5	0.0	0.5	0.0	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.61	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.74	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.44999999999999996	0.7	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.61	0.56	0.56	0.53	0.53	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.64	0.5	0.69	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.45999999999999996	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.45999999999999996	0.61	0.65	0.76	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.56	0.64	0.61	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.56	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.72	0.64	0.53	0.61	0.53	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.69	0.73	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.64	0.53	0.61	0.74	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.53	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.53	0.61	0.64	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.61	0.64	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.69	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.53	0.72	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.53	0.71	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64
The Gold Rush: Fueling Ethanol Production with Protecting Water Quality	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.49	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.7	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.62	0.55	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.53	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.56	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.55	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.33999999999999997	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.53	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.77	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.45999999999999996	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.53	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.45999999999999996	0.64	0.61	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.61	0.5	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.55	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.51	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.69	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.69	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.72	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.55	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.47	0.61	0.55	0.5	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.51	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001
The National Ethanol Vehicle Coalition estimate fo E85 refueling facilities	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.51	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.27	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.64	0.56	0.63	0.52	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.020000000000000018	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.64	0.6	0.030000000000000027	0.7	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.63	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.48	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.48	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.51	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.53	0.53	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.55	0.62	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.54	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.52	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.51	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.54	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.55	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001
The photosynthesis and water use efficiency of eight garden tree species	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.56	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.56	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.56	0.64	0.63	0.69	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.71	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.5	0.63	0.62	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.72	0.63	0.6	0.71	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.7	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.54	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.65	0.54	0.65	0.54	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.54	0.65	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.54	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.54	0.64	0.65	0.54	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.74	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.53	0.63	0.5800000000000001	1.0	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.55	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.49	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001
The Potential for Biofuels from Algae	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.52	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.71	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.52	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.52	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.52	0.65	0.41000000000000003	0.49	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.54	0.0	0.62	0.0	0.62	0.41000000000000003	0.0	0.62	0.64	0.41000000000000003	0.63	0.65	0.41000000000000003	0.63	0.54	0.41000000000000003	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.0	0.64	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.0	0.54	0.65	0.54	0.65	0.54	0.0	0.65	0.63	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.0	0.54	0.0	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.49	0.6	0.55	0.49	0.56	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.45999999999999996	0.6	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.6	0.52	0.71	0.52	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.52	0.77	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.69	0.55	0.69	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.52	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.55	0.52	0.6	0.65	0.52	0.55	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.52	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.49	0.49	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.55	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.54	0.55	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.54	0.55	0.54	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.54	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.55	0.54	0.55	0.55	0.54	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.52	0.55	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.73	0.52	0.65	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.52	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.52	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.43999999999999995
Thermochemical Conversion & Biochemical Conversion, Biomass Program Thermochemical R&D	0.63	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.69	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.55	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.49	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.73	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.26	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.74	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.77	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.71	0.54	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.55	0.73	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.61	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.7	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.7	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.55	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.52	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.74	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.55	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.54	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.69	0.63	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.69	0.69	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.69	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.61
Timber Products Output Mapmaker Version 1.0	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.75	0.61	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.72	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.7	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.63	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.69	0.7	0.69	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.75	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.78	0.78	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.76	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.7	0.73	0.7	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.56	0.56	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.0	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.55	0.72	0.63	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.56	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.6	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.72	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.76	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.73	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.61	0.61
Truck-In-The-Park Biodiesel Demonstration with Yellowstone National Park	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.55	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.69	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.48	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.49	0.71	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.62	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.62	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.72	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.71	0.71	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.73	0.63	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001
U.S. Fuel Ethanol (Renewable) Imports	0.52	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.73	0.52	0.55	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.73	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.73	0.6	0.71	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.63	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.71	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.73	0.71	0.63	0.65	0.49	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.71	0.55	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.49	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.7	0.49	0.71	0.65	0.49	0.71	0.69	0.49	0.69	0.71	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.69	0.55	0.69	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.73	0.69	0.73	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.49	0.71	0.69	0.71	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.47	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.49	0.71	0.63	0.65	0.47	0.47	0.63	0.74	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.33999999999999997	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.77	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.77	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.55	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.43999999999999995	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.49	0.53	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.73	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.49	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.71	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.73	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.72	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.73	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.73	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.71	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.49	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.54	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.52	0.52	0.65	0.62	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001
Underwriter Laboratories (UL) requirements for E85 retail equipment	0.6	0.51	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.7	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.56	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.69	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.69	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.72	0.47	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.77	0.64	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.51	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.75	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.71	0.54	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.72	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.71	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.72	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.72	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.56	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.72	0.7	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.73	0.62	0.73	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.51	0.51	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001
Uniform Format Feedstock Supply System Design for Lignocellulosic Biomass	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.51	0.53	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.53	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.72	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.73	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.74	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.71	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.51	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.72	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.69	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.7	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.7	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.69	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.69	0.65	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.72	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	1.0	0.65	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.7	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.53	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.10999999999999999	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.69	0.65	0.64	0.64
Upper Mississippi River Basin Modeling System Part 2: Baseline Simulation Results	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.53	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.77	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.71	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.7	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.7	0.61	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.47	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.49	0.65	0.63	0.5	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62
US Cellulosic Biomass Feedstock Supplies and Distribution	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.45999999999999996	0.020000000000000018	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.5	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.5	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.010000000000000009	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.53	0.020000000000000018	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.45999999999999996	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.47	0.64	0.71	0.65	0.64	0.71	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.47	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.71	0.69	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.53	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.76	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.74	0.65	0.72	0.7	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.74	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.7	0.62	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.45999999999999996	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.71	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.69	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.72	0.69	0.69	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.75	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.69	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.64	0.65	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.65	0.62	0.7	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.69	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	1.0	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.69	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.71	0.62	0.73	0.62	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.48	0.71	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.71	0.65	0.69	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001
USDA/FAO soil carbon map of the world	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.52	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.65	0.55	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.71	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.49	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.71	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.71	0.65	0.72	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.71	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.71	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.71	0.73	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.73	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.74	0.65	0.74	0.63	0.71	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.74	0.65	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.74	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.71	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.52	0.7	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.55	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.48	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63
Value of Distributed Preprocessing of Biomass Feedstocks to a Bioenergy Industry	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.43999999999999995	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.39	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.39	0.62	0.64	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.39	0.44999999999999996	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.69	0.65	0.37	0.61	0.62	0.7	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.6	0.61	0.69	0.43999999999999995	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.43999999999999995	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.65	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.71	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.63	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.43999999999999995	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.72	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.54	0.63	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.55	0.65	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.75	0.6	0.75	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001
Whole-Plant Corn Harvesting for Biomass: Comparison of Single-Pass and Multiple-Pass Harvest Systems	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.56	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.51	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.52	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.51	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.72	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.5	0.61	0.5	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.55	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.72	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.72	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.54	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.73	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.55	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.75	0.56	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.61
ASABE Standards, 2007	0.48	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.77	0.53	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.81	0.6699999999999999	0.48	0.48	0.48	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.77	0.62	0.62	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.77	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.77	0.72	0.72	0.62	0.72	0.53	0.77	0.72	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.81	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.81	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.81	0.77	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.86	0.81	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.86	0.72	0.72	0.86	0.77	0.72	0.77	0.72	0.72	0.77	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.77	0.62	0.72	0.72	0.86	0.72	0.86	0.72	0.72	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.86	0.72	0.86	0.72	0.77	0.86	0.72	0.86	0.72	0.86	0.77	0.77	0.72	0.86	0.72	0.72	0.77	0.86	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.72	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.72	0.77	0.77	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.72	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.77	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.81	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.77	0.72	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.8	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.77	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.72	0.76	0.77	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.77	0.77	0.72	0.77	0.77	0.77	0.8200000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.8200000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.5800000000000001	0.77	0.77	0.72	0.72	0.77	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.72	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.77	0.72	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.81	0.77	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.48	0.77	0.77	0.48	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.81	0.48	0.77	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.43000000000000005	0.81	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.48	0.77	0.72	0.77	0.72	0.77	0.77	0.77	0.77	0.77	0.77	0.62	0.62	0.77	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.72	0.62	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.81	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.72	0.53	0.86	0.72	0.86	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.72	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.48	0.86	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.77	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.48	0.86	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.77	0.72	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.72	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.48	0.72	0.53	0.77	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.77	0.43000000000000005	0.72	0.77	0.72	0.77	0.72	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.77	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.77	0.77	0.72	0.77	0.72	0.77	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.77	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.77	0.62	0.62	0.72	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.72	0.72	0.77	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.77	0.72	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.72	0.72	0.77	0.77	0.72	0.77	0.77	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.0	0.72	0.72	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.77	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.77	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.77	0.72	0.77	0.62	0.62	0.72	0.77	0.43000000000000005	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.81	0.72	0.72	0.7	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.48	0.62	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001
Comprehensive Nutrient Management Planning Technical Guidance	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.71	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.72	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.76	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.71	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.73	0.64	0.71	0.71	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.72	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.5	0.6	0.5	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.74	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.72	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.53	0.61	0.61	0.75	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.74	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.74	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.71	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.56	0.64	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.71	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.71	0.69	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.64	0.71	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.61
DOE Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Transportation Energy Book, Vol 26 , Table 2.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.35	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.69	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.69	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.62	0.7	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.53	0.7	0.61	0.64	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.53	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.61	0.7	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.47	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.61	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.74	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.43999999999999995	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.28	0.28	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.30000000000000004	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.71	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.74	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.48	0.14	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.76	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.72	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.71	0.76	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.64	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.10999999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65
EPA Guidelines for Preparing Economic Analyses	0.61	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.52	0.72	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.6	0.72	0.6	0.72	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.53	0.63	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.53	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.48	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.48	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.64	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.53	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.75	0.64	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.53	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.55	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.54	0.54	0.63	0.5	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.72	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.0	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.5	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61
Glossary of Biomass Terms	0.64	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.52	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.4	0.43999999999999995	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.4	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.52	0.64	0.48	0.43999999999999995	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.52	0.43999999999999995	0.6	0.48	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.52	0.43999999999999995	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.48	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.52	0.64	0.52	0.64	0.64	0.52	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.52	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.52	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.52	0.64	0.52	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.48	0.56	0.48	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.72	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.72	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.72	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.52	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.77	0.64	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.4	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.76	0.64	0.72	0.72	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.75	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.72	0.64	0.6	0.52	0.72	0.64	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.48	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.72	0.72	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.72	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.72	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.71	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.52	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.52	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.72	0.72	0.6	0.64	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	1.0	0.43999999999999995	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.72	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.52	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.52	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.52	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.52	0.64	0.52	0.72	0.6	0.72	0.56	0.52	0.43999999999999995	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.72	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.52	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6
Predicting Soil Erosion by Water, A Guide to Conservation Planning with the Revised Universal Soil Loss Equation	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.62	0.53	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.71	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.71	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.71	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.62	0.69	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.6
Technical Description of the Toxics Module for MOBILE6.2 and Guidance on Its Use for Emission Inventory Preparation	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.71	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.62	0.69	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.69	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.55	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.52	0.74	0.64	0.6	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.73	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.56	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.54	0.63	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.53	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.48	0.61	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001
User's Guide, Atmospheric Chemistry Modeling Group	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.72	0.62	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.73	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.72	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.71	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.74	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.72	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.71	0.72	0.6	0.63	0.72	0.55	0.64	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.020000000000000018	0.43999999999999995	0.62	0.43000000000000005	0.43000000000000005	0.43000000000000005	0.43000000000000005	0.43000000000000005	0.5	0.5	0.43000000000000005	0.43999999999999995	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.75	0.43000000000000005	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.5	0.48	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.52	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.65	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.72	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.75	0.6	0.75	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.64	0.62	0.7	0.6	0.79	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001
40 CFR Part 63 National Emissions Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants for Source Categories: Gasoline Distribution Bulk Terminals, Bulk Plants, Pipeline Facilities, and Gasoline Dispensing Facilities	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.51	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.61	0.62	0.43999999999999995	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.53	0.53	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.55	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.7	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.73	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.55	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.55	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.54	0.52	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.040000000000000036	0.52	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.61	0.19999999999999996	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.36	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.69	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.49	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.54	0.52	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.62	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.38	0.47	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62
40 CFR, Part 141, Subpart O, App. A	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.75	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.72	0.72	0.78	0.77	0.75	0.79	0.72	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.72	0.69	0.72	0.72	0.69	0.72	0.75	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.72	0.72	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.75	0.75	0.78	0.72	0.72	0.69	0.63	0.75	0.69	0.72	0.69	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.72	0.78	0.72	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.69	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.72	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.8	0.69	0.72	0.63	0.69	0.85	0.75	0.69	0.85	0.75	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.63	0.75	0.69	0.77	0.63	0.8	0.72	0.63	0.75	0.85	0.63	0.85	0.75	0.69	0.75	0.77	0.85	0.69	0.85	0.69	0.75	0.85	0.72	0.85	0.72	0.85	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.85	0.75	0.69	0.75	0.85	0.75	0.74	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.78	0.69	0.75	0.75	0.71	0.78	0.72	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.8	0.78	0.78	0.75	0.86	0.69	0.75	0.72	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.74	0.69	0.75	0.8	0.63	0.72	0.8	0.69	0.75	0.72	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.75	0.75	0.77	0.78	0.75	0.78	0.72	0.7	0.72	0.75	0.72	0.72	0.69	0.69	0.72	0.72	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.72	0.69	0.72	0.72	0.69	0.69	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.69	0.75	0.76	0.72	0.8	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.72	0.69	0.78	0.69	0.69	0.75	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.78	0.72	0.72	0.75	0.69	0.72	0.78	0.75	0.72	0.72	0.69	0.72	0.72	0.69	0.69	0.72	0.75	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.78	0.69	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.78	0.79	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.72	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.78	0.69	0.72	0.69	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.75	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.75	0.72	0.75	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.75	0.72	0.69	0.72	0.76	0.75	0.75	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.69	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.75	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.75	0.75	0.72	0.81	0.6	0.81	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.72	0.72	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.72	0.81	0.69	0.81	0.72	0.69	0.69	0.72	0.72	0.81	0.72	0.81	0.72	0.75	0.72	0.78	0.75	0.72	0.69	0.69	0.81	0.72	0.81	0.72	0.81	0.69	0.72	0.72	0.69	0.75	0.72	0.72	0.81	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.72	0.75	0.75	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.63	0.69	0.72	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.81	0.72	0.72	0.81	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.75	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.69	0.75	0.72	0.69	0.75	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.75	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.75	0.69	0.72	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.69	0.78	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.78	0.69	0.75	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.69	0.71	0.71	0.75	0.72	0.78	0.75	0.72	0.63	0.72	0.69	0.69	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.8	0.72	0.69	0.69	0.72	0.71	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.75	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.75	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.75	0.72	0.72	0.78	0.69	0.69	0.78	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.75	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.69	0.78	0.69	0.72	0.7	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.69	0.72	0.77	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.69	0.69	0.75	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.75	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69
Alternative Fuels & Advanced Vehicles Data Center, Biodiesel Incentives and Laws	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.48	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.55	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.5	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.7	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.75	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.72	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.73	0.63	0.47	0.63	0.62	0.0	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.62	0.61	0.7	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.6	0.54	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.5	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5	0.64	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.72	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.54	0.63	0.63	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001
Clean Air Act Section 221 (o)(1)	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.72	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.78	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.78	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.7	0.63	0.71	0.72	0.63	0.72	0.78	0.63	0.78	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.7	0.78	0.69	0.78	0.69	0.69	0.78	0.63	0.78	0.63	0.78	0.69	0.63	0.72	0.78	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.78	0.69	0.72	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.75	0.75	0.75	0.6	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.72	0.72	0.69	0.72	0.7	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.050000000000000044	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.72	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.72	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.72	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.74	0.6	0.74	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.74	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.74	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.54	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.75	0.69	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.74	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999
Final Rule: Control of Air Pollution from New Motor Vehicles: Heavy-Duty Engine and Vehicle Standards and Highway Diesel Fuel Sulfur Control Requirements	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.53	0.55	0.65	0.55	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.72	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.49	0.72	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.61	0.69	0.54	0.61	0.6	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.56	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.71	0.010000000000000009	0.47	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.71	0.62	0.43000000000000005	0.56	0.55	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.52	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.45999999999999996	0.32999999999999996	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.69	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65
National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants From Petroleum Refineries	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.54	0.64	0.62	0.5	0.47	0.45999999999999996	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.7	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.7	0.61	0.69	0.55	0.55	0.7	0.53	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.55	0.63	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.7	0.61	0.55	0.63	0.69	0.55	0.63	0.55	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.69	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.7	0.61	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.74	0.53	0.53	0.61	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.71	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.55	0.72	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.5	0.38	0.63	0.7	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.18999999999999995	0.56	0.72	0.53	0.5	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.0	0.72	0.61	0.35	0.61	0.38	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.49	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.72	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.56	0.72	0.63	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.53	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.49	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.47	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.41000000000000003	0.43000000000000005	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.69	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.55	0.53	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.63	0.64	0.55
Public Law Version 6124 of the Farm Bill	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.73	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.7	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.75	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.75	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.75	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.65	0.72	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.72	0.7	0.72	0.7	0.72	0.65	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.73	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.75	0.72	0.72	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.77	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.020000000000000018	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.55	0.72	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.73	0.74	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.55	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.75	0.63	1.0	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.73	0.69	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.48	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.53	0.7	0.6	0.65	0.53	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.48	0.53	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6
Regulation of Fuels and Fuel Additives: Renewable Fuel Standard Program	0.43000000000000005	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.48	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.7	0.64	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.69	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.69	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.55	0.69	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.7	0.61	0.62	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.63	0.76	0.48	0.48	0.61	0.72	0.64	0.49	0.65	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.53	0.73	0.61	0.69	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.44999999999999996	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.55	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.33999999999999997	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.33999999999999997	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.7	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.64	0.0	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.64	0.61	0.54	0.64	0.62	0.73	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.54	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.69	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.72	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.71	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.5	0.5	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.47	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.54	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.53	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.48	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.61
The Food, Conservation, and Energy Act of 2008, Part II, Subparts A and B	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.61	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.72	0.72	0.69	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.7	0.62	0.75	0.7	0.62	0.65	0.72	0.62	0.72	0.72	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.72	0.69	0.72	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.64	0.72	0.64	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.72	0.72	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.43999999999999995	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.63	0.74	0.53	0.53	0.61	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.74	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.73	0.64	0.62	0.73	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.73	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.73	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.55	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.7	0.74	0.69	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.69	0.61	0.65	0.7	0.56	0.69	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.55	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.72	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.69	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.64	0.7	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.62
Final Regulatory Impact Analysis for Reformulated Gasoline	0.63	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.52	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.37	0.26	0.4	0.63	0.64	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.56	0.54	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5	0.5	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.54	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.69	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.52	0.52	0.63	0.7	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.49	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.4	0.56	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.30000000000000004	0.4	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.52	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.30000000000000004	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.37	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.49	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.54	0.72	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.54	0.54	0.63	0.6	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.7	0.61	0.7	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.56	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56
Final Regulatory Impact Analysis: Control of Hazardous Air Pollutants from Mobile Sources	0.61	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.48	0.42000000000000004	0.39	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.52	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.69	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.7	0.49	0.63	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.0	0.49	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.42000000000000004	0.63	0.7	0.49	0.43999999999999995	0.63	0.7	0.38	0.7	0.62	0.10999999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.0	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.48	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.54	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.56	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.49	0.64	0.64	0.41000000000000003	0.4	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001
Final Regulatory Impact Analysis: Refueling Emission Regulations for Light Duty Vehicles and Trucks and Heavy Duty Vehicles	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.55	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.49	0.48	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.71	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.64	0.61	0.7	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.5	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.51	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.72	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.73	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.51	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.49	0.62	0.69	0.69	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.44999999999999996	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.54	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.54	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.64	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.56	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.71	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6
Final Rule: Control of emissions of Air Pollution from Locomotives and Marine Compression-Ignition Engines Less than 30 Liters per Cylinder, Regulatory Impact Analysis	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.7	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.5	0.65	0.64	0.7	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.69	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.73	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.09999999999999998	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.55	0.56	0.69	0.47	0.010000000000000009	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.51	0.69	0.6	0.43000000000000005	0.6	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.54	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.52	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.56	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5	0.61	0.54	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.5	0.61	0.5	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.5	0.61	0.5	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.61	0.5	0.61	0.61	0.5	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.52	0.61	0.61	0.48	0.4	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.72	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.69	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.56	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62
Regulatory Impact Analysis for the Control of Hazardous Air Pollutants from Mobile Sources Rule	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.43999999999999995	0.42000000000000004	0.48	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.52	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.71	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.73	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.71	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.69	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.71	0.5	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.12	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.43000000000000005	0.56	0.69	0.55	0.53	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.38	0.69	0.64	0.06999999999999995	0.5900000000000001	0.12	0.65	0.69	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.43999999999999995	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.53	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.54	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.51	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.53	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.49	0.61	0.61	0.43000000000000005	0.4	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.56	0.63	0.55	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.69	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.71	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001
Regulatory Impact Analysis of the Proposed Revisions to the National Ambient Air Quality Standards for Ground-Level Ozone.	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.5	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.0	0.26	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.56	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.5	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.62	0.64	0.43999999999999995	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.53	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.5	0.61	0.71	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.54	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.52	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.48	0.61	0.65	0.56	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.5	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.54	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.49	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.53	0.53	0.56	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.5	0.5	0.61	0.0	0.52	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.39	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.24	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.53	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.26	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.26	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.42000000000000004	0.42000000000000004	0.61	0.62	0.42000000000000004	0.42000000000000004	0.42000000000000004	0.42000000000000004	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.47	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.53	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.69	0.56	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.55	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.44999999999999996	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5	0.61	0.64	0.44999999999999996	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.53	0.61	0.51	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.53	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.55
Regulatory Impact Analysis to the Final Highway Diesel Fuel Rule	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.38	0.38	0.43000000000000005	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.55	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.75	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.71	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.61	0.5	0.63	0.61	0.74	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.54	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.41000000000000003	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.41000000000000003	0.41000000000000003	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.44999999999999996	0.69	0.43999999999999995	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.55	0.41000000000000003	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.38	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.74	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.55	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.54	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.61	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.56	0.64	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.53	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001
Regulatory Impact Analysis: Renewable Fuel Standard Program	0.18999999999999995	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.48	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.43000000000000005	0.39	0.32999999999999996	0.62	0.7	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.72	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.69	0.71	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.69	0.74	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.7	0.69	0.56	0.69	0.74	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.7	0.53	0.7	0.69	0.74	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.69	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.72	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.75	0.42000000000000004	0.42000000000000004	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.43999999999999995	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.53	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.43000000000000005	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.71	0.7	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.45999999999999996	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.63	0.55	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.53	0.65	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.0	0.62	0.73	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.33999999999999997	0.0	0.7	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.31000000000000005	0.33999999999999997	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.43000000000000005	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.69	0.53	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.73	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.69	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.55	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.51	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.44999999999999996	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62
RFS1 Final Rule Regulatory Impact Analysis	0.62	0.53	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.72	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.39	0.39	0.24	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.55	0.55	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.65	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.65	0.62	0.69	0.7	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.74	0.7	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.55	0.63	0.62	0.55	0.7	0.72	0.55	0.72	0.74	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.72	0.7	0.72	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.72	0.74	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.72	0.7	0.74	0.53	0.53	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.55	0.7	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.74	0.7	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.5	0.65	0.62	0.72	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.5	0.65	0.77	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.72	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.55	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.7	0.39	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.65	0.24	0.39	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.27	0.65	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.62	0.39	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.39	0.69	0.62	0.7	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.74	0.65	0.74	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.6	0.74	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.74	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.7	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.65	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.7	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.74	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.72	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.7	0.72	0.65	0.72	0.72	0.7	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.74	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.53	0.6	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001
System delimitation in agricultural consequential LCA	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.55	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.51	0.51	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.5	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.56	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.72	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.74	0.5	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.51	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.69	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.74	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.0	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.52	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.75	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.55	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.74	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.53	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.51	0.63	0.61	0.51	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.55	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.5	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.51	0.5	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.63
Uptake and transformation of benzene and toluene by plant leaves	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.7	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6	0.72	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.72	0.64	0.72	0.64	0.72	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.72	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.48	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.53	0.53	0.6	0.75	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.65	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.54	0.55	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.52	0.5	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.52	0.62	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.54	0.63	0.54	0.6	0.53	0.55	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.63	0.54	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.63	0.72	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.65	1.0	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.54	0.55	0.64	0.55	0.54	0.6	0.61	0.54	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.52	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.63	0.53	0.53	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.54	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.0	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.61	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.55	0.47	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001
beta-caryophyllinic acid: An atmospheric tracer for beta-caryophyllene secondary organic aerosol	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.53	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.71	0.62	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.72	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.69	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.52	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.49	0.61	0.43999999999999995	0.62	0.48	0.52	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.38	0.63	0.43999999999999995	0.48	0.06000000000000005	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.54	0.54	0.56	0.63	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.72	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.45999999999999996	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.56	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.71	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.63
Effect of exposures to ambient ozone on ventilatory lung function in children	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.54	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.52	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.54	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.54	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.53	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.69	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.63	0.6	0.71	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.52	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.51	0.51	0.63	0.61	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.45999999999999996	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.45999999999999996	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.44999999999999996	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.5	0.45999999999999996	0.6	0.56	0.39	0.29000000000000004	0.62	0.54	0.45999999999999996	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.54	0.56	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.72	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.55	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.54	0.69	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.51	0.5	0.55	0.53	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.56	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001
Potential Air Quality Effects of Using Ethanol-Gasoline Fuel Blends: A Field Study in Albuquerque, New Mexico	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.65	0.62	0.69	0.7	0.61	0.69	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.69	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.7	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.6	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.7	0.61	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.53	0.71	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.7	0.69	0.61	0.47	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.75	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.69	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.7	0.62	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.0	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.49	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.52	0.52	0.56	0.56	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.65	0.61	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.69	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.55	0.7	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.69	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.56
A Blueprint for Green Energy in the Americas	0.64	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.48	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.45999999999999996	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.73	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.53	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.48	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.73	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.6	0.53	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.6	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.53	0.64	0.69	0.7	0.53	0.71	0.62	0.53	0.6	0.69	0.53	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.7	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.65	0.69	0.64	0.6	0.52	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.55	0.55	0.0	0.0	0.62	0.77	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.71	0.6	0.55	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.61	0.55	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.5	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.56	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.64	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.53	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.53	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.53	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.55	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.6	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.48	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.53	0.53	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.53	0.53	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.53	0.53	0.6	0.53	0.7	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.56	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.5	0.6	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.52	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6
The Effect of Biodiesel Feedstock on Regulated Emissions in Chassis Dynamometer Tests of a Pickup Truck	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.43999999999999995	0.52	0.6	0.5	0.62	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.55	0.55	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.64	0.6	0.5	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.61	0.55	0.6	0.30000000000000004	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.61	0.5	0.64	0.6	0.55	0.30000000000000004	0.5	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.55	0.5	0.64	0.5	0.64	0.5	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.64	0.6	0.55	0.5	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.65	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.7	0.62	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.55	0.56	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.72	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.72	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.73	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.72	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.54	0.5	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.69	0.6	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.7	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.65	0.64	0.61
Effects of Biodiesel Blends and Arco EC-Diesel on Emissions from Light Heavy-Duty Diesel Vehicles	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.56	0.39	0.5	0.6	0.43000000000000005	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.54	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.54	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.43999999999999995	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.43999999999999995	0.54	0.55	0.54	0.55	0.63	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.69	0.62	0.6	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.76	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.73	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.73	0.54	0.6	0.63	0.53	0.62	0.73	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.7	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.72	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.51	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.55	0.56	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.64	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.69	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.69	0.56	0.61	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.71	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.72	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.71	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.73	0.63	0.73	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.72	0.64	0.69	0.61
Effects of Biodiesel, Biodiesel Blends, and a Synthetic Diesel on Emissions from Light Heavy-Duty Diesel Vehicles	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.54	0.61	0.45999999999999996	0.45999999999999996	0.62	0.4	0.55	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.55	0.6	0.61	0.55	0.47	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.61	0.47	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.54	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.69	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.76	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.69	0.7	0.62	0.69	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.7	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.72	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.72	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.54	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.7	0.73	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.7	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.54	0.54	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6
Association of fine particulate matter from different sources with daily mortality in six US cities	0.61	0.56	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.51	0.51	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.52	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.53	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.44999999999999996	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.55	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.69	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.55	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.49	0.7	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.7	0.6	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.55	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.030000000000000027	0.6	0.55	0.45999999999999996	0.5900000000000001	0.51	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.52	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	1.0	0.63	0.56	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.54	0.6	0.53	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.48	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001
Lung Cancer, Cardiopulmonary Mortality, and Long-term Exposure to Fine Particulate Air Pollution	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.7	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.71	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.64	0.62	0.7	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.61	0.41000000000000003	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.52	0.6	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.62	0.6	0.52	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.09999999999999998	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.48	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.6	0.54	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001
Atmospheric Chemistry of Aldehydes, Enhanced Peroxyacetyl Nitrate Formation from Ethanol-Fueled Vehicles	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.53	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.4	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.55	0.64	0.61	0.4	0.73	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.63	0.6	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.48	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.43000000000000005	0.52	0.5	0.5	0.5	0.5	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.43000000000000005	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.49	0.62	0.6	0.0	0.5	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.53	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.54	0.54	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.53	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.56
Global secondary organic aerosol from isoprene oxidation	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.54	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.56	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.54	0.56	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.63	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.72	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.74	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5	0.63	0.61	0.30000000000000004	0.64	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.33999999999999997	0.5	0.33999999999999997	0.63	0.21999999999999997	0.32999999999999996	0.52	0.29000000000000004	0.29000000000000004	0.56	0.48	0.5	0.33999999999999997	0.0	0.49	0.44999999999999996	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.54	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.52	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.49	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.54	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	1.0	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.5	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.75	0.61	0.75	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.7	0.56	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.65	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001
Identifying the Effect of Individual Emission Sources on Particulate Air Quality Within a Photochemical Aerosol Processes Trajectory Model	0.56	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.65	0.55	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.69	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.64	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.74	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.54	0.64	0.69	0.63	0.71	0.6	0.61	0.7	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.69	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.61	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.51	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.49	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.51	0.52	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.54	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.54	0.5	0.54	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.54	0.5	0.54	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.52	0.52	0.5	0.54	0.56	0.64	0.47	0.47	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.47	0.47	0.47	0.47	0.55	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5	0.54	0.6	0.5	0.54	0.5	0.5	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.5	0.56	0.54	0.6	0.5	0.5	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.54	0.6	0.69	0.72	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.55	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.7	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.52	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.61
Organic aerosol formation from the oxidation of biogenic hydrocarbons	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.52	0.61	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.52	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.43999999999999995	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.51	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.51	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.51	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.51	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.69	0.6	0.54	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.51	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.51	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.71	0.6	0.61	0.71	0.61	0.71	0.56	0.61	0.71	0.64	0.56	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.65	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.71	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.71	0.6	0.71	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.71	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.56	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.53	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.69	0.54	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.7	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.48	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.44999999999999996	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.54	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.64	0.61	0.7	0.69	0.54	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.53	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.4	0.6	0.49	0.6	0.48	0.53	0.4	0.6	0.36	0.51	0.53	0.33999999999999997	0.33999999999999997	0.37	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.4	0.43999999999999995	0.54	0.06999999999999995	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.63	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.48	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.55	0.63	0.65	1.0	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.51	0.56	0.54	0.64	0.65	0.53	0.56	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.54	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.74	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.54	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.48	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.5700000000000001
Secondary organic aerosol formation and transport	0.52	0.52	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.47	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.54	0.54	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.49	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.52	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.7	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.54	0.7	0.62	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.7	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.64	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.56	0.56	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.7	0.54	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.56	0.54	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.55	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.63	0.52	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.72	0.62	0.56	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.52	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.49	0.52	0.54	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.54	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.54	0.56	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.52	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.56	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.72	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.54	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.0	0.64	0.41000000000000003	0.54	0.31000000000000005	0.49	0.31000000000000005	0.5800000000000001	0.31000000000000005	0.29000000000000004	0.52	0.32999999999999996	0.32999999999999996	0.44999999999999996	0.52	0.54	0.31000000000000005	0.29000000000000004	0.52	0.41000000000000003	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.52	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.54	0.52	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.56	0.54	0.49	0.52	0.54	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.56	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.65	0.64	1.0	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.52	0.55	0.6	0.52	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.53	0.52	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.49	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.47	0.43000000000000005	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.72	0.56	0.72	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.54
Secondary organic aerosol formation from m-xylene, toluene, and benzene	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.55	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.7	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.54	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.54	0.63	0.65	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.74	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.69	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.55	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.51	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.48	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.72	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.62	0.24	0.64	0.52	0.62	0.43000000000000005	0.53	0.5	0.61	0.43000000000000005	0.43000000000000005	0.5	0.37	0.37	0.47	0.55	0.55	0.5	0.33999999999999997	0.5700000000000001	0.38	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.54	0.65	0.6	1.0	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.61	0.53	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.53	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.64	0.65	0.51	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.55	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.44999999999999996	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6
Source Apportionment of Wintertime Gas-Phase and Particle-Phase Air Pollutants Using Organic Compounds as Tracers	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.64	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.71	0.61	0.65	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.71	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.7	0.62	0.6	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.7	0.61	0.55	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.44999999999999996	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.4	0.36	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.55	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.72	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.69	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.69	0.53	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.53	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.61
Source Apportionment of Airborne Particulate Matter Using Organic Compounds as Tracers	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.48	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.54	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.56	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.71	0.63	0.64	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.7	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.44999999999999996	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.44999999999999996	0.41000000000000003	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.54	0.55	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.53	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.52	0.54	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.53	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.53	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.54	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.53	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001
The global potential of bioenergy on abandoned agriculture lands	0.61	0.5	0.61	0.52	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.54	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.61	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.64	0.55	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.55	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.65	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.55	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.55	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.65	0.55	0.63	0.55	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.52	0.5	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.5	0.55	0.63	0.61	0.52	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.61	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.52	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.54	0.52	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.61	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.52	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.72	0.63	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	1.0	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.55	0.54	0.6	0.5	0.62	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.55	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.49	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.73	0.5700000000000001	0.73	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.54
Rethinking organic aerosol: Semivolatile emissions and photochemical aging	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.71	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.71	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.53	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.74	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.61	0.72	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.56	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.72	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.4	0.64	0.0	0.52	0.53	0.56	0.55	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.55	0.5	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.51	0.6	0.48	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.56	0.55	0.55	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	1.0	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.69	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.53	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.6
Effects of VOCs on herbaceous plants in an open-top chamber experiment	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.53	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.62	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.61	0.55	0.52	0.55	0.56	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.56	0.55	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.55	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.56	0.55	0.62	0.64	0.56	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.53	0.75	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.73	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.6	0.5	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.56	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.53	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.52	0.65	0.62	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.56	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.75	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.52	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.56	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.72	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.6	0.48	0.0	0.0	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.52	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001
Effect of possible smog irritants on human subjects	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.7	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.5	0.51	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.53	0.55	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.71	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.62	0.69	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.5	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.7	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.71	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.7	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.65	0.53	0.51	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.53	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.45999999999999996	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.42000000000000004	0.55	0.61	0.55	0.55	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.51	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.51	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.52	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.43999999999999995	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.65	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.51	0.63	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.53	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.51	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.45999999999999996	0.0	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.53	0.53	0.6	0.51	0.48	0.48	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.61
Biologically motivated computational modeling of formaldehyde carcinogenicity in the F344 rat	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.52	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.56	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.56	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.63	0.48	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.52	0.69	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.63	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.52	0.5	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.48	0.53	0.61	1.0	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.53	0.48	0.52	0.61	0.0	0.28	0.5	0.55	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.53	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.49	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.53	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001
Human respiratory tract cancer risks of inhaled formaldehyde: Dose-response predictions derived from biologically motivated computational modeling of a combined rodent and human dataset	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.53	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.5	0.61	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.65	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.61	0.49	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.52	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.56	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.54	0.54	0.56	0.6	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.54	0.56	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	1.0	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.45999999999999996	0.51	0.6	0.27	0.010000000000000009	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.55	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63
Effect of Several Oxygenates on Regulated Emissions from Heavy-Duty Diesel Engines	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.36	0.49	0.6	0.24	0.52	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.53	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.7	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.64	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.71	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.4	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.74	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.7	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.71	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.54	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.49	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.69	0.72	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.62	0.56	0.55	0.55	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.55	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.54	0.7	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6
The State of Garbage in America, Vol. 47, No. 4	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.54	0.64	0.6	0.71	0.65	0.6	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.75	0.62	0.0	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.71	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.73	0.6	0.69	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.69	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.71	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.72	0.62	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.72	0.71	0.72	0.71	0.72	0.62	0.64	0.69	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.72	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.52	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.71	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.75	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.73	0.69	0.69	0.71	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.69	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.71	0.69	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.75	0.62	0.6	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.71	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.7	0.64	0.71	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.69	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.54	0.54	0.56	0.69	0.54	0.61	0.65	0.56	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.54	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.69	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.36	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6
Hematotoxicity in Workers Exposed to Low Levels of Benzene	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.73	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.74	0.71	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.64	0.63	0.71	0.72	0.63	0.71	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.74	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.71	0.69	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.7	0.69	0.7	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.69	0.74	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.73	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.69	0.71	0.63	0.69	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.47	0.63	0.71	0.64	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.43999999999999995	0.63	0.38	0.6699999999999999	0.4	0.5	0.06000000000000005	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.73	0.69	0.61	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.5	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.71	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.71	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.56	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.72	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61
Acute lung function responses to ambient acid aerosol exposures in children	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.54	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.54	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.54	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.54	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.71	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.54	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.71	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.52	0.54	0.53	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.52	0.56	0.6	0.55	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.54	0.56	0.52	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.51	0.56	0.6	0.54	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.54	0.52	0.0	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.51	0.5	0.63	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.48	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.54	0.54	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.54	0.55	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.71	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	1.0	0.56	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.55	0.55	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.56
Speciated Ambient Carbonyls in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.51	0.51	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.51	0.52	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.69	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.55	0.63	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.54	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.51	0.51	0.65	0.63	0.51	0.51	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.72	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.7	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.53	0.7	0.61	0.53	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.0	0.45999999999999996	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.51	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.53	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001
Peroxyacetyl nitrate and peroxypropionyl nitrate in Porto Alegre, Brazil	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.52	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.69	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.55	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.49	0.63	0.6	0.5	0.0	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.53	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.71	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.45999999999999996	0.44999999999999996	0.43999999999999995	0.49	0.53	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.55	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.73	0.6	0.73	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001
Bioethanol	0.6	0.7	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.4	0.4	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.5	0.5	0.5	0.6	0.5	0.5	0.5	0.5	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.7	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.8	0.6	0.7	0.7	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.30000000000000004	0.5	0.5	0.5	0.5	0.4	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.30000000000000004	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.30000000000000004	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.5	0.5	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.5	0.7	0.6	0.5	0.5	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.7	0.5	0.5	0.5	0.5	0.5	0.5	0.6	0.5	0.5	0.5	0.6	0.7	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.5	0.6	0.5	0.7	0.5	0.5	0.5	0.5	0.5	0.5	0.5	0.5	0.5	0.7	0.5	0.7	0.5	0.5	0.6	0.7	0.5	0.7	0.5	0.5	0.5	0.5	0.4	0.30000000000000004	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.5	0.5	0.6	0.5	0.5	0.5	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.30000000000000004	0.5	0.4	0.30000000000000004	0.6	0.6	0.19999999999999996	0.5	0.4	0.6	0.4	0.4	0.5	0.4	0.5	0.6	0.5	0.30000000000000004	0.4	0.4	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.30000000000000004	0.5	0.30000000000000004	0.5	0.7	0.7	0.6	0.8	0.6	0.4	0.6	0.4	0.6	0.4	0.4	0.4	0.6	0.4	0.30000000000000004	0.4	0.6	0.6	0.30000000000000004	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.5	0.30000000000000004	0.5	0.19999999999999996	0.30000000000000004	0.7	0.30000000000000004	0.7	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.4	0.6	0.6	0.8	0.6	0.4	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.5	0.4	0.6	0.4	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.30000000000000004	0.6	0.7	0.5	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.7	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.4	0.4	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.5	0.5	0.5	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.5	0.6	0.4	0.6	0.30000000000000004	0.7	0.30000000000000004	0.6	0.5	0.19999999999999996	0.6	0.5	0.4	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.5	0.7	0.6	0.4	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.5	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.4	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.4	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	1.0	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.4	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.4	0.6	0.5	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.4	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.5	0.5	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.5	0.6	0.4	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.4	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.4	0.5	0.30000000000000004	0.30000000000000004	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.7	0.6	0.4	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.6	0.4	0.4	0.6	0.4	0.4	0.6	0.7	0.4	0.30000000000000004	0.19999999999999996	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.30000000000000004	0.5	0.6	0.30000000000000004	0.4	0.6	0.4	0.4	0.6
Mortality from solid cancers among workers in formaldehyde industries	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.54	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.71	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.53	0.56	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.56	0.61	0.5	0.64	0.54	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.7	0.5	0.6	0.5	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.72	0.61	0.54	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.55	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.54	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.56	0.61	0.51	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.69	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.56	1.0	0.56	0.5	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.7	0.56	0.6	0.48	0.24	0.0	0.38	0.49	0.47	0.44999999999999996	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.53	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54
Resource Assessment and Removal Analysis for Corn Stover and Wheat Straw in the Eastern and Midwestern United States-Rainfall and Wind-induced Soil Erosion Methodology	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.010000000000000009	0.39	0.54	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.49	0.53	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.53	0.55	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.54	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.53	0.7	0.55	0.61	0.52	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.54	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.43000000000000005	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.55	0.72	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.63	0.49	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.54	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.65	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.55	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.53	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.5	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.63
Emissions from light duty gasoline vehicles operating on low blend ethanol gasoline and E85	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.55	0.64	0.55	0.63	0.61	0.55	0.48	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.7	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.56	0.33999999999999997	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5	0.62	0.52	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.45999999999999996	0.7	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.37	0.6699999999999999	0.0	0.37	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.54	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.69	0.54	0.55	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.7	0.65	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.63	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.54	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.55	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.73	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.53	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.54
Subchronic toxicity of 4-vinylcyclohexene in rats and mice by inhalation exposure	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.7	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.75	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.56	0.71	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.61	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.72	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.49	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.54	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.65	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.6	1.0	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.020000000000000018	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.47	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6
Source Apportionment of PM2.5 in the Southeastern United States Using Solvent-Extractable Organic Compounds as Tracers	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.69	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.69	0.65	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.71	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.71	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.63	0.61	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.43000000000000005	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.41000000000000003	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.0	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.52	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.69	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.7	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.71	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.44999999999999996	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.56	0.65	0.64	0.53	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.63
Air conditioning and source-specific particles as modifiers of the effect of PM10 on hospital admissions for heart and lung disease	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.55	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.69	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.71	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.56	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.71	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.72	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.72	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.53	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.0	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.44999999999999996	0.53	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.7	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.5	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.7	0.56	0.7	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.56	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.56	0.48	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.65	0.64	0.6
Mortality risk associated with short-term exposure to traffic particles and sulfates	0.61	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.71	0.65	0.6	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.71	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.53	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.44999999999999996	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.51	0.0	0.54	0.48	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.49	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.52	0.55	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	1.0	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.72	0.63	0.64	0.5	0.55	0.55	0.49	0.6	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.54	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.55	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.6	0.64	0.54	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.55	0.61	0.63	0.71	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.69	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001
An association between air pollution and mortality in six US cities	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.54	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.51	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.71	0.62	0.65	0.71	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.53	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.73	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.52	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.53	0.56	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.51	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.54	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.48	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.040000000000000036	0.54	0.38	0.41000000000000003	0.48	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.5	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.54	0.47	0.44999999999999996	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.51	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.51	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.4	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.48	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.6	0.56	0.51	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	1.0	0.56	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.51	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.69	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.55	0.56	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.53	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.56
The concentration-response relation between PM2.5 and daily deaths	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.55	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.45999999999999996	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.64	0.6	0.71	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.69	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.54	0.56	0.64	0.63	0.69	0.64	0.71	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.72	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.69	0.6	0.61	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.49	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.54	0.63	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.73	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.54	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.65	0.55	0.54	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.040000000000000036	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.5	0.61	0.5	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.54	0.5	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5	0.61	0.5	0.61	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.45999999999999996	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.72	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.55	0.61	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.54	0.55	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.52	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.69	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001
Association of black carbon with cognition among children in a prospective birth cohort study	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.73	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.71	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.55	0.7	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.69	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.49	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.54	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.63	0.6	0.49	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.0	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.54	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.73	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	1.0	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.69	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.53	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.55	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.73	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.48	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.53	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6
Prenatal alcohol exposure comparability of effects in humans and animal models	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.55	0.71	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.52	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.55	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.61	0.62	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.49	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.56	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.54	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	1.0	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.53	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.38	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.0	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.56	0.65	0.5700000000000001
Effects of low ambient levels of ozone and sulfates on the frequency of respiratory admissions to Ontario hospitals	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.5	0.65	0.6	0.72	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.69	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.7	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.53	0.63	0.49	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.56	0.61	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.54	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.0	0.55	0.54	0.55	0.54	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.51	0.49	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.54	0.55	0.54	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.45999999999999996	0.44999999999999996	0.55	0.54	0.54	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.54	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.56	0.55	0.55	0.54	0.61	0.5	0.55	0.55	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.53	0.56	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.55	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.53	0.55	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.44999999999999996	0.55	0.51	0.54	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.54	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.42000000000000004	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6
Alcohol teratogenesis: mechanisms of damage and strategies for intervention	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.48	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.6	0.55	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.71	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.54	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.55	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.69	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.53	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.75	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.51	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.63	0.55	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.62	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.51	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.61	1.0	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.020000000000000018	0.54	0.56	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.56	0.55	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.56
Experimentelle reizwirkungen von Acrolein auf den Menschen	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.55	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.71	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.56	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.73	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5	0.63	0.61	0.75	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.75	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.56	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.54	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.71	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.54	0.0	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.61	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63
Inhalation toxicity of acetaldehyde in rats 1. Acute and sub-acute studies	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.56	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.53	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.71	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.74	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.69	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.54	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.56	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.7	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.74	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.72	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.56	0.53	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.55	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.48	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.64	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.030000000000000027	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.52	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001
Respiratory health and individual estimated exposure to traffic-related air pollutant in a cohort of young children	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.53	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5	0.71	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.53	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.64	0.53	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.69	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.72	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.56	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.52	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.48	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.49	0.5800000000000001	0.010000000000000009	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.47	0.5	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.53	0.54	0.62	0.48	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.52	0.61	0.6	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.47	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	1.0	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.48	0.48	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.5	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.53	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001
Atmospheric Chemistry of Alcohols	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.72	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.7	0.61	0.7	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.49	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.73	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.7	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.69	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.7	0.64	0.75	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.64	0.7	0.69	0.73	0.69	0.73	0.64	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.7	0.7	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.84	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.64	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.73	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.52	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.61	0.64	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.49	0.28	0.33999999999999997	0.4	0.28	0.28	0.28	0.28	0.28	0.49	0.49	0.28	0.33999999999999997	0.49	0.61	0.76	0.28	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.43000000000000005	0.16000000000000003	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.43000000000000005	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.55	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.73	0.63	0.55	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.61	0.7	0.7	0.61	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.45999999999999996	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.49	0.64	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.49	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.76	0.64	0.76	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.73	0.7	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.72	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.79	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.4	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.4	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64
Measurements of Atmospheric Carboxylic Acids and Carbonyl Compounds in Sao Paulo City, Brazil	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.7	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.75	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.72	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.73	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.73	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.54	0.44999999999999996	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.55	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.040000000000000036	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.43999999999999995	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.51	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.73	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.69	0.55	0.55	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.53	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6
The little shrub that could - maybe	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.72	0.6	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.48	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.0	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.0	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.0	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.0	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.75	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.69	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.030000000000000027	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.72	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.47	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.72	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.69	0.72	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.72	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.72	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.72	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.72	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.72	0.6	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.52	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.72	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.6	1.0	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.72	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.48	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001
Comparative Economics of Biorefineries Based on the Biochemical and Thermochemical Platforms	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.55	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.74	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.54	0.61	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.54	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.54	0.69	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.0	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.5	0.61	0.61	0.74	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.47	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.52	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.71	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.49	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.56	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.53	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.5	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.53	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.55	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.51	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.62	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.61	0.55	0.56	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.73	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.48	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.020000000000000018	0.64	0.64	0.54	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.42000000000000004	0.61	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.55
Supply and Social Cost Estimates for Biomass from Crop Residues in the United States	0.61	0.54	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.52	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.51	0.6	0.64	0.49	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.5	0.61	0.5	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.64	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.55	0.64	0.65	0.54	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.54	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.62	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.45999999999999996	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.5	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.71	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.26	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.51	0.65	0.63	0.72	0.64	0.63	0.7	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.48	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.5	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.54	0.54	0.63	0.61	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.55	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.52	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.6	0.65	0.56	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.69	0.56	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.4	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.55	0.65	0.56	0.53	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.56
The Soil and Water Assessment Tool: Historical Development, Applications, and Future Research Directions	0.55	0.52	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.48	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.56	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.56	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.7	0.56	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.75	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.53	0.48	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.7	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.7	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.55	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.54	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.6	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.56	0.61	0.54	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.51	0.7	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.41000000000000003	0.64	0.56	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.51	0.6	0.62	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.54	0.62	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.55	0.55	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.0	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6
Plant Size: Capital Cost Relationships in the Dry Mill Ethanol Industry	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.54	0.64	0.62	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.53	0.64	0.53	0.64	0.7	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.33999999999999997	0.53	0.61	0.5	0.62	0.61	0.71	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.77	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.53	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.65	0.54	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.71	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.69	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.7	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.0	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.53	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.55	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001
Aerosolized acetaldehyde induces histamine-mediated bronchoconstriction in asthmatics	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.53	0.63	0.69	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.64	0.62	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.74	0.5	0.65	0.64	0.76	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.72	0.65	0.6	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.69	0.69	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.75	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.47	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.47	0.61	0.47	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.47	0.61	0.47	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.47	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.47	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.47	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.63	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	1.0	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.0	0.62	0.64	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.53	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.71	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.73	0.63	0.73	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001
Effects of Dried Distillers' grain on Fecal Prevalence and Growth of Escherichia Coli 0157 in Batch Culture Fermentations from Cattle	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.52	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.7	0.5	0.5	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.65	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.7	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.69	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.48	0.62	0.61	0.49	0.73	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.73	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.54	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.55	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.7	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.61
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease symptom effects of long-term cumulative exposure to ambient levels of total oxidants and nitrogen dioxide in California Seventh-day Adventist residents	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.56	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.56	0.61	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.53	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.56	0.55	0.63	0.62	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.42000000000000004	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.49	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.51	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.53	0.61	0.56	0.6	0.0	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.52	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.48	0.53	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.53	0.53	0.56	0.56	0.53	0.53	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.53	0.55	0.55	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.51	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.52	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.52	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.51	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.33999999999999997	0.51	0.53	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.64
Long-term ambient concentrations of total suspended particulates, ozone, and sulfur dioxide and respiratory symptoms in a nonsmoking population	0.6	0.61	0.55	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.61	0.62	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.44999999999999996	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.54	0.52	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.54	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.55	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.52	0.52	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.55	0.61	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.0	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.48	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.51	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	1.0	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.69	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.43000000000000005	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.51	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.54	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.63
Challenges in Engineering Microbes for Biofuels Production	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.52	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.42000000000000004	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.53	0.64	0.61	0.56	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.56	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.0	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.54	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.71	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.56	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.73	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.69	0.69	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.71	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.55	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.69	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.56	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.64	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.56	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.54	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.71	0.52	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.56
Biodiesel from Microalgae	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.72	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.52	0.43999999999999995	0.48	0.43999999999999995	0.36	0.56	0.6	0.48	0.48	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.52	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.28	0.43999999999999995	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.52	0.56	0.6	0.24	0.6	0.0	0.72	0.43999999999999995	0.0	0.4	0.43999999999999995	0.4	0.43999999999999995	0.24	0.4	0.43999999999999995	0.45999999999999996	0.24	0.7	0.52	0.24	0.64	0.0	0.24	0.0	0.72	0.43999999999999995	0.4	0.45999999999999996	0.0	0.43999999999999995	0.0	0.43999999999999995	0.4	0.0	0.64	0.0	0.64	0.0	0.4	0.56	0.64	0.0	0.72	0.43999999999999995	0.4	0.0	0.4	0.6799999999999999	0.43999999999999995	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.4	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.48	0.6799999999999999	0.48	0.64	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.52	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.52	0.48	0.6	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.43999999999999995	0.48	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.52	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.8	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.75	0.6	0.75	0.56	0.52	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.72	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.72	0.52	0.56	0.6	0.43999999999999995	0.43999999999999995	0.56	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.52	0.6	0.52	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.72	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.72	0.6	0.6	0.72	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.72	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.48	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.56	0.52	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.48	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.48	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	1.0	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.52	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.43999999999999995	0.52	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.52	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.52	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.52	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.76	0.6	0.76	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.75	0.56	0.74	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.71	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.6
N2O release from agro-biofuel production negates global warming reduction by replacing fossil fuels	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.71	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.53	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.53	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.53	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.53	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.53	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.51	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.54	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.71	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.53	0.62	0.63	0.53	0.63	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.75	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	1.0	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001
Reanalysis of the Harvard Six Cities study and American Cancer Society study of particulate air pollution and mortality	0.55	0.55	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5	0.54	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.53	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.53	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.55	0.64	0.56	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.69	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.56	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.7	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.43999999999999995	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.36	0.45999999999999996	0.040000000000000036	0.55	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.61	0.54	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.45999999999999996	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.54	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.44999999999999996	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.43000000000000005	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.45999999999999996	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.53	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.5	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61
Volatile Organic Compound Emissions from Dry Mill Fuel Ethanol Production	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.51	0.62	0.5	0.54	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.55	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.69	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.69	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.56	0.48	0.75	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.55	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.33999999999999997	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.77	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.72	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.65	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5	0.73	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.53	0.56	0.72	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.72	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.69	0.63	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.49	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.53	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.73	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.55	0.65	0.74	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.72	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.69	0.61	0.55	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.55	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001
The Economics of Harvesting and Transporting Corn Stover for Conversion to Fuel Ethanol: A Case Study for Minnesota	0.6	0.52	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.53	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.55	0.63	0.53	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.52	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.33999999999999997	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.7	0.43999999999999995	0.6	0.43999999999999995	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.45999999999999996	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.45999999999999996	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.56	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.51	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.0	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.54	0.56	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.69	0.62	0.56	0.5700000000000001
Algae Bloom Again	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.48	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.48	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.48	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.53	0.65	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.48	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.48	0.65	0.53	0.48	0.53	0.48	0.48	0.53	0.48	0.48	0.48	0.0	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.48	0.65	0.48	0.65	0.71	0.48	0.53	0.48	0.65	0.48	0.65	0.48	0.53	0.65	0.48	0.65	0.48	0.65	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.65	0.71	0.48	0.53	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.53	0.71	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.74	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.77	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.48	0.48	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.48	0.48	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.77	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.53	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.71	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.65	0.71	0.53	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.48	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.53	0.53	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.53	0.65	0.71	0.53	0.53	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.53	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.53	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.77	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.77	0.65	0.77	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.48	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.53	0.5900000000000001
Grow Your Own?	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.72	0.65	0.79	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.65	0.5	0.65	0.72	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.79	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.79	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.0	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.79	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.72	0.65	0.72	0.0	0.65	0.65	0.79	0.72	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.0	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.72	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.79	0.72	0.72	0.65	0.79	0.65	0.79	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.85	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.72	0.65	0.72	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.65	0.72	0.72	0.79	0.72	0.79	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.79	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.72	0.65	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.72	0.65	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.65	0.79	0.72	0.72	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.79	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.5	0.72	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.5	0.72	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.5	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.72	0.79	0.65	1.0	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.65	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.65	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.65	0.72	0.5	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.72	0.5	0.72	0.79	0.72	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.79	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.72	0.65	0.72	0.72	0.86	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.79	0.72	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001
Hematotoxicity among Chinese workers heavily exposed to benzene	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.54	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.72	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.64	0.69	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.54	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5	0.61	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.48	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.54	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.47	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.5	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.43999999999999995	0.5800000000000001	0.0	1.0	0.44999999999999996	0.37	0.4	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.72	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.51	0.56	0.44999999999999996	0.5	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.64	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.73	0.61	0.73	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61
Mortality From Lymphohematopoietic Malignancies Among Workers in Formaldehyde Industries	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.71	0.65	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.75	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.71	0.5	0.62	0.5	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.69	0.6	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.69	0.73	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.75	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.55	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.55	0.63	0.64	0.71	0.63	0.65	0.55	0.09999999999999998	0.30000000000000004	0.47	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.6	0.6
Effects of ozone and peroxyacetyl nitrate on polar lipids and fatty acids in leaves of morning glory and kidney bean	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.65	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.53	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.48	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.7	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.4	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.61	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.71	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.71	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.62	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.42000000000000004	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.55	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.63	0.6	0.53	0.55	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5	0.6	0.51	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.49	0.47	0.6	0.54	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.55	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.54	0.61	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.51	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.54	0.56	0.54	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.6	0.53	0.44999999999999996	0.47	0.39	0.6	0.51	0.53	0.53	0.6	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.73	0.61	0.73	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.5	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.53	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism report on moderate drinking	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.53	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.53	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.53	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.53	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.48	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.4	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.55	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.55	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.6	0.62	0.5	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.0	0.56	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.54	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001
The next generation of integrated air quality modeling: EPA's Models-3	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.53	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.71	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.52	0.69	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.62	0.020000000000000018	0.55	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.52	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.0	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.55	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.48	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001
Detection of peroxyacetyl nitrate at phytotoxic level and its effects on vegetation in Taiwan	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.55	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.54	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.54	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.54	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.54	0.65	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.71	0.65	0.64	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.65	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.6	0.55	0.64	0.47	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.42000000000000004	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.54	0.55	0.61	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.52	0.51	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.53	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.5	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.5	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.56	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.55	0.6	0.5	0.61	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.53	0.62	0.5800000000000001	1.0	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.71	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.63	0.63	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.52	0.62	0.56	0.69	0.56	0.6	0.5	0.0	0.48	0.43000000000000005	0.55	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.54	0.6	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.53	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61
Process and economic analysis of pretreatment technologies	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.54	0.52	0.56	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.49	0.5	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.61	0.52	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.71	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.54	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.61	0.56	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.52	0.63	0.47	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.5	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.54	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.56	0.61	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.56	0.54	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.52	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	1.0	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.54	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61
Hematotological changes among Chinese workers with a broad range of benzene exposures	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.48	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.54	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.54	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.54	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.53	0.69	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.56	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.54	0.63	0.62	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.73	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.7	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.7	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.52	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.71	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5	0.65	0.36	1.0	0.5800000000000001	0.030000000000000027	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.53	0.45999999999999996	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.55	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001
A Multi-Year study of air pollution and respiratory hospital admissions in three New York State metropolitan areas: results for 1988 and 1989 summer	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.51	0.53	0.55	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.72	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.61	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.56	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.48	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.47	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.47	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.52	0.32999999999999996	0.53	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.49	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.53	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.53	0.52	0.43000000000000005	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.53	0.55	0.54	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	1.0	0.61	0.55	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.55	0.55	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.54	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.7	0.61	0.7	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001
Effects of ambient ozone on respiratory function in active, normal children.	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.54	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.54	0.6	0.61	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.53	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.56	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.53	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.56	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.7	0.53	0.53	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.5	0.61	0.56	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.77	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.69	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.56	0.54	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.52	0.65	0.61	0.56	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.48	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.49	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.54	0.53	0.62	0.53	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.52	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.44999999999999996	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.56	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.53	0.5	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.56	0.5	0.5	0.54	0.21999999999999997	0.0	0.6	0.54	0.5	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.53	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.43999999999999995	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.52	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.56	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.4	0.55	0.53	0.53	0.53	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.54	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.5	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6
Effects of singleday and multiday ozone exposures on respiratory function in active normal children	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.53	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.62	0.52	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.53	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.53	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.53	0.7	0.65	0.6	0.52	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.69	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.69	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.55	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.64	0.6	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.48	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.47	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.49	0.48	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.51	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.040000000000000036	0.21999999999999997	0.6	0.54	0.43000000000000005	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.49	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.53	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.49	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.52	0.53	0.47	0.53	0.53	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001
Respiratory hospital admissions and summertime haze air pollution in Toronto, Ontario: consideration of the role of acid aerosols	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.54	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.7	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.49	0.7	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.5	0.7	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.56	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.63	0.54	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.45999999999999996	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.48	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.56	0.0	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.63	0.54	0.49	0.54	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.52	0.52	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.52	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.55	0.6	0.45999999999999996	0.6	0.54	0.56	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.43000000000000005	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.5	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.55	1.0	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.56	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.55	0.42000000000000004	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001
Development of switchgrass (Panicum virgatum) as a bioenergy feedstock in the United States	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.61	0.7	0.54	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.53	0.61	0.64	0.53	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.41000000000000003	0.0	0.41000000000000003	0.0	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.54	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.37	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.37	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.73	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.55	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.73	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.73	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.31999999999999995	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.52	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.48	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.71	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.69	0.48	0.48	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.71	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.71	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.55	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.4	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.47	0.64	0.61	0.53	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001
Potential Environmental Effects of Corn Stover Removal With Emphasis on Soil Organic Matter and Erosion	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.4	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.7	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.56	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.38	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.53	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.54	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.54	0.56	0.54	0.61	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.52	0.53	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.54	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.55	0.65	0.54	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.47	0.51	0.51	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.73	0.6	0.73	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.63	0.38	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.51	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.53
Current and Potential US Corn Stover Supplies	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.65	0.52	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.54	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.43000000000000005	0.47	0.56	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.7	0.49	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.49	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.49	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.49	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.49	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.49	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.72	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.75	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.72	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.7	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.72	0.6	0.72	0.6	0.72	0.56	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.72	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.54	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.56	0.65	0.5	0.56	0.56	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.7	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.56	0.69	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.56	0.54	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.47	0.47	0.47	0.47	0.47	0.52	0.52	0.47	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.47	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.54	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.52	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.54	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.54	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.52	0.52	0.49	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.56	0.7	0.71	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.56	0.54	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.56
Engineering aspects of collecting corn stover for bioenergy	0.63	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.56	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.51	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.71	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.71	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.53	0.63	0.5	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.53	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.7	0.6	0.73	0.56	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.56	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.65	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.55	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.55	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.56	0.56	0.55	0.56	0.56	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.51	0.6	0.6	0.48	0.65	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.53	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.65	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.53	0.6	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.45999999999999996	0.48	0.53	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.71	0.56	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.7	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.53	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.56	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56
Identification of Secondary Organic Aerosol Episodes and Quantitation of Primary and Secondary Aerosol Concentrations during SCAQS	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.6	0.61	0.52	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.72	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.71	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.49	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.31999999999999995	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.06999999999999995	0.55	0.54	0.6	0.49	0.52	0.53	0.43999999999999995	0.43999999999999995	0.6	0.43999999999999995	0.62	0.54	0.36	0.56	0.47	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.55	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.56	0.61	0.54	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.53	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.63	0.6
Los Angeles Summer Midday Particulate Carbon: Primary and Secondary Aerosol	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.74	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.64	0.63	0.74	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.72	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.55	0.72	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.39	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.62	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.55	0.6	0.54	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.51	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.54	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.54	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.71	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6
Mechanistic analysis of plant responses to air pollution	0.56	0.49	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.47	0.54	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.44999999999999996	0.5	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.52	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.72	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.7	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.72	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.72	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.44999999999999996	0.44999999999999996	0.63	0.54	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.54	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.54	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.47	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.6	0.61	0.54	0.63	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.47	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.44999999999999996	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.52	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.47	0.47	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.56	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.47	0.49	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.61	0.63	0.5	0.54	0.54	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.47	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.0	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	1.0	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.56	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.6	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.52	0.54	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.54
The benefits of pollution control: the case of ozone and U.S. agriculture	0.5900000000000001	0.51	0.62	0.5	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.49	0.51	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.74	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.7	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.71	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.49	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.53	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.54	0.61	0.62	0.54	0.53	0.55	0.53	0.65	0.54	0.65	0.54	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.51	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.54	0.65	0.54	0.61	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.54	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.65	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.54	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.54	0.5	0.54	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.65	0.48	0.0	0.42000000000000004	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	1.0	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.53	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.47	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.51	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.54	0.7	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.65	0.63	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.54
Use of US Croplands for biofuels increases greenhouse gases through emissions from land-use change	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.48	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.71	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.54	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.54	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.5	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.52	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.69	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.62	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.56	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.69	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.54	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.54	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.56	0.55	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.54	0.62	0.64	0.56	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.54	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.62	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.69	0.74	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	1.0	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.69	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001
Implications of environmental policy for U.S. agriculture: the case of ambient ozone standards	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.45999999999999996	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.55	0.55	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.64	0.6	0.43999999999999995	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.61	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.69	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.71	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.61	0.71	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.56	0.7	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.69	0.69	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.55	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.43999999999999995	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.55	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.53	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.47	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.47	0.61	0.47	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.47	0.61	0.47	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.47	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.47	0.61	0.61	0.47	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.0	0.48	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.64	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	1.0	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.56	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.43999999999999995	0.56	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.55	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.53	0.55	0.56	0.62	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001
Temporal Patterns in Air Pollution and Hospital Admissions	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.49	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.56	0.54	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.69	0.65	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.69	0.64	0.63	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.64	0.64	0.54	0.6	0.56	0.65	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.54	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.77	0.7	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.56	0.52	0.54	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.52	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.61	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.51	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.47	0.47	0.5900000000000001	0.47	0.42000000000000004	0.49	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.44999999999999996	0.54	0.08999999999999997	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.47	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.36	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.69	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.54	0.69	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001
Fetal alcohol spectrum disorders: an overview with emphasis on changes in brain and behavior	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.56	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.53	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.55	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.54	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.65	0.54	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.55	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.54	0.63	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	1.0	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.7	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.0	0.5	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.69	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6
Teratogenic effects of alcohol: a decade of brain imaging	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.53	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.48	0.62	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.72	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.72	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.74	0.63	0.74	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.72	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.51	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.69	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.64	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.72	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.53	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.51	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.45999999999999996	0.51	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	1.0	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.53	0.53	0.51	0.55	0.53	0.0	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.69	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.73	0.62	0.73	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001
High crop prices and conservation - Raising the Stakes	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.52	0.6	0.52	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.54	0.61	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.71	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.52	0.49	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.54	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.54	0.49	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.65	0.65	0.54	0.65	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.54	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.52	0.62	0.52	0.71	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.69	0.54	0.56	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.55	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.6	0.62	0.54	0.64	0.56	0.62	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.65	0.5	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.63	1.0	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.54	0.55	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.54	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.06000000000000005	0.54	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.54	0.56	0.63	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.49
Effects of ethanol (E85) versus gasoline vehicles on cancer and mortality in the United States	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.53	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.49	0.63	0.49	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.53	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.4	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.39	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.49	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.5	0.53	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.53	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.45999999999999996	0.62	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.54	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.53	0.5	0.6	0.54	0.52	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.54	0.63	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.73	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.52	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.45999999999999996	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.53	0.62	0.51	0.53	0.53	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.4	0.54	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001
Green house gases emissions in the production and use of ethanol from sugarcane in Brazil	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.48	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.53	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.48	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.48	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.48	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.48	0.56	0.56	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.48	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.48	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.51	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.65	0.62	0.4	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.65	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.56	0.69	0.53	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.54	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.56	0.5	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.51	0.51	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.54	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.51	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.51	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.55	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	1.0	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.61	0.71	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.64	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.65	0.5	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.48	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.52
Perspectives on fuel ethanol consumption and trade	0.48	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.48	0.52	0.6	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.54	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.52	0.56	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.5	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.62	0.5	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.52	0.54	0.6	0.62	0.5	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.48	0.6	0.48	0.54	0.61	0.45999999999999996	0.52	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.48	0.56	0.54	0.56	0.5	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.52	0.69	0.56	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.52	0.4	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.54	0.0	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.56	0.52	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.52	0.5	0.52	0.52	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.52	0.52	0.63	0.69	0.64	0.56	0.45999999999999996	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.45999999999999996	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.56	0.52	0.64	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.5	0.54	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.54	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.52	0.6	0.5	0.56	0.54	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.62	0.54	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5	0.5	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.54	0.56	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.52	0.62	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.62	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.54	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.54	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.62	1.0	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.55	0.55	0.54	0.54	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.54	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.54	0.54	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.52	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.56	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.47	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.54	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.54
Effects on Biodiversity of Forest Fuel Extraction, Governed by Processes Working on a Large Scale	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.0	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.71	0.65	0.69	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.55	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.56	0.61	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.74	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.56	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.72	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5	0.63	0.62	0.52	0.7	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.56	0.53	0.61	0.62	0.55	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.49	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.51	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001
Wood fuel supply as a function of forest owner preferences and management styles	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.62	0.63	0.0	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.71	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.61	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.71	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.64	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.71	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.72	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.72	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.55	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	1.0	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.56	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.54	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.72	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001
Toxic components of motor vehicle emissions for the spruce Picea abies	0.62	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.56	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.55	0.62	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.72	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.7	0.72	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.73	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.53	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.5	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.5	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.62	0.52	0.69	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.69	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.52	0.6	0.62	0.69	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.49	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.63	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.56	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.53	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.53	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.56
Alcohol and the developing brain: neuroanatomical studies	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.55	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.53	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.53	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.54	0.53	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.72	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.53	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.43999999999999995	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.53	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.48	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.72	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	1.0	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.48	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.48	0.64	0.62	0.5	0.55	0.6	0.5	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.48	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.53	0.6	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.53	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.71	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62
Emissions and Engine Performance from Blends of Soya and Canola Methyl Ester with ARB #2 Diesel in a DDC 6V92TA MUI Engine	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.71	0.69	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.65	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.56	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.52	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.74	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.72	0.62	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.73	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.73	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.74	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.52	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.72	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.53	0.53	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.54	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.73	0.61	0.73	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.69	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.48	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.71	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.7	0.65	0.64	0.63
Cerebrovascular effects of carbon monoxide	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.72	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.65	0.7	0.72	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.55	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.55	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.55	0.65	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.72	0.7	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.77	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.72	0.72	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.77	0.62	0.5	0.55	0.65	0.62	0.5	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.53	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.39	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.48	0.48	0.0	0.27	0.48	0.48	0.48	0.48	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.72	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.62	0.53	0.6	0.49	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	1.0	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.53	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.53	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.53	0.55	0.6	0.7	0.62	0.55	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.75	0.6	0.75	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.74	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.55
Photochemical aerosol formation from aromatic hydrocarbons in the presence of Nox	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.69	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.7	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.65	0.55	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.49	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.72	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.56	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.55	0.63	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.55	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.44999999999999996	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.69	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.72	0.63	0.54	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.54	0.54	0.55	0.63	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.45999999999999996	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.49	0.63	0.54	0.55	0.55	0.54	0.54	0.020000000000000018	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.49	0.55	0.61	0.33999999999999997	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.53	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.56	0.63	0.72	0.61	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.61	1.0	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.62	0.55	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.55	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.71	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.44999999999999996	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.52	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.55
Mortality among a cohort of garment workers exposed to formaldehyde: an update	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.56	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.61	0.56	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.53	0.71	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.54	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.48	0.54	0.53	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.45999999999999996	1.0	0.47	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.56	0.63	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.49	0.43999999999999995	0.39	0.0	0.32999999999999996	0.52	0.5	0.56	0.55	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.53	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.56
Land clearing and the biofuel carbon debt	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.47	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.49	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.54	0.64	0.52	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.49	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.52	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.52	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.52	0.49	0.52	0.49	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.54	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.61	0.52	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.42000000000000004	0.52	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.49	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.52	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.49	0.47	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.49	0.54	0.52	0.64	0.54	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.52	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.51	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.65	0.64	1.0	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.64	0.52	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.7	0.54	0.7	0.69	0.54	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.49	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61
Hematotoxicity and carcinogenicity of benzene	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.72	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.49	0.7	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.72	0.56	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.72	0.63	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.72	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.72	0.56	0.63	0.73	0.65	0.56	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.69	0.69	0.72	0.69	0.72	0.65	0.69	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.72	0.69	0.72	0.69	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.54	0.71	0.69	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.74	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.7	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.72	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.49	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.54	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.65	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.77	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.49	0.65	0.52	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.54	0.54	0.56	0.65	0.52	0.54	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.65	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.56	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.74	0.63	0.47	0.54	0.47	0.0	0.53	0.44999999999999996	1.0	0.63	0.49	0.49	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.71	0.69	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.54	0.65	0.49	0.5800000000000001	0.49	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.4	0.49	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.56	0.56	0.72	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6
Prenatal alcohol exposure and fetal programming: effects on neuroendocrine and immune function	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.53	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.54	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.54	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.69	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.72	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.52	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.53	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.75	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	1.0	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.51	0.0	0.54	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.38	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.73	0.61	0.73	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.53	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001
A physiological and morphological study on the injury caused by exposure to the air pollutant, peroxyacetyl nitrate (PAN), based on the quantitative assessment of the injury	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.56	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.56	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.52	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.52	0.62	0.52	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.5	0.62	0.65	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.48	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.7	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.49	0.56	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.5	0.52	0.53	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.51	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.55	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.53	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.56	0.55	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.55	0.33999999999999997	0.63	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.0	0.5	0.6	0.44999999999999996	0.6	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.42000000000000004	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.64
Temperature dependence of secondary organic aerosol formation by photo-oxidation of hydrocarbons	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.53	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.54	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.69	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.7	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.69	0.71	0.61	0.62	0.69	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.69	0.62	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.55	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.72	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.21999999999999997	0.64	0.5	0.62	0.47	0.5900000000000001	0.43000000000000005	0.63	0.38	0.45999999999999996	0.5800000000000001	0.36	0.36	0.5	0.33999999999999997	0.5800000000000001	0.43000000000000005	0.25	0.5900000000000001	0.19999999999999996	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	1.0	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.52	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.45999999999999996	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.54	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.54	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.7	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61
Benzene toxicity	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.75	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.43999999999999995	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.75	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.75	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.5	0.69	0.75	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.75	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.75	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.75	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.8	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.69	0.5	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.8200000000000001	0.63	0.8200000000000001	0.25	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.8200000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.8200000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.75	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.63	0.69	0.5	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.43999999999999995	0.63	0.38	0.63	0.43999999999999995	0.0	0.43999999999999995	1.0	0.38	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.31999999999999995	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.38	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.5	0.69	0.5	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.38	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.43999999999999995	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.63	0.69	0.75	0.63	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.75	0.5700000000000001	0.75	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.43999999999999995	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63
Reconciling sustainability and discounting in Cost-Benefit Analysis: A methodological proposal	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.53	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.55	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.69	0.69	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.74	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.7	0.62	0.72	0.63	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.71	0.65	0.64	0.73	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.69	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.53	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.75	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.69	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.69	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.69	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.55	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.7	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.69	0.69	0.6	0.49	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6
Computer modeling study of ethanol and aldheyde reactivities in Rio de Janeiro urban air	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.52	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.52	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.48	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.4	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.61	0.56	0.74	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.55	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.56	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.020000000000000018	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.54	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.55	0.54	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.53	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.73	0.63	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	1.0	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.52	0.56	0.6	0.55	0.62	0.56	0.55	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.61	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.73	0.62	0.73	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.48	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.55	0.48	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.55
Switchgrass (Panicum vigratum, L.) delivery to a biorefinery using integrated biomass supply analysis and logistics (IBSAL) model	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.51	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.010000000000000009	0.43999999999999995	0.010000000000000009	0.43999999999999995	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.55	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.73	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.54	0.7	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.64	0.56	0.73	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.72	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.71	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.72	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.7	0.74	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.65	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.65
Hydroxydicarboxylic acids: Markers for secondary organic aerosol from the photooxidation of alpha-pinene	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.73	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.71	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.69	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.72	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.6	0.61	0.69	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.69	0.72	0.63	0.61	0.72	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.49	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.30000000000000004	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.51	0.61	0.47	0.6599999999999999	0.050000000000000044	0.43999999999999995	0.53	0.38	0.38	0.54	0.29000000000000004	0.5900000000000001	0.47	0.22999999999999998	0.48	0.4	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.53	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.53	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.53	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.54	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.53	0.62	0.61	0.53	0.62	0.53	0.53	0.53	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.53	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.53	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.55	0.6	0.6	1.0	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.49	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.45999999999999996	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.47	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.7	0.61	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6
Old-growth forests as global carbon sinks	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.71	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.49	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.54	0.69	0.73	0.73	0.64	0.69	0.61	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.74	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.7	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.52	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.0	0.61	0.64	0.0	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.74	0.69	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.77	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.76	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.71	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.64	1.0	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.75	0.61	0.75	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.73	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.71	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61
Asthma attack periodicity: a study of hospital emergency visits in Vancouver	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.71	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.72	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.74	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.72	0.6	0.69	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.69	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.5	0.69	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.54	0.56	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	1.0	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.73	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.72	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62
Corn-based Ethanol Production Compromises Goal of Reducing Nitrogen Export by the Mississippi River	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.52	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.7	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.7	0.61	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.5	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.51	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.33999999999999997	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.64	0.63	0.52	0.7	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.69	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.61	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.74	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.72	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5	0.0	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001
On avoiding dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.0	0.7	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.7	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.0	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.7	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.53	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.55	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.65	0.65	1.0	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.64	0.65	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.71	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.7	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001
Soil Compaction and Growth of Woody Plants	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.45999999999999996	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.55	0.6	0.53	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.0	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.55	0.69	0.55	0.62	0.65	0.53	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.53	0.72	0.55	0.65	0.53	0.53	0.72	0.53	0.53	0.55	0.53	0.55	0.53	0.6	0.53	0.6	0.53	0.72	0.55	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.53	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.53	0.72	0.55	0.53	0.73	0.65	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.65	0.56	0.62	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.69	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.75	0.5	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.77	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.72	0.7	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.55	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.72	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.7	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.53	0.6	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.53	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.53	0.53	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.53	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.48	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.53	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.5	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.7	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.72	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.53	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.7	0.5	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.72	0.55	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.73	0.5800000000000001	0.73	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.53	0.6	0.62	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.43000000000000005	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.55
Time Course of ozone-induced neutrophilia in normal humans	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.53	0.64	0.63	0.7	0.65	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.73	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.63	0.61	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.71	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.54	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.71	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.69	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.7	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.75	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.7	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.75	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.56	0.63	0.54	0.5	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.54	0.54	0.5	0.54	0.5	0.54	0.54	0.49	0.020000000000000018	0.61	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.5	0.54	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.56	0.54	0.5	0.54	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.54	0.5	0.54	0.54	0.5	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.61	0.64	0.54	0.54	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.54	0.54	0.56	0.64	0.54	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.71	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	1.0	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.56	0.63	0.55	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61
COPD prevalence in nonsmokers in high and low photochemical air pollution areas	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.52	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.52	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.74	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.64	0.6	0.71	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.77	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.55	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.54	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.52	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.52	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.52	0.49	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.53	0.61	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.0	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.53	0.53	0.65	0.52	0.53	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.53	0.6	0.64	0.53	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.69	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.69	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.69	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.56	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001
Source apportionment of secondary organic aerosol during a severe photochemical smog episode	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.49	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.7	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.54	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.54	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.54	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.7	0.61	0.64	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.47	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.52	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.5	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.30000000000000004	0.64	0.44999999999999996	0.62	0.49	0.56	0.43999999999999995	0.5800000000000001	0.42000000000000004	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.42000000000000004	0.42000000000000004	0.5700000000000001	0.36	0.5900000000000001	0.43999999999999995	0.36	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.55	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.61	0.55	0.54	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.74	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	1.0	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.52	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.45999999999999996	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.48	0.48	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.51	0.53	0.53	0.62	0.56	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.64	0.56	0.55	0.65	0.47	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001
Valuing time and reliability: assessing the evidence from road pricing demonstrations	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.55	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.55	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.47	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.47	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.47	0.63	0.47	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.47	0.6	0.47	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.47	0.64	0.47	0.64	0.47	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.47	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.47	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5	0.64	0.6	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.54	0.65	0.63	0.71	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.72	0.6	0.55	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.73	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.52	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.6	1.0	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.51	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001
Atmospheric Degradation of Volatile Organic Compounds	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.51	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.48	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.63	0.61	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.7	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.7	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.55	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.0	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.7	0.55	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.43999999999999995	0.51	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.42000000000000004	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.48	0.51	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.51	0.48	0.48	0.55	0.6	0.61	0.53	0.63	0.51	0.53	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.61	0.55	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.55	0.61	0.53	0.64	0.65	0.65	1.0	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.7	0.53	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.51	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.51	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.61	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.51	0.63	0.61	0.4	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.44999999999999996	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001
Effects of ambient concentrations of peroxyacetyl nitrate on navel orange trees	0.54	0.56	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.56	0.6	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.49	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.48	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.51	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.51	0.51	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.54	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.51	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.69	0.56	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.5	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.77	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.55	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.44999999999999996	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.53	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.7	0.6	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.43999999999999995	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.52	0.47	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.51	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.51	0.55	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.51	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.51	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.47	0.61	0.62	0.56	0.55	0.63	0.44999999999999996	0.63	0.47	0.63	0.47	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.51	0.42000000000000004	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.47	0.63	0.47	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.51	0.4	0.63	0.47	0.45999999999999996	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.47	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.47	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.51	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.51	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.56	0.55	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.7	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.54	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.45999999999999996	0.42000000000000004	0.47	0.0	0.55	0.51	0.51	0.51	0.61	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.56	0.65	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.54	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.55
Inhibitory effect of peroxyacetyl nitrate on cyclic photophosphorylation by chloroplasts from black valentine bean leaves	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.53	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.63	0.69	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.52	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.62	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.56	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.5	0.62	0.5	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.71	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.72	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.43999999999999995	0.63	0.64	0.56	0.4	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.5	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.69	0.72	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.63	1.0	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.71	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.0	0.48	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.52	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.71	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.61
Evaluated Kinetic and Photochemical Data for Atmospheric Chemistry-IUPAC Subcommitte on Gas Kinetic Data Evaluation for Atmospheric Chemistry	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.56	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.53	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.71	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.49	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.5	0.62	0.65	0.74	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.55	0.71	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.53	0.64	0.61	0.52	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.71	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.45999999999999996	0.54	0.030000000000000027	0.030000000000000027	0.030000000000000027	0.030000000000000027	0.030000000000000027	0.44999999999999996	0.44999999999999996	0.030000000000000027	0.45999999999999996	0.43000000000000005	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.030000000000000027	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.52	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.53	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.5	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.54	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.71	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.53	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.62
On Discounting Regulatory Benefits: Risk, Money, and Intergenerational Equity	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.52	0.62	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.71	0.65	0.61	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.65	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.69	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.69	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.7	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.69	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.0	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.72	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.71	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.55	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.52	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6
A comparison of proximity and land use regression traffic exposure models and wheezing in infants	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.73	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.73	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.64	0.7	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.71	0.61	0.55	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.71	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.54	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.0	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.65	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.72	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.47	1.0	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.61	0.74	0.63	0.62	0.54	0.6	0.56	0.55	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.48	0.48	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.69	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.54	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.56	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.56	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.53	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001
Synergistic action of the benzene metabolite hydroquinone on myelopoietic stimulating activity of granulocyte/macrophage colony-stimulating factor in vitro	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.55	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.56	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.53	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.55	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.7	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.54	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.53	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.55	0.73	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.69	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.52	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.56	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.52	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.0	0.62	0.55	0.53	0.61	1.0	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.56	0.64	0.69	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.56	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.55	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.53	0.65	0.54	0.64	0.62	0.55	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.42000000000000004	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.64
Source Contributions to the Mutagenicity of Urban Particulate Air Pollution	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.5	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.43999999999999995	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.62	0.71	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.7	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.56	0.69	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.54	0.7	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.49	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.0	0.5	0.48	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.51	0.51	0.5	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.63	0.48	0.51	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.51	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.43999999999999995	0.43999999999999995	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.52	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.51	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.55	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.52	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.71	0.62	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.5	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.51	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.53	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.56	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52
Immediate sensory nerve-mediated respiratory responses to irritants in healthy and allergic airway-diseased mice	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.71	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.52	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.53	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.55	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.53	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.52	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.55	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.53	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	1.0	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.55	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.0	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.48	0.48	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.61	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.48	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.5700000000000001
A concept for simultaneous wasteland reclamation, fuel production, and socio-economic development in degraded areas in India: need, potential and perspectives of Jatropha plantations	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.56	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.49	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.5	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.0	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.0	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.0	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.0	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.0	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.0	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.53	0.51	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.71	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.55	0.7	0.5	0.61	0.5	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.61	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.48	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.54	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.52	0.62	0.54	0.63	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.53	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.54	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	1.0	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.54	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.56	0.55	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.53	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63
Miscanthus: European experience with a novel energy crop	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.0	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.75	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.69	0.7	0.69	0.7	0.69	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.69	0.7	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.52	0.56	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.52	0.52	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.47	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.56	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.72	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.72	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.56	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001
Review of the Governing Equations, Computational Algorithms, and Other Components of the Models-3 Community Multiscale Air Quality (CMAQ) Modeling System	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.53	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.54	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.54	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.64	0.63	0.72	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.64	0.69	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.49	0.74	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.49	0.7	0.65	0.61	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.7	0.6	0.0	0.6	0.55	0.45999999999999996	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.0	0.54	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.47	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.51	0.54	0.63	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.5	0.5	0.54	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.5	0.61	0.5	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5	0.54	0.61	0.5	0.61	0.5	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.61	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.61	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.69	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.55	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.44999999999999996	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.6	0.61	0.7	0.65	0.61	0.63
A Comparison of Benzene and Toluene Plume Lengths for Sites Contaminated with Regular vs. Ethanol-amended Gasoline	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.51	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.4	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.55	0.7	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.69	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.69	0.62	0.55	0.56	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.72	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.39	0.61	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.39	0.6	0.39	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.6	0.39	0.6	0.39	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.39	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.6	0.39	0.6	0.6	0.39	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.45999999999999996	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.48	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.54	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.53	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.0	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001
Corn Stover Availability and Collection Efficiency Using Typical Hay Equipment	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.52	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.63	0.7	0.71	0.7	0.71	0.61	0.7	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.63	0.71	0.7	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.7	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.71	0.7	0.63	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.74	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.77	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.63	0.53	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.7	0.7	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.56	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.74	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.74	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.7	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.54	0.63	0.63	0.63
Epicuticular wax of Norway spruce needles as indicator of traffic deposition	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.69	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.69	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.69	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.64	0.54	0.69	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.72	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.75	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.07999999999999996	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.53	0.61	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.61
Diesel Engine Exhaust Emissions Evaluation of Biodiesel Blends Using a Cummins L10E Engine	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.55	0.56	0.55	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.54	0.7	0.63	0.54	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.43999999999999995	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.7	0.63	0.61	0.43999999999999995	0.54	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.61	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.61	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.7	0.63	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.56	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.75	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.72	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.7	0.56	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.7	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.71	0.62	0.52	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.72	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.7	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.69	0.75	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.73	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.74	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.69	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001
Crop and Soil Productivity Response to Corn Residue Removal A Literature Review	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.55	0.69	0.64	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.64	0.45999999999999996	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.45999999999999996	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.53	0.69	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.71	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.7	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.74	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.64	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.55	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.53	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.55	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.69	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.55
Simulating ozone effects on forest productivity: Interactions among leaf-, canopy-, and stand-level processes	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.55	0.63	0.61	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.54	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.65	0.56	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.56	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.09999999999999998	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	1.0	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.62	0.54	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.55	0.55	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.49	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.54	0.64	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001
Particulate matter exposure in cars associated with cardiovascular effects in health young men	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.48	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.69	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.72	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.48	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.56	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.050000000000000044	0.5	0.62	0.49	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.51	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.4	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.53	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	1.0	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.7	0.56	0.7	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.53	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001
Effects of steady-state and variable ozone concentration profiles on pulmonary function	0.53	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.51	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.52	0.63	0.53	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.53	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.53	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.53	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.53	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.53	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.52	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.44999999999999996	0.69	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.62	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.53	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.55	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.53	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.55	0.52	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.43000000000000005	0.5	0.62	0.54	0.0	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.54	0.56	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.74	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.55	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.53	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.47	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.53	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.48	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001
Atmospheric Deposition of Nitrogen: Implications for Nutrient Over-Enrichment of Coastal Waters	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.56	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.52	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5	0.64	0.63	0.73	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.54	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.72	0.63	0.55	0.7	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.69	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.55	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.41000000000000003	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.7	0.56	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.55	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.56	0.53	0.61	0.62	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.55	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.54	0.62	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.54	0.65	0.54	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5	0.65	0.54	0.65	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.54	0.64	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.45999999999999996	0.61	0.43999999999999995	0.55	0.65	0.54	0.6	0.65	0.54	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.51	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.65	0.73	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.65	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.73	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.45999999999999996	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.0	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.51	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.56
Mechanisms of carbon monoxide toxicity	0.61	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.53	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.69	0.64	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.74	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.72	0.72	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.72	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.69	0.61	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.74	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.72	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.72	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.72	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.79	0.61	0.44999999999999996	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.53	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.56	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.64	0.53	0.61	0.56	0.56	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.48	0.48	0.36	0.35	0.48	0.48	0.48	0.48	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	1.0	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.48	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.76	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001
Extended follow-up of a cohort of British chemical workers exposed to formaldehyde	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.72	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.69	0.69	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.72	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.52	0.63	0.65	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.5	0.6	0.63	0.72	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.69	0.72	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.62	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.72	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.53	0.49	0.32999999999999996	0.0	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61
Ambient air pollution and atherosclerosis in Los Angeles	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.52	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.52	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.56	0.56	0.65	0.56	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.72	0.54	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.72	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.72	0.54	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.54	0.52	0.52	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.72	0.54	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.54	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.5	0.61	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.73	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.52	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.52	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.54	0.56	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.4	0.5800000000000001	0.44999999999999996	0.33999999999999997	0.0	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.49	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.49	0.62	0.54	0.49	0.4	0.54	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.54	0.49	0.62	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.49	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.51	0.65	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.56	0.5	0.43000000000000005	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.47	0.44999999999999996	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.64	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.61	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.56	0.65	0.53	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.69	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.56	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56
Spatial Analysis of Air Pollution and Mortality in Los Angeles	0.52	0.49	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.48	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5	0.54	0.54	0.62	0.65	0.55	0.54	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.53	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.71	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.72	0.65	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.7	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.69	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.75	0.52	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.49	0.62	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.55	0.52	0.73	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.49	0.49	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.54	0.54	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.45999999999999996	0.49	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.55	0.62	0.49	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.5	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.4	0.5700000000000001	0.41000000000000003	0.0	0.39	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.62	0.5	0.52	0.45999999999999996	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.47	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.45999999999999996	0.36	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.55	0.62	0.65	0.55	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.61	0.54	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.49	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.55	0.6	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.52	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.52
Estimating cost for integrated harvesting and related forest management activities	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.53	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.0	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.61	0.62	0.53	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.48	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.53	0.6	0.48	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.48	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.48	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.48	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.48	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.61	0.6	0.55	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.5	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.74	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.65	0.55	0.69	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.65	0.72	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.43999999999999995	0.5900000000000001	0.43999999999999995	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.53	0.53	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.52	0.53	0.53	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.54	0.64	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.48	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.73	0.5800000000000001	0.73	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.54	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001
Estimation of the Monthly Average Ratios of Organic Mass to Organic Carbon for Fine Particulate Matter at an Urban Site	0.61	0.56	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.51	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.54	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.48	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.53	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5	0.63	0.64	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.6	0.62	0.69	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.49	0.69	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.72	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.72	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.54	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.54	0.5	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.53	0.0	0.43999999999999995	0.61	0.61	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.43999999999999995	0.51	0.61	0.55	0.45999999999999996	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.53	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.54	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.53	0.52	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.51	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.36	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.53
Is benzene a precursor for secondary organic aerosol?	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.71	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.71	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.71	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.55	0.55	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.61	0.63	0.7	0.64	0.63	0.69	0.73	0.64	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.53	0.61	0.72	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.43999999999999995	0.55	0.33999999999999997	0.5900000000000001	0.29000000000000004	0.38	0.55	0.4	0.4	0.5700000000000001	0.0	0.65	0.33999999999999997	0.48	0.38	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.51	0.61	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.74	0.5700000000000001	0.51	0.55	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	1.0	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.49	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.41000000000000003	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.55	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.7	0.65	0.75	0.5900000000000001	0.75	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.71	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001
A process model to estimate biodiesel production costs	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.56	0.52	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.54	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.5	0.54	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.63	0.54	0.56	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.5	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.5	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.41000000000000003	0.6	0.65	0.5	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.62	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.65	0.54	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.56	0.62	0.65	0.5	0.56	0.71	0.61	0.56	0.69	0.54	0.56	0.54	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.5	0.54	0.65	0.54	0.65	0.62	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.65	0.69	0.54	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.56	0.65	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.49	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.49	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.52	0.62	0.54	0.54	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.55	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.7	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.75	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.54	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5	0.56	0.52	0.5	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6	1.0	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.52	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.54	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.63	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.54	0.63	0.54	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.75	0.62	0.75	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.73	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.74	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.65	0.54	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.5
Corn Stover to Sustain Soil Organic Carbon Further Constrains Biomass Supply	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.53	0.61	0.0	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.71	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.64	0.56	0.72	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.77	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.69	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.65	0.52	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.53	0.5	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.72	0.62	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.63	0.65	1.0	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.53	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.54	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.64	0.54	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.0	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.53	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.61	0.6
Impact of ozone on the growth and yield of trees: A review	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.63	0.54	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.52	0.64	0.61	0.54	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.49	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.54	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.56	0.73	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.54	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.56	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.53	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.69	0.56	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.69	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.75	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.53	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.52	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.56	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.49	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.56	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.43000000000000005	0.65	0.0	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.56	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.73	0.63	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.75	0.54	0.75	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.48	0.62	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5
Nitrogen deposition in California forests: A Review	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.55	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.51	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.55	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.65	0.53	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.72	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.73	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.6	0.73	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.69	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.74	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.71	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.69	0.72	0.61	0.55	0.73	0.5	0.61	0.5	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.51	0.61	0.65	0.55	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.61	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.55	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.48	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.51	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.53	0.65	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.38	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.53	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.51	0.65	0.65	0.51	0.55	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.63	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.65	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.0	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.53	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.73	0.55	0.73	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.69	0.53	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.55	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5	0.55	0.5	0.53	0.62	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001
Regional Estimation of Base Flow and Groundwater Recharge in the Upper Mississippi Basin	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.53	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.53	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.7	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.69	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.69	0.65	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.73	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.72	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.52	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.7	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.44999999999999996	0.71	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.71	0.62	0.61	0.56	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.72	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.56	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.73	0.56	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.53	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.7	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.55	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.52	0.61	0.55	0.64	0.0	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.48	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.55
Ozone concentration and pulmonary response relationships for 6.6 hour exposures with five hours of moderate exercise to 0.08, 0.10, and 0.12 ppm	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.56	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.69	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.53	0.53	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.55	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.7	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.71	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.48	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.72	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.69	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.55	0.64	0.6	0.49	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.51	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.54	0.6	0.62	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.45999999999999996	0.61	0.55	0.5	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.49	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.010000000000000009	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.62	0.54	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.52	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	1.0	0.61	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.53	0.55	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.47	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.69	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.71	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.7	0.61	0.7	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.69	0.64	0.61	0.63
Contributions of toluene and alpha-pinene to SOA formed in an irradiated toluene/alpha-pinene/NOx/air mixture: Comparison of results using C-14 content and SOA organic tracer methods	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.69	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.72	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.56	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.52	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.52	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.14	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.14	0.63	0.54	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.54	0.63	0.54	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.55	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.56	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.64
Identification and quantification of aerosol polar oxygenated compounds bearing carboxylic or hydroxyl groups	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.52	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.53	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.7	0.69	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.72	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.77	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.55	0.69	0.5	0.62	0.5	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.52	0.7	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.52	0.64	0.55	0.56	0.5	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.0	0.56	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.51	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.61	1.0	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.52	0.54	0.65	0.61	0.72	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.62
Estimates of the contributions of biogenic and anthropogenic hydrocarbons to sceondary organic aerosol at the southeastern US locations	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.55	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.69	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.53	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.7	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.45999999999999996	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.36	0.64	0.55	0.62	0.49	0.44999999999999996	0.040000000000000036	0.5800000000000001	0.44999999999999996	0.51	0.55	0.52	0.53	0.5	0.36	0.5700000000000001	0.040000000000000036	0.36	0.44999999999999996	0.43999999999999995	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.56	0.5	0.55	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.5	0.56	0.5	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.56	0.5	0.56	0.5	0.6	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5	0.56	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.53	0.55	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5	0.56	0.56	0.5	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.56	0.56	0.54	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.45999999999999996	0.6	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.55	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.52	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.51	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.52	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.61	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.56	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.30000000000000004	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56
Formation of 2-methyl tetrols and 2-methylglyceric acid in secondary organic aerosol from laboratory irradiated isoprene/NOX/SO2/air mixtures and their detection in ambient PM2.5 samples collected in the Eastern United States	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.51	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.52	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.64	0.7	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.5	0.5	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.52	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.72	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.39	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.7	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.54	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.55	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.28	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.54	0.51	0.5700000000000001	0.43000000000000005	0.0	0.5800000000000001	0.36	0.35	0.55	0.38	0.53	0.51	0.31999999999999995	0.49	0.49	0.55	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.56	0.53	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.6	0.53	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.71	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.53	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.54	0.63	0.62	0.4	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.54	0.48	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.65
Primary and secondary contributions to ambient PM in the midwestern United States	0.6	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.54	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.42000000000000004	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.52	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.63	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.63	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.6	0.69	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.62	0.69	0.64	0.69	0.64	0.62	0.72	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.49	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.75	0.63	0.61	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.71	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.43000000000000005	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.56	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.51	0.45999999999999996	0.0	0.6	0.6	0.52	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.6	0.56	0.39	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.56	0.65	0.0	0.5	0.51	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.54	0.6	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.5	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5	0.62	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.54	0.54	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.54	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.7	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.53	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.56	0.56	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.54	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.44999999999999996	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.54
Survey of volatile organic compounds associated with automotive emissions in the urban airshed Sao Paulo, Brazil	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.56	0.56	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.7	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.72	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.55	0.7	0.69	0.56	0.69	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.53	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.71	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.49	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.55	0.54	0.6	0.48	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.54	0.51	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.51	0.54	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.53	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.69	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.53	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001
Determination of secondary organic aerosol products from the photooxidation of toluene and their implications in ambient PM2.5	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.63	0.54	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.52	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.54	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.55	0.69	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.55	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.49	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.69	0.61	0.49	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.56	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.33999999999999997	0.64	0.5	0.56	0.44999999999999996	0.55	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.36	0.35	0.5700000000000001	0.0	0.010000000000000009	0.54	0.4	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.30000000000000004	0.61	0.37	0.6	0.54	0.63	0.54	0.56	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.54	0.55	0.54	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.53	0.61	0.54	0.55	0.54	0.55	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.56	0.54	0.56	0.54	0.55	0.54	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.54	0.52	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.54	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.54	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.54	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.61	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.55	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.45999999999999996	0.64	0.54	0.62	0.54	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.5	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.51	0.56	0.55	0.5	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.51	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.55	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001
Behavioral effects of carbon monoxide: meta analyses and extrapolations	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.6	0.64	0.54	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.53	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.6	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.6	0.69	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.56	0.64	0.53	0.6	0.52	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.55	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.74	0.56	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.6	0.55	0.65	0.51	0.51	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.72	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.7	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.7	0.61	0.43999999999999995	0.55	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.51	0.53	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.55	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.54	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.47	0.47	0.28	0.0	0.47	0.47	0.47	0.47	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.62	1.0	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.56	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.52	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.49	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001
Time-dependent changes of markers associated with inflammation in the lungs of humans exposed to ambient levels of ozone	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.54	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.48	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.69	0.61	0.63	0.52	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.7	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.69	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.7	0.69	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.72	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.72	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.52	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.53	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.0	0.4	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.52	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.53	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.53	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.55	0.5	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.65	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.51	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.73	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.47	1.0	0.55	0.53	0.49	0.56	0.62	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.53	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.55	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.53	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.53	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6
Exposure of humans to ambient levels of ozone for 6.6 hours causes cellular and biochemical changes in the lung	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.69	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.54	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.52	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.5	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.71	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.73	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.73	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.48	0.72	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.56	0.51	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.010000000000000009	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.55	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.72	0.6	0.55	0.61	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.69	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.7	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.55	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.53	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61
Ozone-induced inflammation in the lower airways of human subjects	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.71	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.73	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.48	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.71	0.56	0.56	0.56	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.71	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.5	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.71	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.55	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.49	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.7	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.7	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.56	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.39	0.0	0.5	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.48	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.54	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.56	0.65	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	1.0	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.6	0.55	0.69	0.54	0.56	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.56	0.53	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.69	0.64	0.63	0.69	0.62	0.55	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.53	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6
Comparison of pulmonary responses of asthmatic and nonasthmatic subjects performing light exercise while exposed to a low level of ozone 	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.55	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.53	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.71	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.71	0.5	0.63	0.5	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.69	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.71	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.53	0.61	0.71	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.53	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.52	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.54	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.5	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.54	0.62	0.5	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.52	0.64	0.64	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.61	0.54	0.56	0.61	0.54	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.53	0.62	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5	1.0	0.62	0.56	0.44999999999999996	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.53	0.53	0.52	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.65	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.53	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.56	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.62
Kinetics of Wood Saccharification: Hydrolysis of Cellulose and Decomposition of Sugars in dilute Acid at High Temperature	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.55	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.56	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.53	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.7	0.64	0.63	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.69	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.64	0.62	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.7	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.53	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.52	0.72	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.71	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.72	0.65	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.53	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.49	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.71	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.54	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.53	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.62
Differences in Phosphorus and Nitrogen Delivery to the Gulf of Mexico from the Mississippi River Basin	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.71	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.69	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.5	0.6	0.64	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.7	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.7	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.7	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.72	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.72	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.69	0.56	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.56	0.63	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.61	0.69	0.77	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.73	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.53	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.69	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.7	0.62	0.7	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.0	0.5	0.63	0.55	0.65	0.53	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.53	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6
The sustainability of Brazilian ethanol-An assessment of the possibilities of certified production	0.56	0.55	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.53	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.54	0.47	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.71	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.54	0.54	0.56	0.7	0.63	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.52	0.63	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.55	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.69	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.65	0.6	0.56	0.7	0.65	0.62	0.5	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.7	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.69	0.7	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.56	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.51	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.62	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.52	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.43999999999999995	0.6	0.65	0.64	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.69	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.53	0.55	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.7	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.65	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.65	0.55	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.48	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.54
Absorption of air pollution by plants, and consequences for growth	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.52	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.55	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.55	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.69	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.69	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.7	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.55	0.61	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.69	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.69	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.73	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.78	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.65	0.7	0.6599999999999999	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.49	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.64	0.55	0.55	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.49	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.7	0.61	0.7	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.49	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.55	0.63	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.73	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.7	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.65	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.5800000000000001	0.5	0.52	0.5	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.55	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.52	0.45999999999999996	0.5	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.52	0.61	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.55	0.64	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.0	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.48	0.47	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.52	0.47	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.54	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	1.0	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.64	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.55	0.55	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.7	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.54	0.55	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.55	0.61	0.54	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.7	0.5800000000000001	0.7	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.54	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.61	0.54	0.69	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001
Analysis of Traffic Patterns and Yield Monitor Data for Field Efficiency Determination	0.55	0.54	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.55	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.56	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.53	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.55	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.56	0.7	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.54	0.63	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.76	0.55	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.7	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.71	0.69	0.61	0.69	0.61	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.69	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.69	0.6	0.6	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.69	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.55	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.56	0.61	0.63	0.56	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6	0.55	0.63	0.62	0.56	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.54	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.54	0.54	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.53	0.61	0.6	0.6	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.51	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.65	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.55	0.6	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.7	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.7	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.6	0.55	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.56	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.71	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.69	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.73	0.5700000000000001	0.73	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.55	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.6	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.52	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.6
Class 8 Truck Emission Testing: Effects of Test Cycles and Data on Biodiesel Operation	0.56	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.56	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.54	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.55	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.56	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.56	0.61	0.56	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.47	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.47	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.5	0.73	0.61	0.63	0.52	0.54	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.63	0.71	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.62	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.69	0.6	0.61	0.56	0.73	0.53	0.54	0.63	0.63	0.54	0.54	0.62	0.7	0.63	0.69	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.53	0.64	0.61	0.62	0.54	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.61	0.55	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.69	0.5900000000000001	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.56	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.56	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.69	0.7	0.61	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.55	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.56	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.61	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.53	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.56	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.64	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.61	0.62	0.71	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.61	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.62	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.64	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.65	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.53	0.53	0.56	0.62	0.56	0.54	0.6	0.62	0.6	0.7	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6	0.56	0.55	0.55	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.5700000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.69	0.64	0.62	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.73	0.61	0.73	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.62	0.56	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.62	0.7	0.63	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.69	0.61	0.64	0.55
Emissions from Nine Heavy Trucks Fueled by Diesel and Biodiesel Blend without Engine Modification	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.62	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.64	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.6	0.54	0.65	0.56	0.6	0.53	0.54	0.51	0.6	0.6799999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.69	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.6	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.5800000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.54	0.7	0.64	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.43999999999999995	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.54	0.5800000000000001	0.54	0.7	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.43999999999999995	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.64	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.63	0.54	0.7	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.54	0.6599999999999999	0.53	0.7	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.69	0.61	0.61	0.7	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.7	0.69	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.75	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.63	0.6	0.62	0.62	0.7	0.65	0.69	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.6	0.63	0.63	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.61	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.6	0.5900000000000001	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.63	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.64	0.6699999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.65	0.64	0.65	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.65	0.55	0.6699999999999999	0.48	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.55	0.64	0.65	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.64	0.5700000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.72	0.5900000000000001	0.55	0.65	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.63	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.6	0.71	0.69	0.63	0.6699999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.64	0.64	0.72	0.6599999999999999	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.64	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.61	0.65	0.64	0.6	0.6	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.63	0.62	0.6	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.6799999999999999	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.55	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.62	0.63	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.53	0.62	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6	0.63	0.6	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.62	0.61	0.65	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.61	0.63	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.5900000000000001	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.63	0.61	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.64	0.65	0.62	0.61	0.61	0.61	0.62	0.61	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.75	0.63	0.61	0.63	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.6	0.5800000000000001	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.61	0.6799999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.62	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.6699999999999999	0.65	0.6	0.61	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.5900000000000001	0.5800000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.64	0.62	0.5700000000000001	0.65	0.62	0.71	0.6	0.65	0.65	0.6	0.7	0.65	0.65	0.61	0.64	0.61	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.72	0.62	0.61	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.64	0.5900000000000001	0.62	0.62	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.65	0.63	0.63	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.63	0.65	0.63	0.7	0.6699999999999999	0.62	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.6	0.7	0.5700000000000001	0.7	0.6	0.61	0.63	0.6	0.65	0.6799999999999999	0.62	0.64	0.64	0.5800000000000001	0.61	0.5900000000000001	0.69	0.6699999999999999	0.63	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6	0.62	0.6599999999999999	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.63	0.64	0.61	0.61	0.63	0.5900000000000001	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.64	0.6599999999999999	0.62	0.62	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.65	0.62	0.5900000000000001	0.65	0.6	0.64	0.61
