 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MACROECONOMIC EFFECTS OF RISK RETENTION REQUIREMENTS 

 

TIMOTHY F. GEITHNER, CHAIRMAN 
FINANCIAL STABILITY OVERSIGHT COUNCIL 
Completed pursuant to Section 946 of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act

January 2011

 

CONTENTS 

 
 
I.  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ................................................................................................................2 
 
II. THE STATUTORY MANDATE ......................................................................................................5 
 
III. SECURITIZATION AND ITS MACROECONOMIC EFFECTS ..........................................................7 
Development of the Securitization Market ..........................................................................7 
Securitization’s Role in the Financial Crisis ......................................................................10 

 
IV. RISK RETENTION AND THE DODD-FRANK ACT .....................................................................15 
Regulatory Reforms to Securitization ................................................................................15 
Risk Retention and its Macroeconomic Effects .................................................................16 

 
V. ESTABLISHING A FRAMEWORK FOR RISK RETENTION ...........................................................18 
Principles............................................................................................................................18 
Constructing a Robust Risk Retention Framework ...........................................................19 

 
VI. ADJUSTING RISK RETENTION REQUIREMENTS .....................................................................27 
Calibrating Risk Retention Requirements .........................................................................27 
Considerations Regarding Static and Proactive Adjustment of Risk Retention ................28 

 
VII. CONCLUSION ..........................................................................................................................30 
 
APPENDIX .......................................................................................................................................31 
Appendix A: Other Relevant Sections of the Dodd-Frank Act .........................................31 
Appendix B: Other Relevant Regulatory Initiatives ..........................................................32 

 

 

I.  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

Section 9411 of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (the “Dodd-
Frank  Act”  or  the  “Act”)2  imposes  credit  risk  retention  (“risk  retention”)  requirements,  under 
which securitizers, and, in certain circumstances, originators3 of asset-backed securities (“ABS”) 
must retain not less than 5 percent of the credit risk for any asset unless the asset is a Qualified 
Residential  Mortgage  or  the  originator  of  the  asset  meets  underwriting  standards  that  the 
Agencies4 will jointly prescribe.   

Under  Section  946  of  the  Dodd-Frank  Act,  the  Chairman  of  the  Financial  Stability  Oversight 
Council (the “Council”) is required to conduct a study on the macroeconomic effects of the risk 
retention requirements under Subtitle D of Title IX of the Dodd-Frank Act, with emphasis placed 
on potential beneficial effects with respect to stabilizing the real estate market, and issue a report 
to Congress no later than 180 days after the date of enactment of the Dodd-Frank Act.5    

This study makes the following conclusions:  

  Securitization is an important source of credit formation to the economy, but certain 
risks  of  securitization  contributed  to  the  financial  crisis  and  macroeconomic 
instability; 

  Risk  retention,  if  properly  structured,  can  address  some  of  these  inherent  risks  by 
requiring an originator or securitizer to have ongoing exposure to the credit risk of the 
underlying assets; and 

  There  are  macroeconomic  implications  of  securitization  and  risk  retention;  to  the 
extent that risk retention can incent better lending decisions, it may help to mitigate 
some of the pro-cyclical effects securitization may have on the economy.   

This study also offers several principles and recommendations that should inform the design of a 
risk retention framework so as to strengthen the securitization process and facilitate economic 

                                                 

1   Section 941 of the Dodd-Frank Act adds a new section 15G to the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”), which 

is codified at 15 U.S.C. § 78o-11.   

2    Pub. L. No. 111-203, 124 Stat. 1376 (2010).   
3   Section 941 of the Dodd-Frank Act defines (i) a securitizer as “(A) an issuer of an asset-backed security; or (B) a person who organizes and 
initiates an asset-backed securities transaction by selling or transferring assets, either directly or indirectly, including through an affiliate, to the 
issuer,” 15 U.S.C. § 78o-11(a)(3), and (ii) an originator as a person who “(A) through the extension of credit or otherwise, creates a financial 
asset that collateralizes an asset-backed security; and (B) sells that asset directly or indirectly to a securitizer,” 15 U.S.C. § 78o-11(a)(4).  

4   The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (“FDIC”), the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (“OCC”), the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System (the “Board”), and the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”), must jointly prescribe rules on risk retention 
under  Section  941  no  later  than  270  days  following  the  date  of  enactment.    Exchange  Act,  Section  15G(b).    The  statute  also  requires  the 
Federal  Housing  Finance  Agency  (“FHFA”) and  the  Department  of  Housing  and  Urban Development  (“HUD”),  along  with  the  foregoing 
Agencies to jointly prescribe rules on risk retention with respect residential mortgages and defining the Qualified Residential Mortgage.  This 
study refers to the FDIC, the OCC, the Board, the SEC, the FHFA, and HUD collectively as the “Agencies.”   

5   The Chairman of the Council is responsible for the content of this report.  In preparing this report, the Chairman consulted with the Agencies. 

- 2 - 

 

growth by allowing market participants to price credit risk more accurately and allocate capital 
more efficiently.   

*   *   *   *   * 

Over  the  past  forty  years,  asset-backed  securitization  has  become  an  increasingly  important 
source  of  credit  formation  for  the  economy.    Securitization  offers  many  benefits,  including 
increased  liquidity,  expanded  credit  availability,  and  reduced  cost  of  credit.    Without  proper 
safeguards, however, securitization can introduce significant risks to financial markets and to the 
economy.    The  securitization  process  involves  multiple  parties  with  varying  incentives  and 
information,  thereby  breaking  down  the  traditional  direct  relationship  between  borrower  and 
lender.  The party setting underwriting standards and making lending decisions (the originator) 
and the party making structuring decisions (the securitizer) are often exposed to minimal or no 
credit risk.  By contrast, the party that is most exposed to credit risk (the investor) often has less 
influence over underwriting standards and may have less information about the borrower.  As a 
result, originators and securitizers that do not retain risk can, at least in the short run, maximize 
their  own  returns  by  lowering  loan  underwriting  standards  in  ways  that  investors  may  have 
difficulty  detecting.    The  originate-to-distribute  model,  as  it  was  conducted,  exacerbated  this 
weakness by compensating originators and securitizers based on volume, rather than on quality. 

The academic literature provides evidence that mortgage-backed securitization contributed to a 
decline  in  underwriting  standards  during  the  mid-2000s,  facilitating  an  over-supply  of 
excessively  risky  mortgages.    There  is  also  evidence  that  the  expansion  of  mortgage  supply 
through securitization helped accelerate price increases in the housing market to unsustainable 
levels and, therefore, contributed to the ensuing decline in housing prices and the economy. 

To address the problems in the financial system that contributed to the financial crisis, Congress 
enacted the Dodd-Frank Act in July 2010.  The Dodd-Frank Act’s reforms to the securitization 
market  include  greater  transparency  for  investors,  measures  to  mitigate  conflicts  of  interest  at 
credit ratings agencies, and the credit risk retention requirements in Section 941.  

This  study  discusses  the  potential  design  of  a  risk  retention  framework.    Such  a  framework 
should  seek  to  meet  the  following  objectives:  (i)  align  incentives  without  changing  the  basic 
structure  and  objectives  of  securitization  transactions;  (ii)  provide  for  greater  certainty  and 
confidence among market participants; (iii) promote efficiency of capital allocation; (iv) preserve 
flexibility as markets and circumstances evolve; and (v) allow a broad range of participants to 
continue  to  engage  in  lending  activities,  while  doing  so  in  a  safe  and  sound  manner.    A  risk 
retention framework can be structured in a number of ways to meet these objectives.  The form 
of risk retention, allocation of risk retention to various participants in the securitization chain, 
amount of risk retention, allowances for risk management, and exemptions from risk retention 
are all important variables in the design of any such framework. 

Although  a  risk  retention  framework  can  help  align  incentives  and  improve  underwriting 
standards,  the  macroeconomic  implications  of  risk  retention  are  complex.    A  risk  retention 

- 3 - 

 

framework can incent better lending decisions and consequently help strengthen the quality of 
assets underlying a securitization.  It may also help mitigate some of the pro-cyclical effects that 
asset-backed  securitization  can  have  on  the  economy.    However,  if  overly  restrictive,  risk 
retention  could  constrain  the  formation  of  credit,  which  could  adversely  impact  economic 
growth.    The  challenge  is  to  design  a  risk  retention  framework  that  maximizes  benefits  while 
minimizing its costs.   

As the recent financial crisis demonstrates, securitization, without appropriate reforms, can cause 
significant harm to the economy.  Risk retention can help align the interests of the participants in 
the  securitization  chain,  reduce  the  risks  inherent  in  securitization,  and  promote  the  stable 
formation of credit and efficient allocation of capital in the United States. 

- 4 - 

 

 

II. THE STATUTORY MANDATE 

In addition to the general mandate to study the macroeconomic effects of risk retention, Section 
946 calls for the study to include an analysis of the macroeconomic effects of risk retention on 
real  estate  asset  price  bubbles.    The  statute  also  calls  for  consideration  of  the  feasibility  of 
minimizing  bubbles  by  proactively  adjusting  risk  retention  requirements  and  minimum 
underwriting  standards;  whether  such  adjustments  should  be  formulaic  or  discretionary;  and, 
how such adjustments should be coordinated with monetary policy.  Specifically, Section 946 
requires: 

(1)  an  analysis  of  the  effects  of  risk  retention  on  real  estate  asset  price  bubbles, 
including a retrospective estimate of what fraction of real estate losses may have 
been averted had such requirements been in force in recent years; 
 
(2)  an  analysis  of  the  feasibility  of  minimizing  real  estate  price  bubbles  by 
proactively  adjusting  the  percentage  of  risk  retention  that  must  be  borne  by 
creditors and securitizers of real estate debt, as a function of regional or national 
market conditions; 
 
(3)  a  comparable  analysis  for  proactively  adjusting  mortgage  origination 
requirements; 
 
(4)  an  assessment  of  whether  such  proactive  adjustments  should  be  made  by  an 
independent regulator, or in a formulaic and transparent manner; 
 
(5) an assessment of whether such adjustments should take place independently or 
in concert with monetary policy; and 
 
(6) recommendations for implementation and enabling legislation. 

 
Several points should be noted about the scope of this study. 

First, the study discusses the pro-cyclicality of credit with respect to asset-backed securitizations 
and the potential for risk retention requirements to minimize this pro-cyclicality.  The study does 
not provide a specific quantitative assessment of the fraction of real estate losses that might have 
been averted, because the risk retention rules under Section 941 have not yet been issued, and 
thus cannot be retrospectively considered.  Moreover, sufficient data are not available to make 
such an estimate possible.  Instead, the study provides a broad assessment of the macroeconomic 
impact of risk retention on real estate bubbles and economic cyclicality.  

- 5 - 

 

Second,  the  academic  literature  on  risk retention with respect to  asset-backed  securitization  is 
limited.    Moreover,  available  information  is  insufficiently  robust  to  allow  for  a  quantitative 
comparable analysis for proactively adjusting mortgage origination requirements, an assessment 
of  formulaic  adjustments  to  such  requirements, or  a  quantitative  evaluation  as  to  whether  any 
adjustments should be made independently or in concert with monetary policy.  However, the 
study reviews benefits and drawbacks to adjusting risk retention regulation over time.  

Third, the study’s evaluation of the macroeconomic implications of risk retention is confined to 
the existing literature and available data.  Future studies could include more original research and 
make more specific quantitative assessments with respect to the aforementioned questions.  

The  analysis  presented  in  this  study  should  serve  to  inform  the  rule  writing  process  currently 
underway by the Agencies.  It may also help to create a risk retention framework that will allow 
markets to allocate capital efficiently to American businesses, consumers and homeowners in a 
sustainable fashion, facilitate economic growth and promote financial stability.  

- 6 - 

 

III. SECURITIZATION AND ITS MACROECONOMIC EFFECTS 

DEVELOPMENT OF THE SECURITIZATION MARKET 

Securitization is the process through which a security is created that gives investors a right to the 
cash flows generated by (and frequently, a security interest in) a pool of loans or other financial 
assets.  Typically, securitizations are created with the intent to sell part or all of the securities to 
third-party investors.   

Since  the  first  securitization  of  residential  mortgages  in  1970,6  the  asset-backed  securitization 
market  has  become  an  important  mechanism  for  credit  formation.    Prior  to  the  advent  of 
securitization, funding through the capital markets for many borrowers was more limited.  By 
providing  access  to  the  capital  markets,  securitization  has  improved  the  availability  and 
affordability  of  credit  to  a  diverse  group  of  businesses,  consumers,  and  homeowners  in  the 
United States.  

Much  of  the  initial  securitization  issuance  was  backed  by  residential  mortgages,  which  had 
guarantees  from  the  Government  National  Mortgage  Association  (“Ginnie  Mae”)  or  the 
Government Sponsored Enterprises (“GSEs”).7  Early securitizations typically employed a “pass-
through” structure, whereby principal and interest collected on the assets are “passed through” on 
a pro rata basis to the security holders.8   

Over time, asset-backed securitization market participants expanded into other asset classes and 
began  to  create  more  complex  structures.    The  sophistication  of  securitization  structures  has 
allowed products to be tailored to meet a variety of demands, such as investor risk and duration 
appetites as well as differences in asset classes.  Tranches of securitizations (e.g., through senior-
subordinated  structures)  can  be  used  to  create  investments  with  different  cash  flow  or  loss 
absorption characteristics.   

Starting  in  the  mid-1980s,  these  concepts  were  applied  to  the  securitization  of  non-residential 
mortgage  assets,  including  commercial  mortgages,  credit  cards,  auto  loans  and  leases,  student 
loans, business loans, equipment loans and leases, and dealer floorplans.9  

In  addition,  securitizers  also  developed  resecuritizations,  in  which  a  securitizer  uses  the  cash 
flows  of  previously  securitized  assets  as  the  base  for  a  new  securitization.    Resecuritizations 
                                                 

6   The Government National Mortgage Association (“GNMA” or “Ginnie Mae”) issued the first mortgage-backed security in 1970. 
7   For purposes of this study, the term Government Sponsored Enterprises (“GSEs”) refers to Federal National Mortgage Association (“FNMA” 

or “Fannie Mae”) and the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (“FHLMC” or “Freddie Mac”). 

8   The original securitization market consisted of “agency” securities of pooled residential mortgages, with the payments of interest and principal 

guaranteed by Ginnie Mae, Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac.  

9   Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Report to the Congress on Risk Retention (October 2010). 

- 7 - 

 

allowed securitizers to finance higher risk assets that might be otherwise difficult to sell, or to 
benefit from the higher rating attributed to a portion of the structure.10 

As  a  result  of  this  increase  in  demand  and  financial  innovations,  total  securitization  issuance 
increased  over  time  in  all  asset  classes,  particularly  in  those  backed  by  residential  assets  (see 
Figure 1).  This chart shows that although commercial asset-backed securitization issuance (such 
as  autos  and  credit  cards)  increased  from  the  mid-1990’s  through  the  run-up  to  the  financial 
crisis,  it  did  not  increase  to  the  same  extent  as  residential  mortgage  asset-backed  issuance, 
particularly for lower credit quality instruments such as subprime and Alt-A residential mortgage 
securitizations. 

Figure 1: Total Asset-Backed Securitization Issuance by Year11 

$2,500

2,000

1,500

1,000

500

0
1985

1987

1989

1991

1993

1995

1997

1999

2001

2003

2005

2007

2009

Autos
Credit Cards
Manufactured Housing
Other ABS

CDO
Equipment
Non‐Agency Residential MBS

CMBS
Floorplan
Student Loans

 

)
s
n
o

i
l
l
i

b

 

n

i
 

$
(
 

e
c
n
a
u
s
s
I

 

The asset-backed securitization market became an important source for credit intermediation in 
part because it offers investors a number of benefits that improved efficiency and contributed to 
a  lower  cost  of  credit.    Investors  in  asset-backed  securities  can  efficiently  diversify  the  credit 
risks to which they are exposed because the securitized loan pools are diverse with respect to a 
number  of  characteristics,  including  by  borrower,  property,  and  geography.    Asset-backed 
securities thus provide an additional source of credit for businesses, consumers, and homeowners 
beyond the traditional banking sector.  Further, asset-backed securitization can legally isolate the 
                                                 

10  Certain structures, commonly referred to as CDOs, or CDO2 (Collateralized Debt Obligations Squared) if a securitizer created a structured 

asset from another CDO, further increased the complexity and elongated the chain between originator and investor. 

11  Source:  Inside  MBS  &  ABS,  “Mortgage  and  Asset  Securitizations  Issuance"  (January  7,  2011),  Copyright  Inside  Mortgage  Finance 
Publications (for Non-Residential MBS issuance data) and J.P. Morgan Securities LLC (for all other asset class issuance data).  Data does not 
include GSE mortgage issuance.  The category “Other ABS” includes stranded asset, RV, boat, consumer, EETC, and small business loans. 
 

- 8 - 

 

underlying financial assets from the originator and securitizer.  Legal isolation provides investors 
with enhanced protections in the event of a bankruptcy of one or more of these parties and also 
reduces the need to perform due diligence on the credit risk of the originator or securitizer.12  In 
addition, the structuring of securitized interests (e.g., through senior-subordinated structures) can 
create investments with particular credit and interest rate risk profiles that can match investors’ 
risk appetites.   

Securitization also allows financial institutions to manage their credit, funding, and liquidity risk 
more  actively,  and  to  increase  lending  activity  because  securitization  allows  them  to  sell  the 
assets and their risks to third parties.  Therefore, their exposure to interest rate and liquidity risks 
is  reduced  because  securitization  allows  financial  institutions  to  limit  such  risks  by  more 
appropriately  matching  the  duration  of  their  assets  and  liabilities  (often  referred  to  as  “term 
funding”).    Moreover,  asset-backed  securitization  allows  non-bank  lenders  to  originate  at 
competitive  prices  without  deposit  funding,  thereby  reducing  barriers  to  entry  and  increasing 
lending competition. 

Alongside  the  benefits,  the  securitization  process  has  certain  fundamental  weaknesses.    By 
separating  the  borrower  and  lender,  securitization  can  create  informational  and  incentive 
asymmetries.    If  incentives  are  not  well-aligned,  then  information  asymmetries  may  lead  one 
party to maximize its return at the expense of other parties, particularly borrowers and investors.  
For instance, academic literature has identified at least seven important types of frictions in the 
residential  mortgage  securitization  chain,  which  can  cause  agency  and  adverse  selection 
problems in a securitization transaction.13   

One important informational friction highlighted during the recent financial crisis has aspects of 
a  “lemons”  problem  that  exists  between  the  issuer  and  investor.14  An  originator  has  more 
information about the ability of a borrower to repay than an investor, because the originator is 
the party making the loan.  Because the investor is several steps removed from the borrower, the 
investor may receive less robust loan performance information.  Additionally, the large number 
of assets and the disclosures provided to investors may not include sufficient information on the 
quality of the underlying financial assets for investors to undertake full due diligence on each 
asset that backs the security.  

                                                 

12  Typically, the U.S. securitization market relies on separate legal entities – or special purpose vehicles (“SPVs”) – which is legally separated 
from the sponsoring entity.  This provides securitization investors protection in circumstances where the sponsoring or originating entity enters 
insolvency proceedings. 

13  See A. Ashcraft and T. Schuermann, “Understanding the Securitization of Subprime Mortgage Credit,” Foundations and Trends in Finance, 

vol. 2, no. 3 (2008) for a discussion of information asymmetries in the case of subprime mortgages. 

14  M.  Jensen  and  W.  Meckling,  “Theory  of  the  Firm:  Managerial  Behavior,  Agency  Costs  and  Ownership  Structure,”  Journal  of  Financial 
Economics,  vol.  3,  no.  4  (1976);  G.  Gorton  and  G.  Pennacchi,  “Banks  and  Loan  Sales:  Marketing  Nonmarketable  Assets,”  Journal  of 
Monetary Economics, vol. 35, no.3 (1995). 

- 9 - 

 

SECURITIZATION’S ROLE IN THE FINANCIAL CRISIS 

Although  securitization  provides  many  benefits  to  lenders  and  borrowers,  it  also  played  a 
significant role in the recent financial crisis.  The financial crisis brought to the surface certain 
inherent problems in the securitization process, including misaligned incentives of participants 
and  informational  asymmetries.    These  problems  may  have  exacerbated  the  pro-cyclicality  of 
lending, resulting in unsustainable increases in asset prices. 

The  issuance  of  asset-backed  securities  expanded  significantly  in  the  lead-up  to  the  financial 
crisis,  particularly  for  residential  and  commercial  mortgages.    This  growth  accommodated 
investor demand for highly rated asset-backed securities, which over time became increasingly 
complex.  Additional demand for the junior tranches of the highly rated residential mortgage-
backed  securities  (“RMBS”)  and  commercial  mortgage-backed  securities  (“CMBS”)  began  to 
grow as such tranches were increasingly distributed as components of other structured products 
such as collateralized debt obligations (“CDOs”).15    

To satisfy the growing investor demand for loans, particularly mortgages, to serve as collateral 
for  structured  products,  originators  and  securitizers  increasingly  relied  upon  an  originate-to-
distribute  model  in  which  originators  sold  their  loans  to  securitizers,  who  then  sold  securities 
backed by these loans to investors.  This model helped facilitate a rapid increase in origination 
and  securitization  of  subprime  and  Alt-A  loans  beginning  in  the  early  2000s,  as  a  large  and 
increasing portion of such loans were being securitized and sold to investors, rather than held as 
whole loans on the balance sheets of originators.  For example, between 2001 and 2006, the ratio 
of  securitized  issuance  to  origination  increased  from  46  percent  to  81  percent  and  the  market 
share of subprime and Alt-A originations increased from 11 percent to 40 percent (See Figure 2 
below).  

                                                 

15  M. Adelson and D. Jacob, “The Sub-prime Problem: Causes and Lessons,” unpublished mimeo (2008) discusses of the role of CDOs in the 
crisis.  Others argue that “ratings arbitrage” was an important motivation for mortgage securitization in this period.  J. Coval, Jurek. J, and E. 
Stafford, “The Economics of Structured Finance,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 23, no.1 (2009) and M. Brennan, Hein, J. and S. 
Poon, “Tranching and Rating,” unpublished mimeo (2009). 

- 10 - 

 

Figure 2: Origination and Issuance of Agency and Non-Agency Mortgage Loans16 

($ in billions)

Year
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009

Subprime / Alt-A

Origination
$215
267
395
715
1,005
1,000
466
64
10

Issuance
$98
176
269
521
797
814
433
2
0

Ratio
46%
66%
68%
73%
79%
81%
93%
3%
0%

Origination
$445
571
650
515
570
480
347
97
92

Prime Jumbo

Issuance
$142
172
238
233
281
219
178
7
0

Ratio
32%
30%
37%
45%
49%
46%
51%
7%
0%

Origination
$1,265
1,706
2,460
1,210
1,092
990
1,162
920
1,185

Conforming
Issuance
$915
1,270
1,912
892
879
817
1,062
900
1,107

Ratio
72%
74%
78%
74%
81%
83%
91%
98%
93%

 

 

In the originate-to-distribute model, originators receive significant compensation upfront without 
retaining a material ongoing economic interest in the performance of the loan.  This reduces the 
economic incentive of originators and securitizers to evaluate the credit quality of the underlying 
loans carefully.  Some research indicates that securitization was associated with lower quality 
loans in the financial crisis.  For instance, one study found that subprime borrowers with credit 
scores  just  above  a  threshold  commonly  used  by  securitizers  to  determine  which  loans  to 
purchase  defaulted  at  significantly  higher  rates  than  those  with  credit  scores  below  the 
threshold.17  By lowering underwriting standards, securitization may have increased the amount 
of credit extended, resulting in riskier and unsustainable loans that otherwise may not have been 
originated. 

As  the  originate-to-distribute  model  became  more  pervasive,  underwriting  criteria  weakened 
more broadly.  This deterioration was particularly prevalent with respect to the verification of the 
borrower’s  income,  assets,  and  employment  for  residential  real  estate  loans,  and  in  the 
measurement of net operating income for commercial real estate loans.  Originators began to use 
non-traditional loan products (e.g., negative amortization loans, interest-only periods, and teaser 
rates) that were designed to reduce the initial monthly loan payment.  Additionally, predatory 
lending became a problem as financial products became too complex or inappropriate for certain 
borrowers.   

In  theory,  aggressive  underwriting  should  have  been  held  in  check  by  market  discipline.  
However,  recent  experience  suggests  that  there  was  an  over-dependence  on  credit  ratings  by 
investors  as  well  as  other  weaknesses  in  risk  management  practices.    There  were  incentive 
problems with respect to credit rating agencies (“CRAs”) in the issuer-pay model.18  Further, the 
                                                 

16  Source:  2010  Mortgage  Market  Statistical  Annual  published  by  Inside  Mortgage  Finance  Publications,  Inc.  www.imfpubs.com.  Copyright 
2010.  Conforming data includes conventional conforming mortgages and Fannie/Freddie MBS excluding pools with average loan age over 3 
months. 

17  B. Keys, T. Mukherjee, A. Seru, and V. Vig, “Did Securitization Lead to Lax Screening? Evidence from Subprime Loans,” Quarterly Journal 

of Economics, vol. 125, no.1 (2010).  

18  P. Bolton, X. Freixas, and J. Shapiro, “The Credit Ratings Game,” NBER Working Paper No. 14712 (2008); J. Fons, “White Paper on Rating 
Competition  and  Structured  Finance,”  unpublished  mimeo  (2008);  J.  Fons,  “White  Paper on  Rating  Competition  and  Structured  Finance,” 

- 11 - 

 

turmoil has raised questions about the effectiveness of CRAs’ assessment of risks in the rating of 
complex  financial  products.19    Among  the  factors  that  may  have  contributed  to  poor  ratings 
performance of structured finance products are an underestimation of the severity of a housing 
market downturn and model risk aggravated by limited historical data.20 

In conjunction with the many other drivers that led to the bubble in home prices, the increased 
use of securitization may have contributed to home price appreciation by increasing the supply of 
mortgage  credit.    The  expansion  of  subprime  mortgage  credit  was  closely  correlated  with  an 
increase in securitization of subprime mortgages, and there is some evidence that the increased 
supply in subprime mortgage credit was in part responsible for greater home price appreciation.21  
Further,  subprime  mortgage  products  were  often  structured  under  the  assumption  that  home 
prices  would  continue  to  rise.    Accordingly,  increases  in  home  prices  may  have  reinforced 
expectations  for  future  appreciation,  which  may  have  fueled  more  lending.    Increases  in  loan 
volume, in turn, may have precipitated further increases in home prices.22  

To the extent that securitization contributed to a bubble in home prices, it also contributed to a 
larger  drop  in  home  prices  once  the  bubble  burst.    The  decline  in  home  values  tightened  the 
supply  of  credit  because  the  value  of  collateral  declined,  thus  raising  the  cost  of  credit  for 
borrowers who use housing as collateral.23   

In addition to residential lending, securitization may have also contributed to the contraction in 
credit seen in other asset classes, including non-real estate asset classes.  As the market became 
aware  of  the  risks  associated  with  the  subprime  market,  there  were  doubts  about  the  value  of 
securities  backed  by  subprime  mortgages.    Research  has  indicated  that  many  large  financial 
institutions were using subprime asset-backed securities to collateralize short-term borrowings.  
As the value of the collateral was called into question, it became harder for the banks to maintain 
access  to  their  short-term  liquidity.24    This  in  turn  may  have  caused  the  market  to  doubt  the 
solvency of these institutions, which resulted in a further contraction in liquidity.   

                                                                                                                                                             

unpublished mimeo (2008); V. Skreta, and L. Veldkamp, “Rating Shopping and Asset Complexity: A Theory of Ratings Inflation,” Journal of 
Monetary Economics, vol. 56, no.5 (2008).   

19  While  there  is  limited  direct  evidence  on  this  point  in  the  academic  literature,  recent  work  by  Ashcraft,  Vickery,  and  Goldsmith  (2010) 
documents evidence that credit rating agencies reduced risk-adjusted subordination levels for non-agency RMBS deals during the recent MBS 
boom. 

20  The Committee on the Global Financial System (“CGFS”), Publication No. 32, “Role of Ratings in Structured Finance: What went wrong and 

what can be done to address the shortcomings?”  

21  A. Mian and A. Sufi, “The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence from the U.S. Mortgage Default Crisis,” Quarterly Journal 

of Economics, vol. 124, no. 4 (2009).  

22  R. Shiller, Irrational Exuberance (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2000).  
23  N. Kiyotaki and J. Moore, “Credit Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 105, no. 2 (1997); B. Bernanke and M. Gertler, “Agency Costs, 

Net Worth, and Business Fluctuations,” American Economic Review, vol. 79, no. 1 (1989). 

24  G. Gorton and A. Metrick, “Securitized Banking and the Run on Repo,” working paper (2010). 

- 12 - 

 

These disruptions to individual financial institutions had a material impact on financial markets 
and  macroeconomic  conditions.    Once  a  financial  institution  fails,  there  can  be  significant 
spillovers  beyond  the  firm  because  the  failure  can  spark  contagion,  in  part  due  to  declines  in 
market  liquidity.25    For  example,  some  evidence  suggests  that  financial  institutions  that  relied 
more heavily on short-term funding (such as borrowings collateralized by subprime asset-backed 
securities) reduced lending to the corporate sector to a greater extent during the crisis.26  

During the financial crisis, the prices of asset-backed securities, such as those backed by auto 
loans, credit cards, student loans, loans to businesses, and loans secured by heavy equipment all 
fell dramatically and simultaneously.27  For example, credit spreads on credit card, student loan, 
CMBS,  and  auto  asset-backed  securities  widened  during  the  financial  crisis  (see  Figure  3).  
Further, the private new origination market slowed significantly or – for certain asset classes – 
stopped altogether.  Credit spreads for some asset classes traded at levels over 300 times higher 
than their historical average, making new issuance uneconomical and constraining funding for 
credit in these markets to businesses, consumers and homeowners. 

Figure 3: Illustrative ABS and MBS Spreads 2004 – 201028 

 

1,500

1,250

1,000

750

500

250

)
s
t
n
o
p

i

 
s
i
s
a
b
(
 
d
a
e
r
p
S

0
2004

 

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

Credit Card ABS (Spread to Swaps)
FFELP Student Loan ABS (Spread to LIBOR)

Prime Auto Loan ABS (Spread to Swaps)
CMBS Super Senior (Spread to Swaps)

 

Asset-backed securities may have been particularly susceptible to sharp price declines, because 
the complexity of the securitization structure made these assets difficult for market participants 
to  evaluate  quickly.    Additionally,  perceptions  regarding  misaligned  incentives  in  the 
securitization  market  caused  market  participants  to  become  increasingly  pessimistic  about  the 

                                                 

25  D. Diamond and R. Rajan, “Liquidity Shortages and Banking Crises,” Journal of Finance, vol. 60, no. 2 (2005). 
26  V. Ivashina and D. Scharfstein, “Bank Lending During the Financial Crisis of 2008,” Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 97, no. 3 (2010). 
27  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Report to the Congress on Risk Retention (October 2010).  
28  Source: J.P. Morgan Securities LLC. 

 

- 13 - 

 

quality of the underlying collateral.  At the outset, market participants did not have clarity about 
where the risks were greatest and which counterparties were most significantly exposed.  The 
crisis  was  exacerbated  by  the  fact  that  many  of  the  investors  in  these  instruments  had  not 
anticipated potential losses and had failed to manage their risk exposure appropriately.   

The  financial  crisis  was  not  the  first  time  that  markets  for  securitized  products  experienced 
significant  disruptions.    For  example,  significant  losses  in  the  franchise  loan  securitization 
market from 1996 to 1998 and the manufactured housing loan securitization market from 1994 to 
1996 demonstrate that complex financial products and unchecked lending practices can lead to 
unsustainable credit formation.   

As the crisis intensified, losses occurred throughout the securitization chain.  Where originators 
held loans that had not yet been securitized and securitizers held loans or securities that had not 
yet  been  sold,  these  entities  took  losses.    However,  the  primary  losses  were  experienced  by 
investors who held the asset-backed securities.  The investor base in such securities was diverse, 
including pension funds, insurance companies, mutual funds, domestic and foreign banks, and 
hedge funds. 

Taken as a whole, these problems illustrate that markets are unable, in certain circumstances, to 
align the incentives of parties in the securitization chain adequately.  Moreover markets may not 
fully  internalize  the  risks  securitization  can  pose  to  financial  and  economic  stability.    Such 
weaknesses demonstrate the need for regulatory reforms.  

- 14 - 

 

IV. RISK RETENTION AND THE DODD-FRANK ACT  

REGULATORY REFORMS TO SECURITIZATION 

To  prevent  future  crises  and  support  greater  stability  in  financial  markets,  Congress  passed 
comprehensive financial reform legislation in July 2010.  

The  Dodd-Frank  Act  provides  market  participants  and  regulators  with  tools  to  address  the 
underlying  problems  of  securitization  witnessed  in  the  recent  financial  crisis.    Many  of  these 
reforms  rely  on  investors  to  enforce  market  discipline,  but  also  recognize  that  regulatory 
oversight is necessary.  These reforms include: 

  Risk retention requirements;   
  Credit rating agency reform and conflicts of interest; 
 
  Consumer protection; and 
 

Improved transparency and issuer due diligence; 

Improved monitoring of systemic risks throughout the financial system. 

For further details, see Appendix A. 

In  addition  to  the  Dodd-Frank  Act,  there  are  other  reform  efforts  underway.    These  reforms 
include  accounting  changes  under  Accounting  Standards  Codification  (“ASC”)  Topic  860, 
Transfers  and  Servicing  (commonly  called  FAS  166)  and  ASC  Topic  810,  Consolidations 
(commonly  called  FAS  167),  and  modifications  to  regulatory  capital  requirements  under  the 
Basel  Accord.    The  accounting  changes  influence  whether  a  securitizer  must  consolidate  a 
securitization onto its balance sheet, which can affect the decision whether to securitize a pool of 
loans.    The  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (“BCBS”)  has  put  forward  a  new 
framework, which seeks to improve the capital and liquidity position of banks.  Included in these 
provisions are a number of measures that seek to ensure that sufficient capital is held against 
securitization exposures (see Appendix B).  

The challenges in the asset-backed securitization market are not unique to the United States, and 
other  countries  are  also  implementing  regulatory  changes  to  address  these  challenges.    For 
example, the European Parliament has recently adopted a set of reforms known as Article 122a 

- 15 - 

 

of the Capital Requirements Directive.29  These rules require credit risk retention of 5 percent, 
which is similar to the baseline set forth in Section 941 of the Dodd-Frank Act. 

RISK RETENTION AND ITS MACROECONOMIC EFFECTS 

Credit risk retention (herein referred to as “risk retention”) refers to the meaningful exposure to 
the credit risk of a securitization’s underlying assets that cannot be removed, sold, or hedged for 
a specified period of time.  This definition of risk retention does not include representations and 
warranties  (i.e.,  the  risk  that  the  loans  were  not  underwritten  pursuant  to  stated  policies  and 
procedures).  It also does not include interest rate risk, foreign exchange rate risk, or other types 
of market and macroeconomic risk that a securitizer might retain.  

Risk  retention  requirements  may  reduce  risks  to  financial  stability  arising  from  incentive  and 
informational  asymmetries  between  the  investor  and  earlier  securitization  chain  participants.  
They  may  also  improve  loan  quality  because  participants  might  better  internalize  the  costs  of 
poor  underwriting,  as  they  must  now  hold  a  portion  of  the  underlying  risk.    By  aligning  the 
incentive  structure  to  reflect  the  incentives  of  traditional  portfolio  lending  more  closely,  risk 
retention  may  help  ensure  that  securitizers  and  originators  are  making  prudent  loans  that  are 
priced appropriately, as securitizers of these assets will want to be compensated for the risks they 
now must hold.  

In principle, traditional bank lending alleviates problems typically associated with asymmetric 
information,  because  lenders  have  the  proper  incentives  to  screen  and  monitor  borrowers.30  
However,  these  incentives  depend on  lenders  retaining  the  risk  associated with the loans they 
make.31    By  removing  the  credit  risk,  securitization  may  reduce  an  originator’s  incentives  to 
properly underwrite and evaluate borrowers.   

Consistent  with  those  arguments,  academic  literature  suggests  that  securities  that  have  some 
form  of  risk  retention  may  provide  better  incentives  than  securities  without  risk  retention.    A 
solution to a “lemons” problem is risk-sensitive compensation, often achieved by requiring the 
originator  to  have  a  stake  in  the  outcome.    During  the  run-up  to  the  financial  crisis,  many 
investors  did  not  take  adequate  account  of  these  informational  asymmetries,  and  therefore  a 
“lemons”  problem  existed.    It  was  only  after  asset  performance  began  deteriorating  that  this 
problem became apparent. 

                                                 

29  Article 122a of the Capital Requirements Directive consists of two directives: (i) Directive 2006/48/EC of the European Parliament and of the 
Council  of  14  June  2006  relating  to  the  taking  up  and  pursuit  of  the  business  of  credit  institutions  (recast),  known  as  the  Banking 
Consolidation Directive (“BCD”); and (ii) Directive 2006/49/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 14 June 2006 on the capital 
adequacy of investment firms and credit institutions (recast), known as the Capital Adequacy Directive. Article 122a is part of the BCD. 

30  D. Diamond, "Financial Intermediation and Delegated Monitoring," Review of Economic Studies, vol. 51 (1984). 
31  G. Gorton and G. Pennacchi, "Banks and Loan Sales: Marketing Non-Marketable Assets," Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 35, no. 3 

(1995). 

- 16 - 

 

The  academic  literature  on  loan  syndications  has  documented  that  retained  share  is  used  to 
reduce the importance of information asymmetries between lead managers and other syndicate 
members.32  In particular, it indicates that retained share may have a larger impact on loan price 
for risky and opaque firms, where these frictions are likely to be important, and the ability to 
hedge  retained  share  has  an  adverse  impact  on  the  supply  of  credit  to  these  types  of  firms.33  
There  is  evidence  that  when  the  originator  and  the  securitizer  of  Alt-A  mortgage-backed 
securities  were  affiliated,  the  resulting  securities  were  less  likely  to  experience  losses.    This 
resulted, in part, because the originator was less likely to sell poorly underwritten assets to its 
own affiliate for securitization.34  

To the extent that risk retention helps avoid deterioration in underwriting standards, it may help 
prevent a recurrence of the sort of credit expansion that led to the home price bubble in the recent 
financial crisis.  

                                                 

32  A. Sufi, “Information Asymmetry and Financing Arrangements: Evidence from Syndicated Loans,” Journal of Finance, vol. 62, no. 2 (2007).  
33  In particular, there is evidence that the onset of credit default swap (“CDS”) trading, which permits the lead manager to hedge its exposure 
without knowledge of other members, has had an adverse impact on the supply of credit to opaque and risky corporate borrowers. See A. 
Ashcraft and J. Santos, "Has the CDS market lowered the cost of corporate debt?" Journal of Monetary Economics, no.56, no.4 (2009). 

34  C. Demiroglu and C. James, “Works of Friction? Originator-Sponsor Affiliation and Losses on Mortgage-Backed Securities,” University of 

Florida working paper (2009). 

 

- 17 - 

 

V. ESTABLISHING A FRAMEWORK FOR RISK RETENTION 

PRINCIPLES 

As  the  Agencies  promulgate  regulations  for  risk  retention  as  required  by  Section  941,  they 
should seek to develop a framework that will balance the benefits of risk retention against its 
potential  costs  —  incentivizing  originators  and  securitizers  to  be  conscious  of  the  risk  in  the 
underlying assets that they are originating or distributing, while not unduly raising the cost of 
credit.    Any  framework  should  serve  to  mitigate  the  misalignment  of  incentives,  asymmetric 
information,  and  macroeconomic  risks  associated  with  securitization,  and  simultaneously 
promote  a  robust  securitization  market  that  can  continue  to  provide  credit  to  businesses, 
consumers  and  homeowners  in  the  United  States.    Because  such  regulations  will  apply  to  a 
variety  of  assets  and  securitization  structures,  there  are  multiple  approaches  that  the  Agencies 
can consider in executing the statutory requirements.  Such a framework should seek to achieve 
the following: 

  Align incentives.  Asset-backed securitization developed because it provides specific risk 
transfer  benefits  and  loweres  the  cost  of  credit,  in  addition  to  being  a  source  of  term 
funding.  By reducing risk and better aligning incentives, risk retention can improve loan 
quality and underwriting standards, but preserve the benefits of risk and capital transfer. 
 

  Provide greater certainty and confidence among market participants.  A risk retention 

framework that provides clear rules can help market participants accurately price risk.  
 

  Promote  efficiency  of  capital  allocation.   Risk  retention  can  promote  more  efficient 
allocation of capital across the economy because it can help prevent excess credit flows at 
excessively low interest rates that do not accurately reflect the risks of assets. 
 

  Preserve flexibility as markets and circumstances evolve.  The framework can take into 

account the changing nature of markets and future innovations. 

 

  Allow a broad range of participants to continue to engage in lending activities, while 
doing so in a safe and sound manner.  Implementation that takes into account unique 
aspects  of  smaller  originators  and  securitizers  can  preserve  a  robust  and  competitive 
securitization market. 
 

While risk retention offers many potential benefits, it is one of many reforms.  It cannot address 
all  problems  in  the  securitization  chain,  and  will  work  in  conjunction  with  other  reforms.  
Moreover, risk retention may be more suitable in some circumstances than others, depending on 
the specific nature of the underlying financial assets. 

- 18 - 

 

CONSTRUCTING A ROBUST RISK RETENTION FRAMEWORK 

There are a number of factors to consider when evaluating how to implement a risk retention 
framework.  The spectrum of options includes the following:  

  Form of risk retention.  There are several different forms of risk retention that one could 
consider in developing a framework.  While there are many variations, the general forms 
include: a vertical slice (a pro rata piece of every tranche), a horizontal slice (a first loss 
interest in the securitization structure), or an equivalent exposure of the securitized pool 
(retaining a random selection of assets from the pool).  

 

 

  Allocation of risk retention.  The point along the securitization chain where risk retention 
is held also affects the outcome of the risk retention requirements.  Section 941 places the 
primary responsibility for retaining risk on the securitizer, but the originator, and in some 
cases other participants, could be permitted to hold this exposure.  Whether the exposure 
is held or shared among different entities can also drive different incentives.  

  Amount of risk retention.  A framework could employ a static amount of risk retention, 
whereby  the  amount  of  exposure  does  not  vary  across  asset  classes,  asset  quality  or 
economic  cycle.    Alternatively,  the  framework  could  allow  for  variations.    Thus,  the 
amount  of  risk  retention  could  be  a  function  of  time  and  /  or  a  function  of  asset 
characteristics. 

 

  Hedging,  prevention  of  arbitrage,  and  allowance  for  risk  management.    Specific 
hedging of the risk retention required by Section 941 is prohibited by the Dodd-Frank 
Act, and any framework should seek to minimize arbitrage opportunities.  However, it is 
also  important  for  financial  institutions  to  manage  their  other  risks  for  safety  and 
soundness  purposes.    Therefore,  the  framework  should  seek  to  prohibit  the  transfer  or 
hedging of the specific credit risk required to be retained, but allow firms to manage other 
risks, such as interest rate, foreign exchange, and macroeconomic risks. 

 

 

  Exemptions from risk retention.  A risk retention framework could include the ability to 
exempt higher quality assets meeting rigorous underwriting standards.  In addition to the 
required exemptions for the QRM and other asset classes, the framework could exempt 
securitizers  from  holding  the  credit  risk  of  higher  quality  assets  that  meet  additional 
product, underwriting, and other standards that tend to decrease credit risk.  

 

The choices that the Agencies make in establishing and implementing a framework must balance 
macroeconomic risks with the availability and cost of credit, as discussed later in this study.   

- 19 - 

 

FORM  

In constructing a framework for risk retention requirements, a securitizer could be required to 
employ  a  particular  form  of  risk  retention  or  allowed  to  choose  from  a  list  of  permitted 
choices.  The primary choices could include: (i) vertical risk-retention: retention of a pro rata 
economic  interest  in  the  credit  risk  of  the  securitization;  (ii)  horizontal  risk-retention: 
retention of a first loss interest in the securitization; and (iii) representative sample: retention 
of  a  subset  of  assets  that  are  selected  randomly  from  the  original  pool  intended  to  be 
securitized that has credit risk characteristics similar to those of the securitized assets.   

VERTICAL (PRO RATA) RISK RETENTION 

Vertical risk retention requires the retention of a pro rata economic interest in the credit 
risk of the securitization, equivalent to retaining a pro rata portion of each tranche.  For 
example, a five percent risk retention for a three-tranche securitization comprised of a 94 
percent (or $94) senior tranche, a 5 percent (or $5) subordinate tranche and a 1 percent 
(or $1) equity tranche would be equal to a total of $5, comprised of retention of $4.70 of 
the senior tranche (5 percent of $94), $0.25 of the subordinate tranche (5 percent of $5), 
and $0.05 of the equity tranche (5 percent of $1).  As shown in this example, vertical risk 
retention allocates the risk of loss through the entire securitization.  

Senior Tranche -

94%

Retained  Senior 
Tranche 4.70%

  

 

 

                        

Subordinate – 5%

Equity – 1%

Retained  Sub 
Tranche 0.25%
Retained  Equity 
Tranche 0.05%

    

HORIZONTAL (FIRST LOSS) RISK RETENTION 

Horizontal risk retention involves the retention of the first loss credit risk.  This typically 
involves the allocation of all losses on the securitized assets until the par value of the first 

- 20 - 

 

loss position is reduced to zero.  Horizontal risk retention is graphically depicted below in 
simplified form: 

 

Senior Tranche -

95%

Subordinate – 5%  

                                                
In the above example, a securitizer with a 5 percent horizontal risk retention requirement 
would hold this horizontal piece as a subordinated tranche or tranches.  By placing the 
securitizer in the first loss position, any losses in excess of those projected (and implicitly 
priced)  at  origination  will  first  affect  the  subordinate  tranche  holder,  until  the  losses 
exceed the subordination provided by the horizontal risk retention.    

EQUIVALENT EXPOSURE 

A potential third form of risk retention involves the securitizer retaining on its balance 
sheet a representative sample of all the assets that are transferred to the issuing entity.  To 
do so, the securitizer would need to select a random sample of assets that comprises a 
percentage  of  the  unpaid  principal  balance of  entire  pool  from  the  pre-defined  pool  of 
assets designated for potential securitization.  

To ensure that the loans retained have a similar credit risk to those securitized, a number 
of protections would likely have to be put in place.  

ALLOCATION  

The  point  in  the  securitization  chain  where  risk  retention  is  held  can  affect  incentive 
alignment differently.  In traditional lending, the originator of credit typically holds a loan on 
its balance sheet, thereby retaining all, or a significant share, of the risks associated with the 
loan.    The  risk  retention  requirements  discussed  above  could  be  imposed  on  various 

- 21 - 

 

participants  in  the  securitization  chain  to  adjust  incentives.35    Understanding  the  role  and 
incentives of each major participant in the securitization chain can drive different choices in 
implementation of risk retention.   

SECURITIZER 

Section 941 defines a securitizer as “(A) an issuer of an asset-backed security; or (B) a 
person  who  organizes  and  initiates  an  asset-backed  securities  transaction  by  selling  or 
transferring  assets,  either  directly  or  indirectly,  including  through  an  affiliate,  to  the 
issuer.”  The securitizer oversees the creation and sale of the securities backed by loans 
purchased from originators. This process has several components, which may sometimes 
be divided among separate firms, although this study generally treats them as if carried 
out by a single entity. 

The securitizer performs the legal and economic functions required for a securitization, 
including  reviewing  loan  documents  and  origination  standards,  handling  any  required 
registration  of  offer  and  the  sale  of  asset-backed  securities  with  the  SEC  if  a  public 
offering  is  initiated.    The  securitizer  or  underwriter  engages  one  or  more  credit  rating 
agencies  to  analyze  the  transaction  and  assign  ratings  to  securities  that  reflect  the 
securities’ likelihood of default and expected loss given default.  Finally, the securitizer 
hires  an  investment  bank  as  an  underwriter  to  market  the  securities.    For  many  ABS 
transactions, the underwriter and the securitizer are affiliated entities. 

Because  the  securitizer  is  a  primary  decision  point  for  assets  being  securitized, 
application  of  risk  retention  requirements  to  the  securitizer  can  be  an  effective  way  of 
creating an incentive for the monitoring of the credit quality of the assets it securitizes 
(regardless of the identity of the originator). 

ORIGINATOR 

Section 941 defines an originator as a person who “(A) through the extension of credit or 
otherwise, creates a financial asset that collateralizes an asset-backed security; and (B) 
sells  that  asset  directly  or  indirectly  to  a  securitizer.”    An  originator  makes  the  initial 
decision about whether, and on what terms, to extend credit to a business, consumer or 
homeowner  and  often  provides  initial  short-term  funding.    Originators  include  banks, 
thrifts, subsidiaries of bank or thrift holding companies, independent finance companies, 
and finance companies affiliated with vehicle, equipment, or other types of manufactures.  

                                                 

35  Further, Section 941 requires that the rules shall provide for “the allocation of risk retention obligations between a securitizer and an originator 
in the case of a securitizer that purchases assets from an originator, as the Federal banking agencies and the Commission jointly determine 
appropriate.”  15 U.S.C. § 78o-11(c)(1)(G)(iv).  In doing so, the percentage of risk retention required to be held by the securitizer must be 
reduced by the percentage retained by the originator.  15 U.S.C. § 78o-11(d)(1).   

- 22 - 

 

The originator may securitize the loans directly or sell them to an aggregator that may 
buy  loans  from  many  different  originators.    Aggregators  are  intermediaries  between 
originators  and  securitizers,  and  loans  may  pass  through  several  such  parties’  hands 
before being securitized.  

Ultimately,  having  an  originator  retain  an  economic  interest  in  the  securitization  can 
improve its incentives to originate high quality assets.  To the extent the originator has 
ongoing responsibilities, risk retention can better align incentives with the investor. 

THIRD-PARTIES  

CMBS TRANSACTIONS   

Section  941  prescribes  that  for  securities  backed  by  commercial  mortgages,  the 
Agencies may adopt rules regarding the “retention of the first-loss position by a third-
party purchaser that specifically negotiates for the purchase of such first loss position, 
holds  adequate  financial  resources  to  back  losses,  provides  due  diligence  on  all 
individual assets in the pool before the issuance of the asset-backed securities, and 
meets the same standards for risk retention as the Federal banking agencies and the 
Commission require of the securitizer.” 

Section  941  thus  explicitly  contemplates  that  the  Agencies  could  determine  that  a 
first-loss exposure by a third-party purchaser, under certain conditions, could satisfy 
the  risk  retention  requirements.    In  CMBS,  the  most  junior  tranche  (commonly 
referred  to  as  the  “B  piece”)  is  usually  purchased  by  a  commercial  real  estate 
specialist that focuses on understanding and managing the credit risk associated with 
this  junior  tranche.    In  many  cases,  these  buyers  are  the  “special  servicers,”  or 
servicers  tasked  to  manage  loans  that  become  troubled  during  the  life  of  the 
transaction.  These parties usually conduct due diligence on individual loans and / or 
properties  while  the  securitization  is  being  assembled,  and  may  have  more 
information than other investors about the quality of the underlying pool of assets. 

THIRD-PARTY CREDIT GUARANTORS 

A risk retention framework could consider allowing a third party guarantor to satisfy 
risk  retention  requirements  by  taking  part  or  all  of  the  credit  risk.    The  residential 
mortgage securitization market evolved to allow a number of third parties to provide 
external credit support, either to the underlying loans or the securities.  Of particular 
note  are  Fannie  Mae,  Freddie  Mac,  the  Federal  Housing  Administration  (and  other 

- 23 - 

 

government  agencies),  private  mortgage  insurance  (“PMI”)  providers,  and  bond 
insurers.  

AMOUNT  

There are several choices in how to structure the amount of risk that should be retained for a 
particular securitization.  This amount could be applied uniformly across all securitizations 
and  across  time.    Alternatively,  the  amount  could  vary  based  on  the  quality  and 
characteristics  of  the  particular  assets  securitized  and  on  the  economic  environment  that 
exists  at  the  time  of  securitization.    Section  941  provides  the  Agencies  with  exemptive 
authority to make adjustments as they deem appropriate within guidelines provided by the 
statute. 

There may be benefits in adjusting the amount of risk retention for different quality assets, as 
adjustments can more appropriately align risk retention with expected loss.  For example, a  
5 percent risk retention requirement may not be necessary for high quality assets.  In other 
cases, 5 percent may not be sufficient to incent better underwriting standards for pools with 
higher expected loss.  Some have suggested adjusting risk retention based on various metrics 
that reflect the expected performance of the underlying assets. Risk retention might also be 
adjusted  over  time  in  conjunction  with  economic  cycles,  a  possibility  that  is  addressed  in 
more detail in Section VI. 

On the other hand, a standardized rule applied uniformly may allow for greater transparency, 
measurability, and certainty of implementation.  However, some metrics that adjust to reflect 
expected performance may not apply appropriately to all asset classes, and may be difficult 
to measure with confidence ex ante. 

Therefore, when designing a risk retention framework, the benefits of better incenting actions 
by  uniquely  tailoring  the  amount  of  risk  retention  to  the  characteristics  of  an  asset  pool 
should be carefully balanced with the increased complexity and potential for regulators to set 
levels effectively. 

HEDGING, PREVENTION OF ARBITRAGE, AND RISK MANAGEMENT 

To improve effectiveness, risk retention should result in meaningful and continued exposure 
to  the  credit  risk  of  the  securitization.    Therefore,  without  proper  restrictions,  the  use  of 
hedging  and  other  arbitrage  practices  could  ultimately  undermine  the  goals  of  the  Dodd-
Frank Act risk retention requirements.  On the other hand, the financial system benefits by 
allowing  financial  institutions  to  maintain  robust  risk  management  practices.    Almost  all 
financial  institutions  employ  a  risk  department  that  oversees  other  risk  taking  parts  of  the 
firm to minimize the probability that external shocks and internal risk positions would cause 

- 24 - 

 

large losses due to unexpected market changes.  Some of these institutions are also overseen 
by  prudential  regulators,  who  also  have  an  interest  in  ensuring  that  financial  institutions 
maintain safe and sound risk management practices. 

Therefore, balancing the prohibition of hedging with the goal of allowing firms to manage 
their overall risk exposure will be important in aligning incentives and maintaining a safe and 
sound financial system.  A risk retention framework, which itself is meant to reduce risks to 
financial stability, should not unduly prevent other types of risk mitigation.  

EXEMPTIONS THROUGH UNDERWRITING STANDARDS  

While  risk  retention  is  the  focus  of  Section  941,  it  also  requires,  for  certain  asset  classes, 
partial or total exemptions of asset-backed securities where the underlying loans meet strong 
underwriting  policies  and  standards.    In  this  regard,  exemptions  could  take  into  account  a 
borrower’s  history  of  debt  repayment,  the  borrower’s  current  and  anticipated  capacity  to 
make debt payments, and the quality and value of the collateral securing repayment.  Such 
exemptions,  in  combination  with  risk  retention  requirements,  may  further  incent  strong 
underwriting practices. 

The  Qualified  Residential  Mortgage  (“QRM”)  as  defined  in  Section  941  provides  an 
exemption  for  residential  mortgage  loans  that  have  underwriting  and  product  features  that 
historical loan performance data indicate result in a low risk of default.36  Section 941 also 
requires  that  the  standards  for  a  QRM  be  no  broader  than  the  standards  established  for 
“Qualified  Mortgages”  as  defined  under  Section  129C  of  the  Truth  in  Lending  Act.37  
Agencies are also required under Section 941 to prescribe underwriting standards for three 
non-residential asset classes: auto loans, commercial loans, and commercial mortgages.  For 
loans  originated  under  these  standards,  risk  retention  must  be  less  than  5  percent.  
Implementation of exemptions based on underwriting standards could include: 

  Explicit quantitative standards whereby clearly defined standards are set.  Under such a 
framework  specific,  standards  and  values  could  be  established  in  which  no  loan  could 
exceed  in  order  to  qualify  under  the  exemption.    For  example,  regulators  could  set  a 
specific total debt-to-income ratio or loan-to-value ratio without exceptions. 

  An automated underwriting model that allows for compensating factors.  Under such a 
framework, a borrower’s credit history could be offset with an increased down payment 
and lower loan-to-value ratio.  Therefore, an automated underwriting model would not set 

                                                 

36 15 U.S.C. § 78o-11(e)(4). 
37 15 U.S.C. § 78o-11(e)(4)(c).  

- 25 - 

 

a  numerical  value  for  any  standard,  but  instead  could  provide  a  range  of  values  with 
corresponding formulas that allow for different combinations of standards.   

Both approaches have benefits and drawbacks.  The first framework allows for simplicity, 
but may result in certain loans of creditworthy borrowers otherwise failing to qualify for an 
exemption.    However,  those  borrowers  may  be  able  to  obtain  loans  subject  to  the  risk 
retention  framework.    The  second  framework,  while  potentially  better  able  to  account  for 
creditworthiness due to offsetting factors, is much more complex and would place a material 
burden on regulators to create a full set of standards across many asset classes appropriately. 

- 26 - 

 

VI. ADJUSTING RISK RETENTION REQUIREMENTS   

CALIBRATING RISK RETENTION REQUIREMENTS 

Implementing risk retention requirements in the securitization process could potentially mitigate 
some of the destabilizing effects that securitization has on the credit cycle and, more generally, 
macroeconomic conditions. 

To  the  extent  risk  retention  can  help  avoid  deterioration  in  underwriting  standards,  it  may 
safeguard against a recurrence of the excessive expansion of credit that led to the home price 
bubble in the recent crisis.  In addition to improving the incentive structure in securitization, risk 
retention could diminish the amount of credit available by tying up cash that would otherwise be 
used to make additional loans – an effect that could further mitigate some of the pro-cyclicality 
in credit supply that has been attributed to securitization. 

There is limited literature on the macroeconomic effects of risk retention to date, but available 
academic  literature  suggests  that  securitizations  that  have  some  form  of  risk  retention  may 
perform  better,  because  risk  retention  helps  to  align  incentives  between  originators  and 
investors.38    The  relative  performance  of  various  types  of  asset-backed  securities  during  the 
financial crisis also provides some evidence of the effectiveness of risk retention requirements in 
this regard.   

Risk retention requirements may help mitigate pro-cyclicality in credit formation and real estate 
values,  contributing  to  the  stability  of  the  financial  system,  the  real  estate  sector,  and  the 
economy.  Setting the risk retention requirements at a level that maximizes these benefits while 
minimizing  costs  is  important.    Risk  retention  requirements  that  are  too  weak  can  impose 
substantial  costs,  as  can  requirements  that  are  too  stringent.    An  excessive  requirement  could 
unduly limit credit availability and economic output to the point that these costs could outweigh 
the benefits of improved stability.  A weak requirement, however, could reduce long-run growth 
by increasing risks to financial stability. 

An increase in credit costs could constrain credit supply, but this may not be, in and of itself, a 
negative  consequence  of  risk  retention.    Interest  rates  on  securitized  mortgages  in  the  period 
leading up to the crisis did not reflect the real risks of unsustainable lending to private parties, the 
financial system, and the economy.  Low private costs for credit were not sustainable because 
they did not internalize all of the social costs of credit expansion to the entire system.  To the 
extent that risk retention helps the market determine prices that reflect true private and public 
                                                 

38  See D. Diamond, "Financial Intermediation and Delegated Monitoring," Review of Economic Studies, vol. 51 (1984).  In particular, retaining 
the risk associated with the loans that banks make provides such incentives.  By spreading or removing the risk, securitization may reduce the 
bank’s incentives to screen borrowers.  See G. Gorton and G. Pennacchi, "Banks and Loan Sales: Marketing Non-Marketable Assets," Journal 
of Monetary Economics, vol. 35, no. 3 (1995). 

- 27 - 

 

costs of securitization, an increase in credit costs to sustainable levels would contribute to growth 
by promoting more efficient resource allocation. 

CONSIDERATIONS REGARDING STATIC AND PROACTIVE ADJUSTMENT OF RISK 
RETENTION 

Section  946  requires  consideration  of  whether  risk  retention  requirements  and  mortgage 
origination requirements should be static or dynamic.  In practice, a static framework would only 
be  adjusted  infrequently  in  response  to  structural  changes  in  credit  markets.    In  contrast,  a 
dynamic  framework  would  be  adjusted  more  frequently  in  a  counter-cyclical  manner.    Each 
approach has costs and benefits that should be considered. 

Static  regulations  have  the  benefit  of  being  transparent  and  providing  certainty  to  market 
participants, but may not be responsive to changing market conditions.  This may allow market 
participants to make longer-term plans for savings and investment.  The existing literature notes 
that fixed rules may provide for greater predictability.39  Static regulations are less complex for 
regulators.  On the other hand, if regulators set risk retention requirements at an inappropriate 
level,  or  design  them  in  an  inappropriate  manner,  the  costs  in  terms  of  lost  long-term  output 
could  outweigh  the  benefits  of  the  regulations.    Additionally,  fixed  rules  may  not  allow  for 
judgment  to  be  applied  as  economic  conditions  change.40    If  regulators  are  not  responsive  to 
innovation and changes in financial conditions, the regulations could become less applicable and 
the benefits of risk retention may decline.  

By contrast, dynamic regulation could either be automatic, utilizing pre-determined formulas, or 
set  by  regulators  on  a  discretionary  basis.    Some  academic  literature  suggests  that  changing 
conditions should be monitored by regulators over time, implying that there may be benefits to 
changing  regulation  to  address  emerging  risks  to  the  system.41    In  the  case  of  automatic 
regulation, the required amount of risk retention could be tied to the business cycle or financial 
market  indicators  in  a  formulaic  manner.    Regulations  could  be  written  to  contain  a  counter-
cyclical formula linking risk retention or underwriting standards to, for example, home prices.  In 
this  example,  required  risk  retention  could  increase  automatically  as  the  economy  grows  and 
home  prices  rise,  in  order  to  constrain  unsustainable  increases  in  credit  supply  that  could 
potentially fuel emerging bubbles.  Alternatively, as the economy slows and home prices fall, the 
level of retention could fall automatically to encourage credit flows and to avoid recessions.   

                                                 

39  See Bank of England, “The Role of Macroprudential Policy: A Discussion Paper,”  (November 2009).   M.  Dewatripont and J. Tirole, The 

Prudential Regulation of Banks (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1994). 

40  See Bank of England, “The Role of Macroprudential Policy: A Discussion Paper,” (November 2009). 
41  See  T.  Adrian  and  H.  Shin,  “The  Shadow  Banking  System:  Implications  for  Financial  Regulation,”  Banque  de  France,  Financial  Stability 

Review, No. 13 (September 2009). 

- 28 - 

 

Such  dynamic  regulation  could  address  potential  cyclicality  in  credit  formation.    However, 
determining the precise formula by which retention would be tied to the business cycle could 
pose significant challenges to policymakers, as the understanding of formulaic linkages between 
risk retention, credit supply and macroeconomic conditions may not be sufficiently robust to do 
so  at  high  levels  of  confidence.    Additionally,  such  relationships  may  change  over  time, 
potentially  reducing  the  benefits  of  dynamic  regulation  conducted  using  pre-determined 
quantitative inputs, absent ongoing regulatory intervention.   

Another type of dynamic regulation would allow regulators to adjust the regulations on a more 
discretionary  basis.    This  would  allow  regulators  to  change  underwriting  standards  or  risk 
retention requirements in response to economic and financial developments, including financial 
innovation.    However,  requiring  regulators  to  make  changes  to  regulations  in  response  to  the 
business cycle may pose challenges, both in theory and practice, as it requires regulators to make 
determinations regarding the impact such changes may have on the business cycle, and to make 
such  changes  quickly.    Additionally,  the  existing  literature  also  notes  that  allowance  for 
regulatory  discretion  can  lead  to  a  bias  towards  forbearance.42    Some  suggest  that  regulatory 
independence may be an important factor in ensuring that unpopular rules can be implemented 
when necessary.43   

Accordingly,  the  Agencies  should  act  prudently  in  setting  out  the  rules  associated  with  risk 
retention  requirements  and  associated  exemptions.    Following  the  implementation  of  the  risk 
retention  rules,  regulators  should  take  into  account  the  changing  nature  of  markets  and  future 
innovations and whether such rules should be adjusted accordingly. 

                                                 

42  See Bank of England, “The Role of Macroprudential Policy: A Discussion Paper,”  (November 2009).   M.  Dewatripont and J. Tirole, The 

Prudential Regulation of Banks (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1994). 

43  See  M.  Brunnermeier,  A.  Crocket,  C.  Goodhert,  A.  Persaud,  and  H.  Shin,  “The  Fundamental  Principles  of Financial  Regulation,”  Geneva 

Report on the World Economy 11 (June 2009). 

- 29 - 

 

VII. CONCLUSION 

Securitization  is  an  important  source  of  credit  formation  for  the  economy,  allowing  market 
participants to draw efficiently upon a wide variety of sources of capital and investment, both to 
lower costs and diversify risk.  As discussed above, some of the benefits of securitization include 
reducing the cost of credit for borrowers and improving mechanisms for financial institutions to 
manage  interest  rate  risk.    However,  absent  safeguards,  there  are  inherent  risks  in  the 
securitization process that can detract from these benefits.  These risks have historically included 
misaligned incentives among participants in the securitization process, a lack of disclosure and 
transparency, and investor overreliance on CRAs.  The Dodd-Frank Act mandates many reforms 
to address these issues, including risk retention requirements. 

Risk retention serves as an important tool that, if properly structured, has the potential to address 
misaligned incentives and the deterioration in underwriting standards — two critical problems 
that had a significant impact on businesses, consumers, and homeowners in the United States.  It 
is important to note that while risk retention can help mitigate some of these inherent risks, it 
does not solve all of the problems in the securitization process and may not be appropriate in all 
cases.    Therefore,  risk  retention  must  be  considered  in  conjunction  with  other  reforms  in  the 
Dodd-Frank Act as well as other reforms occurring both domestically and internationally. 

The  academic  literature  indicates  that  there  may  be  a  connection  between  asset-backed 
securitization  and  an  exacerbation  of  pro-cyclical  lending.    Misaligned  incentives  and  a 
deterioration in underwriting standards may have implications on the broader economy if they 
lead to excess lending in periods of growth and a greater contraction of credit during periods of 
stress.    Some  academic  literature  suggests  that  securitization  may  have  contributed  to  an 
expansion  of  credit  in  the  run-up  to  the  financial  crisis,  which  in  turn  facilitated  increases  in 
housing prices and worsened the ensuing contraction in credit when the housing bubble burst. 

Based on the available literature, there is evidence that risk retention could minimize the pro-
cyclical  macroeconomic  effects  of  securitization  by  aligning  incentives  and  improving 
underwriting standards.  On the other hand, if risk retention requirements are too stringent, they 
could constrain lending, and consequently, the formation of credit.   

Accordingly, it is important to design a risk retention framework that maximizes the benefits of 
asset-backed securitization as a source of credit formation and minimizes the inherent risks of an 
originate-to-distribute model.  Such a framework should allow for efficient allocation of capital, 
where  market  participants  accurately  price  credit  risk.    As  observed  in  the  most  recent  crisis, 
market participants did not always internalize the true cost of the credit extended.  To the extent 
that risk retention and other reforms can help address efficient capital allocation, they can serve 
to facilitate stable economic growth. 

- 30 - 

 

APPENDIX 

APPENDIX A: OTHER RELEVANT SECTIONS OF THE DODD-FRANK ACT  

RATING AGENCIES - TITLE IX, SUBTITLE C 

Subtitle C of the Dodd-Frank Act must be properly regulated and have a strong set of 
incentives  to  accurately  rate  securities  in  order  to  perform  their  role  and  provide 
meaningful and reliable ratings.  The Dodd-Frank Act contains a number of provisions 
that  are  intended  to  improve  the  quality  and  transparency  of  credit  ratings,  address 
conflicts of interest, reduce reliance on credit ratings, and require additional studies on 
future changes to the structure of credit rating agencies. 

Specifically, Subtitle C removes statutory references to credit ratings from certain statutes 
and requires each Federal agency to review its regulations for references to credit ratings 
and  replace  these  references  with  a  standard  of  creditworthiness.    The  SEC  must  also 
conduct  a  study  on  (i)  the  independence  of  credit  rating  agencies  and  how  this 
independence  affects  the  ratings  they  issue;  (ii)  the  feasibility  and  desirability  of 
standardizing credit rating terminology; and (iii) the feasibility of establishing a public or 
private utility or self regulatory agency for assigning credit rating agencies to issuers to 
determine the ratings of structured finance products.  The Comptroller General (“GAO”) 
must  conduct  a  study  on  alternative  means  for  compensating  credit  rating  agencies  in 
order to create incentives for more accurate credit ratings.  The GAO must also conduct a 
study on the feasibility and merits of creating an independent professional organization 
that would establish independent standards for governing the rating analyst profession. 

DISCLOSURE - TITLE IX, SUBTITLE D, SECTION 942 AND 945 

Section  942  and  945  addresses  disclosure  and  information  transparency.    Section  942 
mandates  that  the  SEC  adopt  regulations  requiring  issuers  of  an  ABS  to  disclose 
information  regarding  assets  backing  each  tranche  or  class  of  the  security  and  to  set 
standards for the format of the data provided.  Section 945 mandates that the SEC issue 
rules  that  the  registration  statement  filed  by  issuers  of  ABS  includes  a  review  by  the 
issuer of the assets underlying the ABS and disclose the nature of the review. 

- 31 - 

 

REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES - TITLE IX, SUBTITLE D, SECTION 943 

Section  943  mandates  that  the  SEC  prescribe  regulations  regarding  disclosure  of 
representations  and  warranties  in  the  ABS  market,  whereby  each  rating  agency  must 
include in their report a description of the representations, warranties, and enforcement 
mechanisms  available  to  investors  and  state  how  these  differ  from  similarly  issued 
securities.    The  SEC  must  also  require  securitizers  to  disclose  fulfilled  and  unfulfilled 
repurchase requests across all trusts aggregated by the securitizers.  

UNDERWRITING PROCESS AND CONSUMER PROTECTION – TITLE XIV, SECTION 1412 

Section 1412 requires the Federal Reserve Board (and the Consumer Finance Protection 
Bureau  once  transferred)  in  consultation  with  the  Department  of  Housing  and  Urban 
Development,  Department  of  Veterans  Affairs,  Department  of  Agriculture,  and  Rural 
Housing  Service,  defines  standards  for  a  Qualified  Mortgage  (QM),  which  reflects  a 
borrower’s  ability  to  repay,  ensuring  that  responsible  and  affordable  mortgage  credit 
remains  available  to  homeowners.    While  the  section  lists  criteria,  it  leaves  ultimate 
discretion  to  the  rule  writer.    Suggested  criteria  include:  restrictions  on  payment 
structures  where  the  principle  balance  increases  over  time,  fully  amortizing  fixed  rate 
loans,  taking  into  account  fees,  taxes,  and  assessments,  placing  limits  on  fees,  and 
qualification for adjustable rate mortgages based on the maximum rate a borrower might 
pay during the first five years, among others. 

APPENDIX B: OTHER RELEVANT REGULATORY INITIATIVES 

BASEL ACCORD REFORMS 

Following  the  financial  crisis,  on  December  16,  2010  the  BCBS  announced  stricter 
capital  regulatory  requirements  for  banks,  which  are  commonly  known  as  Basel  III.  
Previously,  in  July  2009  the  BCBS  strengthened  supervisory  standards  and  increased 
regulatory capital requirements for complex securitizations.  The BCBS adopted several 
revisions  to  the  regulatory  framework  known  as  Basel  II  to  address  some  of  the  main 
issues that arose during the crisis.  Basel III is intended to improve the banking sector's 
ability to absorb shocks arising from financial and economic stress.  Basel III must be 
individually adopted by the regulators of each participating nation and is to be phased in 
beginning January 1, 2013.  These standards include requirements for banks to have: (i) 
heightened  risk  weight  for  some  lower-rated  and  unrated  securitization  exposures;  (ii) 
more  conservative  collateral  haircuts  for  securitization  collateral  with  respect  to 

- 32 - 

 

counterparty  exposure;  and  (iii)  additional  specific  risk  haircuts  for  securitization 
exposures when calculating the capital requirement related to market risk.  

STATEMENTS OF FINANCIAL ACCOUNTING STANDARDS NOS. 166 AND 16744  

In  June  2009,  the  Financial  Accounting  Standards  Board  (“FASB”)  issued  Financial 
Accounting  Statements  166  and  167,  which  change  the  way  entities  account  for 
securitizations and special-purpose entities to better align financial accounting disclosure 
practices  with  the  actual  risks  of  asset-backed  securitization.    These  statements  were 
effective for companies’ first fiscal year that began after November 15, 2009 and January 
1, 2010 for companies reporting on a calendar year basis.  The statements require banks 
to consolidate on their balance sheets certain securitized assets as well as other financial 
assets that were previously disclosed as off-balance sheet assets if certain standards of 
control  are  met.45    While  these  consolidation  standards  primarily  respond  to  the  risks 
associated with off-balance sheet securitization and the need for better disclosure, they 
also have implications for earnings and regulatory capital of on-balance sheet securitized 
assets.  In some cases, the cost of reserving capital against the consolidated securitization 
assets  may  reduce  the  attractiveness  of  using  securitization  structures  and  incentivize 
investors to use other means to fund loan origination.   

While it is unclear what impact that mandatory risk retention will have on consolidation 
analysis, it is clear that accounting treatment for securitization structures will differ based 
on  characteristics  of  that  structure  and  the  distribution  of  economic  interest  among 
investors  and  entities  affiliated  with  the  transaction.46    While  risk  retention’s  potential 
impact  on  the  accounting  treatment  of  securitization  may  vary,  the  requirements 
associated  with  consolidation  have  material  consequences  on  earnings  and  capital 
allocation for affected entities.  

INTERNATIONAL COMPARISONS - ARTICLE 122A 

Article 122a is an amendment to the European Capital Requirements Directive that was 
adopted by the European Parliament in May 2009.  The amendment, among other things, 
introduces a new originator retention requirement and significantly strengthens investor 
due  diligence  obligations,  with  capital  sanctions  in  the  event  of  non-compliance.    In 

                                                 

44  See  Accounting  Standards  Codification  (ASC)  Topic  860,  Transfers  and  Servicing  (commonly  called  FAS  166)  and  ASC  Topic  810, 

Consolidations (commonly called FAS 167). 

45  See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Report to the Congress on Risk Retention (October 2010) for a fulsome analysis of the 

consolidation of off-balance sheet assets. 

46  See the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Report to the Congress on Risk Retention (October 2010) discusses trends that 

currently exist for accounting for the securitization of different asset types.  

- 33 - 

 

December  2010,  the  Committee  of  European  Bank  Supervisors  (CEBS)  issued  final 
guidelines with respect to the application of Article 122a. 

Article  122a’s  provisions  will  apply  to  new  securitizations  issued  after  December  31, 
2010  and  after  December  31,  2014  for  existing  securitizations  where  underlying 
exposures  are  subject  to  addition  or  substitution  after  that  date  (i.e.,  master  trusts  and 
some CDO structures).  Article 122a applies to any EU credit institution that invests in or 
holds securitization positions in either its banking book or trading book.  Additionally, 
for  an  issuer  to  sell  tranches  of  structured  finance  securities  to  European  credit 
institutions,  it  will  be  necessary  for  non-European  institutions  to  comply  with  Article 
122a.  For example, if an EU or US auto ABS issuer wants to sell auto loan ABS tranches 
to  a  European  credit  institution,  it  will  need  to  comply  with  the  EU  retention 
requirements and also provide sufficient information for EU investor due diligence. 

Article 122a provides a range of options to the market with regards to the form of risk 
retention, including: (i) vertical retention of risk not less than 5 percent of the nominal 
value of each of the tranches sold or transferred to the investors; (ii) retention of risk not 
less than 5 percent of the nominal value of the securitized exposure in case of revolving 
securitizations;  (iii)  equivalent  exposure  though  retention  of  risk  of  randomly  selected 
exposures  equal  to  not  less  than  5  percent  of  the  nominal  amount  of  the  securitized 
exposures,  where  there  would  otherwise  have  been  securitized  in  the  securitization 
provided  that  the  number  of  potentially  securitized  exposures  is  not  less  than  100  at 
origination; and (iv) horizontal retention of risk of the first loss tranche and if necessary 
other tranches having the same or more severe risk profile and not maturing any earlier 
than  those  transferred  or  sold  to  investors,  so  that  the  retention  equals  no  less  than  5 
percent of the nominal value of the securitized exposures.  

Article 122a provides an important example of risk retention strategies currently being 
pursued by regulatory bodies outside of the United States.  

- 34 - 

